* 1151941
* CAREER: Geodynamic Study of Earth's Mantle Asthenosphere and Core Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2017
* Dayanthie Weeraratne, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 554,075.00

Although plate tectonic theory was accepted in the geological community more
than 40 yrs ago, many basic concepts of plate dynamics, such as the physical
properties of the lithosphere, composition, temperature, physical dimensions,
differences between oceanic and continental plates, and how plate motion is
accommodated by the underlying asthenosphere is still unknown today. The
physical nature of the lubrication beneath lithospheric plates that allows them
to move is actively debated. The lubricating layer beneath tectonic plates known
as the asthenosphere is part of a multi-layered structure of the interior of the
Earth including the plates themselves, the silicate mantle (~half the Earth's
outer radius), and the central iron core (~3400 km inner radius). We know that
the early rocks of our solar system, known as chondrites, consisted of a complex
matrix of iron and silicates, however, the Earth's interior today exhibits
complete separation of these two substances between the iron core and silicate
mantle. The career objectives proposed here encompass two main focus directions
to study 1) the lithosphere and asthenosphere in oceanic and continental mantle
and 2) differentiation and formation of the Earth's interior layers during core
formation. This work will be carried out by methods that integrate seismology
and geophysical fluid dynamics. Seismic work using newly collected ocean bottom
seismometer data and land instruments, will be combined with laboratory fluid
experiments designed to address fundamental scientific questions. The
educational component of this proposal is two fold, 1) to attract
underrepresented minority students to the geological sciences and 2) improve
quantitative skills in geoscience students through introduction of math lessons
through familiar geological problems. A new minority program in geology at CSUN
titled 'Geological Experience for Minority Students' (GEMS) will guide students
throughout their undergraduate degree as part of a program with mentoring, peer
support, regular workshops, involvement in research activities, and field work
in south Africa and marine research cruises. Funds are also requested to develop
a new course titled "Mathematical Tools for Geologists", that will present
mathematical concepts from the perspective of geological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The integration of fluid dynamic studies and
seismic tomography methods will identify physical properties of the lithosphere,
asthenosphere, and the difference in these properties between the oceanic and
continental mantle. In particular the work will focus on the physical properties
of the asthenosphere testing previous hypotheses that this unusual interior
layer is composed of partial melt, higher water content, or may only be due to
the combined effects of natural increases in pressure and temperature with depth
in the mantle. Fluid experiments are proposed to study the growth and
propagation of Saffman-Taylor instabilities or viscous fingering in the Earth's
upper mantle. The combination of viscosity and buoyancy variations caused by the
introduction of fingers of volatile rich plume material into a depleted
asthenospheric channel may explain several observations in both oceanic and
continental environments including anomalous surface volcanism and linear
patterns of seismic velocity and gravity anomalies. Scaling of fingering
wavelengths, channel depth, and fluid viscosities to the Earth's mantle will
constrain asthenospheric thickness and mantle rheologies where seamounts are
observed and ocean bottom seismic work has been done. Another set of fluid
experiments are proposed to study the physical processes surrounding
differentiation of the Earth's interior. The formation of the Earth's core is
the biggest differentiation event in the Earth's history shown to have occurred
very quickly in the first 30 My of Earth formation, yet we know surprisingly
little about the physics of how this enormous event transpired. Because of the
sharp difference in the physical properties of iron and silicates, and
computational challenges in modeling these interfaces, our current understanding
of this ancient event is limited to theoretical analysis, conceptual models,
cartoons, and geochemical studies. A research direction is proposed to conduct
fluid dynamic experiments that incorporate a new medium of liquid metal gallium
combined for the first time with traditional corn syrup fluids to study iron-
silicate differentiation. Fluid experiments scaled to Earth interior dynamics
will consider appropriate rheological and temperature regimes, the boundary
conditions, and time scales for liquid metal instabilities. Discovery of
secondary effects from sinking metal plumes include trailing fluid filled
conduits and upwelling thermo-chemical plumes that will consider the hypotheses
that core forming events initiate the first rising mantle plumes and act to
transport material throughout the Earth's interior to regions such as the
Transition zone and asthenosphere.