* 1151264
* CAREER: Novel Voltammetric Biosensor Design to Promote Interest and Inquiry-Based Learning in Electrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Leslie Sombers, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 12/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

In this CAREER award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Leslie Sombers of North Carolina State
University and her graduate student researchers will be supported to investigate
the use of fast-scan cyclic voltammetry to monitor the enzymatic generation of
hydrogen peroxide with carbon-fiber microelectrodes. The approach that Prof.
Sombers and her students are developing will be used to measure the presence and
dynamics of specific, non-electroactive analytes in biological tissue. For her
integrated educational project, Prof. Sombers will work with her students to
develop a presentation to be given to the public at the North Carolina Museum of
Science on the use of electrochemistry, as well as working with North Carolina
State's Science House on developing hands-on materials for use in K-12
education. In situ detection of biologically active molecules is important in
helping to innovate in biology, neuroscience and medicine. The kind of work that
Prof. Sombers and her students are developing will allow researchers in these
fields to make chemical measurements in relatively un-perturbed living systems.
This is important in answering fundamental questions that can lead to new
understandings of the operations of living systems, as well as developing new
approaches to medicine. The graduate students working on this project will gain
useful inter-disciplinary experience at the intersection of biology, chemistry
and electronics. Prof. Sombers will also continue her efforts at increasing the
opportunities for students from underrepresented groups to participate in the
STEM enterprise.