* 1151682
* CAREER: Rusting the Earth: the mechanisms and mineralogy of microbial Fe oxidation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Clara Chan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 423,632.00

Microbes are numerous, widespread, and metabolically-versatile organisms,
impacting virtually every environment on Earth?s surface. Fe-oxidizing
microorganisms (FeOM) have likely been oxidizing, or ?rusting,? the Earth for
billions of years. In near-neutral pH environments, FeOM form iron
oxyhydroxides, which adsorb metals, organics, and other nutrients, affecting
element bioavailability, C cycling, and soil and water quality. Microbial Fe
oxidation is predicted to accelerate Fe oxidation rates in low oxygen,
Fe(II)-rich environments found in circumneutral aquifers and soils, where
abiotic oxidation rates are slow. However, few neutrophilic FeOM species have
been unambiguously shown to oxidize Fe; therefore we know little about the
diversity, genetics, and biochemistry of FeOM that function at neutral pH.
&lt;br/&gt;My overall aim is to develop an integrated microbiological,
biochemical, mineralogical and geochemical understanding of Fe microbial
oxidation, in order to accurately describe modern and ancient Fe cycling on
Earth. We first need to develop methods to recognize and quantify circumneutral
microbial Fe oxidation and effects, so this project has the following research
objectives: (1) Isolate and characterize novel FeOM from groundwater and thus
expand the currently limited knowledge of FeOM diversity; (2) Discover
candidates for key genes/proteins involved in Fe oxidation, to gain insight into
bio(geo)chemical mechanisms and to give us the abilities to assay Fe-oxidation
and recognize the genetic capability in (meta)genomes; (3) Characterize C
metabolism and related genes in isolates, to understand how microbial Fe
oxidizers can influence C cycling. This work will involve a combination of
culturing and physiological characterization, differential gene/protein
expression, qPCR, as well as sequencing and analysis of isolate genomes and
environmental 16S rRNA and other genes. We will work in conjunction with the NSF
Christina River Basin Critical Zone Observatory (CRB-CZO) in DE and PA, using
CRB-CZO sites as a source of novel FeOM and as a testing ground for our new
methods for detecting FeOM presence and activity. &lt;br/&gt;The research themes
will be integrated into educational activities that train students to think
creatively and work across disciplines. Creativity and interdisciplinary
scientific thought is vital to the innovation and problem-solving needed to
advance our society and address environmental issues. Such skills take practice,
so the main educational objectives are to (1) develop an inquiry-based
undergraduate geomicrobiology class and (2) create a curriculum for a ?Microbes
in the Wild!? science module for under-represented female middle school students
in the Serviam Academy. I will also train a postdoctoral researcher and a PhD
student over the course of the project. The research will be incorporated into
continuing outreach programs, including school presentations, teacher workshops,
the college?s annual Coast Day, Science Café, and other opportunities organized
by the DE Sea Grant office.