* 1151022
* CAREER: Identifying controls on size evolution through comparative analysis
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2017
* Jonathan Payne, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 11/30/2017
* USD 458,203.00

CAREER: Identifying controls on size evolution through comparative
analysis&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan L. Payne, Department of Geological and Environmental
Sciences, Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1151022&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Size
and function are inseparable in biology because a wide variety of physiological
and life-history traits scale with size. Patterns of size evolution can
therefore complement taxonomic diversity and geochemical proxy data by providing
quantitative constraints on the influence of ecological interactions and
environmental change on major events in the history of life, from the origin of
eukaryotes to the Cambrian explosion, the early Paleozoic radiation of marine
animals, the Cenozoic rise of mammals, the circumstances of mass extinctions and
subsequent recoveries, responses to climate change, and potential influences of
sampling bias on taxonomic diversity. &lt;br/&gt;One of the most intriguing
observations in the study of size evolution is that patterns of change are often
shared across distantly related taxa during intervals of taxonomic radiation,
mass extinction, and global environmental change. Just as comprehensive, global
compilation of stratigraphic ranges has enabled vast advances in our
understanding of biodiversity dynamics, an analogous compilation of body sizes
spanning the Phanerozic is critical for identifying controls on the evolution of
this key functional trait. &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to determine if
and when evolutionary dynamics have been shared across major clades through the
Phanerozoic and thereby identify the factors that shape the evolution of
organism size. To accomplish this goal, PI will compile comprehensive, genus-
level size datasets for foraminifera, brachiopods, and gastropods. These groups
comprise more than 25% of the genus diversity in the marine fossil record but
differ in basic anatomy, physiology, and ecology. By identifying the best model
for size evolution within each clade, determining whether or not the mode of
size evolution has shifted during the Phanerozoic, and testing whether
evolutionary dynamics are shared across these groups, PI will determine whether
there are universal ecological or environmental controls on size evolution or
if, instead, the dynamics of size evolution vary among groups as a function of
ecological and physiological properties or change through geological time as a
function of biological or environmental circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;This study will
provide the foundation for PI's long-term education and outreach program.
Participation in the collection and analysis of body size data requires
relatively little technical training or access to expensive instruments or
facilities. Consequently, it offers an ideal opportunity to involve students at
all levels directly in data collection and analysis, both in the classroom and
as part of intensive summer research programs. Each summer, six high school
students and one high school teacher will assist undergraduates and the graduate
student in data collection and preliminary analyses. The high school teacher
will continue data collection and analysis during the academic year at Yerba
Buena High School, a school that serves a majority population of economically
disadvantaged families and underrepresented groups in STEM fields. The graduate
student will visit the class on a biweekly basis to supervise data collection
and analysis, and the class will visit Stanford each spring as a capstone
experience. The PI will develop a new freshman seminar class with exercises
based on data from this project. Project success will be evaluated using surveys
to assess student attitudes toward STEM fields and future plans before and after
participation in the project, as well as long-term tracking of students'
educational histories in future years.&lt;br/&gt;Data collected from this
project will be archived as stand-alone datasets at Dryad, but will also be
entered into the Paleobiology Database, an open-access, community-wide
compilation of fossil occurrence data. Size data are integral to analyses of
evolutionary dynamics and the fidelity of the fossil record. Because the data
produced in this study will cover a significant fraction of known marine genera,
they are likely to be used broadly by the community in studies unrelated to the
proposed project.