* 1151414
* CAREER: Dynamics of complex quantum systems, scaling limits and renormalization
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Thomas Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 09/30/2018
* USD 416,231.00

This research project addresses three main topics:&lt;br/&gt;(1) The well-
posedness theory of the initial value problem for the Gross-Pitaevskii (GP)
hierarchy,&lt;br/&gt;based on the approach initiated by the PI jointly with N.
Pavlovic (UT Austin).&lt;br/&gt;A main motivation underlying our work is our aim
at generalizing methods from nonlinear dispersive &lt;br/&gt;PDE's for the
analysis of quantum field theories (QFT's). &lt;br/&gt;(2) Problems in non-
relativistic Quantum Electrodynamics (QED), in particular relating to the
&lt;br/&gt;semiclassical motion of electrons, radiation damping, and the problem
of ultraviolet&lt;br/&gt;renormalization in QED.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Derivation of
kinetic equations from kinetic scaling limits of the thermal momentum
&lt;br/&gt;distribution function for interacting electron gases, modeled in
dynamical Hartree-Fock theory. &lt;br/&gt;These projects involve several ongoing
collaborations, including international ones.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Study of the
GP hierarchy, which emerges in the analysis of interacting Bose gases,
bridges&lt;br/&gt;some of the most exciting recent developments in physics
(Bose-Einstein condensation)&lt;br/&gt;with some of the most impressive recent
developments in mathematics (nonlinear dispersive PDE's).&lt;br/&gt;Non-
relativistic QED is the physical theory of non-relativistic quantum mechanical
matter &lt;br/&gt;(electrons, atoms, molecules) interacting with the energy
quanta (photons) of light, and&lt;br/&gt;describes processes in a wide spectrum
of quintessential areas in technology (chemistry,&lt;br/&gt;electronics,
modeling of solar panels, etc). The derivation of kinetic equations from
quantum&lt;br/&gt;dynamics leads to a precise mathematical understanding of
classical physics (fluid dynamics) &lt;br/&gt;from quantum
physics.&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this project involves the
training of graduate students in highly multidisciplinary &lt;br/&gt;annual
thematic programs that provide them with a integrative and specialized
understanding of&lt;br/&gt;links between Analysis, Applied and Computational
Mathematics, nonlinear PDE's, and Mathematical Physics. &lt;br/&gt;The goal is
to provide graduate students with an exceptionally broad understanding of their
research fields.