* 1151191
* CAREER: Mask Video Projection Based Additive Manufacturing at the Micro-scale over Large Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Yong Chen, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to establish a micro-scale additive manufacturing process based on dynamic
mask video projection for the fabrication of three-dimensional computer-aided
design models with high throughput. Novel approaches by integrating optical,
mechanical and software designs will be systematically studied to elucidate the
mechanisms through which a projection image can be continuously moved in high
speed without losing its native resolution. The related process models and
dynamic mask image planning techniques will be established to achieve the
desired accuracy, resolution and speed. The educational objective is to promote
engineering through hands-on education and product/process innovations based on
additive manufacturing technologies. Key education activities include outreach
to high school and community college students, new curriculum development for
university and working professional levels, and an open source project for the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
contribute a novel micro-scale additive manufacturing process that may lead to
newer industrial applications and device designs in a host of industries such as
aerospace, automobile, defense, medical, and consumer products. The
investigation into process modeling, process planning, and capability
characterization will also result in a fabrication tool with gigapixel
resolution. Such a tool, if available, will significantly contribute to the
future biomedical and engineering research related to tissue engineering and
engineered textures. Through its integrated education and outreach activities,
this CAREER project would provide essential infrastructure, exciting teaching
materials and interesting lab projects to students at every level from K-12 to
graduates. Advanced knowledge on additive manufacturing technologies and their
novel applications would increase domestic students? interest in science and
engineering and promote advanced manufacturing to a broader population.