* 1151670
* "Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rocks and Reactors: The Origins of Radiation Exposure Disparity, 1941 to 1979"
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Jacob Hamblin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 03/31/2013
* USD 15,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rocks and Reactors: The Origins of Radiation
Exposure Disparity, 1941-1979

This research investigates how different standards for contamination became
acceptable norms at different organizational settings and stages in the nuclear
fuel chain. It compares radiation safety as practiced at Atoms for Peace
research reactor laboratories and at southwestern United States uranium mines.
Archival and secondary literature is used to investigate how radiation safety
was instituted internationally at academic research reactors, but not extended
to those most directly affected by radiation pollution?indigenous subsistence
communities located where a high proportion of the nuclear fuel chain activities
(mining, milling, production, use, and storage of nuclear materials) occur
worldwide.

It advances scholarship on the inclusion, exclusion, and exchange of scientific
knowledge and practice between diverse cultures at research reactors and mining
sites. It demonstrates how the differential regulation of the same technological
product can occur, and finally, it fills an important gap in the history of
nuclear technologies, by placing the regulation of nuclear reactors at the
center of analysis.

This research explains the complex history of radiation standard setting so that
a broader public can participate and contribute to discussions and decisions on
environmental justice and nuclear history. In addition, it develops new teaching
tools, and disseminates and builds knowledge through workshops on radiation
exposure in which indigenous groups, research scientists and historians are
active participants.