* 1151985
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Prehispanic Settlement Systems and Landscapes in the Lake Patzcuaro Basin, Michoacan, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Christopher Stawski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 10,211.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Helen Pollard, Christopher Stawski will examine the
settlement of the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin (LPB) by the Tarascan Empire from the
Late Preclassic (100 B.C.) to the time of Spanish Conquest (circa A.D. 1525).
Located in the highlands of the Mexican state of Michoacán, the LPB was the core
of the Tarascan Empire, a major rival of the Aztecs. This lake basin has been
the focus of not only archaeological and anthropological research, but also
geological, geographical, ethnohistoric, and paleoecological research. Mr.
Stawski's research will combine all these types of data into a multi-
disciplinary, multi-scalar analysis that will explore the process of settlement
and the ways in which the Tarascans and their ancestors modified, adapted and
cultivated the landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is important
because the region underwent significant environmental change over this time
period and the work will show how humans living in a traditional society
responded to this change to maintain a functioning and expanding social system.
The work is directly important because it will increase understanding of many
societies in multiple parts of today's world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to
firsthand accounts from the Spanish, and the rich ethnohistoric and
archaeological data, much is known about the Tarascan State during the Late
Postclassic time period that led into the Spanish conquest (A.D. 1350 to 1525).
However, what is still relatively unknown is the manner in which the lake basin
became the core of a major Mesoamerican empire. The goal of this research is to
provide a longitudinal study of the peopling of the lake basin, including
analysis that will answer questions of how and why certain communities were
settled, moved, or grew during certain time periods. Key to this is the nature
of the human-environmental relationships in the lake basin, and how they changed
the foundations of the socio-political setting of the area. Through the use of
Geographic Information Systems (GIS), high resolution satellite imagery, and an
archaeological database that has collected and accumulated data from the past 40
years of work in the LPB, Mr.Stawski will be able to map and analyze the
communities and landscape over a period of 1,600 years. This will provide a
means to determine the variables that affected cultural transformations,
environmental fluctuations, and state emergence at varying scales and with
multiple lines of evidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a
broader impact, both through its intellectual merit as well as on the social
science community. It will continue a long tradition of multi-disciplinary work,
and contribute to on-going collaborative efforts between American, Mexican and
French researchers in archaeology, anthropology, history and the physical
sciences. The project should make a direct contribution to the literature on
human-environmental relationships and the emergence of secondary states.
Furthermore, this research will be an outlet for the accumulated data of 40
years of research in the Lake Pátzcuaro Basin, and will be able to provide new
and updated data for the region that has yet to be published and presented. This
proposed research would provide a means for this data to be disseminated to
other academic and professional forums, in hopes that this renewed interest in
West Mexican anthropology, archaeology, and ecology will spark an international
and inter-disciplinary movement towards intellectual collaboration.