* 1151430
* CAREER:  Air-sea Exchange of Volatile Organic Compounds--Impacts on Climate and Atmospheric Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Timothy Bertram, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 525,540.00

Biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC), emitted from photosynthetic
organisms, play a controlling role in both regulating oxidant loadings and
setting the production rate of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) in both
terrestrial and marine environments. To date, the vast majority of research has
focused on terrestrial sources of BVOC, with specific attention to the factors
that control the emission rates of isoprene, monoterpenes, and sesquiterpenes.
In comparison, considerably less is known about marine BVOC emissions. Similar
to terrestrial processes, the spatio-temporal distribution of marine BVOC
emissions is thought to be highly variable, depending on the number
concentration and species of photosynthetic organism. It has been suggested that
marine BVOC emissions in highly productive regions of the oceans: 1) impact
oxidant loadings in the marine boundary layer (MBL), 2) contribute to SOA
production, and 3) alter particle size and microphysical properties, thus
impacting cloud formation and persistence in the MBL. At present, there exists
an extreme paucity of experimental data of BVOC fluxes to constrain global
models of ocean BVOC emissions and their subsequent impact on climate and
atmospheric chemistry. This multi-scale investigation is designed to link
detailed laboratory investigations of isoprene and total monoterpene production
from isolated monocultures of an array of relevant marine organisms with direct
measurements of isoprene and total monoterpene emissions made via eddy
correlation during coastal algae blooms from the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography (SIO) pier and during a research cruise in a region of high
biological activity and high wind speeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of the effort involves coupling with the Birch Aquarium, the
educational outreach center of SIO, and their Summer Learning Adventure Camp
programs to: 1) Develop a hands-on experiment, for students in 7-9th grade, to
investigate the uptake of carbon dioxide by the ocean and its impact on ocean
acidity. The lesson will discuss fundamental scientific concepts (e.g.,
solubility, acid-base chemistry), while investigating how the atmosphere and
oceans are linked. Further, the experiment will be designed with the intent of
teaching students the scientific process in which hypotheses are designed and
tested. 2) Connect graduate students, who have designed miniature carbon dioxide
sensors as part of an existing analytical chemistry graduate class, with 7-9th
grade students who will then use these sensors in their hands-on experiment. 3)
Engage 7-9th grade students as they discover active research alongside graduate
student guides and participate in hands-on experiments. Students will make
observations, collect data, and learn about a variety of scientific instruments
and their applications.