* 1151498
* CAREER: Complex Lead Oxides as Corrosion Films and Extended Inorganic Hybrids
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Catherine Oertel, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2018
* USD 474,602.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carboxylic acid corrosion of lead and
its alloys is a major cause of degradation of historic cultural objects such as
organ pipes. Complex lead oxide carboxylates form as products of this corrosion
process and constitute a structurally rich yet understudied family of compounds.
This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program,
pairs analysis of the growth and composition of corrosion films with advanced
structural characterization of lead oxide carboxylate corrosion products and
their related synthesized phases. Laboratory exposure studies will establish how
susceptibility of lead-tin alloys to carboxylic acid attack depends on alloy
composition and humidity. Phase identification, elemental mapping, and high-
resolution oxidation state identification in oxide corrosion films will provide
insight into the role of each metal in the corrosion process. The project aims
to move understanding of carboxylic acid attack of lead-tin alloys from the
phenomenological to the mechanistic. Model studies will be linked to artifact
deterioration through analysis of authentic organ pipe samples and use of
environmental data from organ cases. Hydrothermal methods will be employed to
synthesize a family of lead oxide carboxylates, for which observed corrosion
products form the basis. These hybrid materials contain infinite components
based on edge-sharing Pb4O tetrahedra. The partial charge model will provide
insight into the solution influences governing formation of diverse 0-, 1-, and
2-D Pb4O-based architectures. 207Pb NMR will complement X-ray diffraction in
characterization of Pb2+ lone pair stereoactivity. This project takes place at a
primarily undergraduate institution and is centered on the participation of
undergraduate researchers. Applications of the research to the field of art
conservation will be used as the basis for an integrated program of education of
undergraduate non-science majors and interdisciplinary K-12 outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corrosion of lead and its alloys leads to loss of
performance in objects as varied as lead acid batteries and historic organ
pipes. Particularly in light of its toxicity, full understanding of the
interactions of lead with its environment and the chemistry of its corrosion
products is critical. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program, will use laboratory exposure experiments, as well as
characterization of authentic samples, to elucidate the causes and mechanisms of
corrosion of lead-tin alloy organ pipes. Compounds that form as corrosion
products, as well as related synthesized phases, will be subjected to detailed
structural analysis. Outcomes will have applications to the conservation of
culturally important organs that are enjoyed in concerts and recordings,
treasured by musicologists for their ties to notable composers, and valued as
physical documents of pre-industrial handcraft and technology. This project will
take place at Oberlin College, a primarily undergraduate institution with a
strong tradition of preparing students for graduate study and careers in
science. Undergraduate students will be the primary participants in all phases
of the project research. They will receive training in techniques of materials
characterization that are not always encountered in the canonical chemistry
curriculum. The PI will use the link between the project research and art
conservation as the starting point for an undergraduate course for non-science
majors on the chemistry of art materials. Through partnership with Oberlin?s
nationally recognized Allen Memorial Art Museum (AMAM), students in the course
will produce written, audio, and hands-on tools to create a materials tour of
the museum. These media will be implemented in the AMAM?s established K-12
outreach program.