* 1151668
* RUI:  Investigations of Newly Discovered OxoMetallic Clusters Inside Fullerene Cages
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Steven Stevenson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 279,775.00

With a RUI grant from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism Program in
the NSF Chemistry Division, Professor Steven Stevenson will carry out research
on oxometallic fullerenes (OMFs), which consist of metallic oxide clusters
encapsulated within fullerenes. Research goals include the (1) discovery and
synthesis of new OMFs, (2) novel separation methods, (3) functionalization
chemistry, and (4) characterization (e.g., magnetic, electrochemical, X-ray,
NMR). Stevenson will also develop sustainability technologies to address the
depletion of expensive and rare metals (e.g., Sc, Lu) used in their synthesis. A
special feature of these OMF molecules is their ability to form clusters
containing the most atoms trapped inside a fullerene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stevenson's sample dissemination network and exchange of
scientific ideas includes both domestic and international scientists. The
research program promotes participation of undergraduate student researchers at
the host institution as well as local community college students at early stages
in their academic careers. Students will develop technical skills (e.g.,
instrumentation, lab work), communication skills (e.g., publications,
presentations) and people skills (e.g., lab participation within a team
environment). With the proposed plan, a community college/undergraduate student
can have 2 to 4 years of research experiences to better prepare themselves for
graduate school, industry, or other careers (e.g., medical, pharmacy).