* 1151197
* CAREER: General Relativistic Modeling of Stellar Death for Advanced LIGO Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Fiona Harrison, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 448,991.00

This program will theoretically underpin Advanced LIGO's searches for
gravitational waves (GWs) from stellar collapse and core-collapse supernovae and
will lay the foundations for a GW-neutrino multimessenger astronomy of core-
collapse supernovae in preparation for the next galactic supernova. The project
team will develop open-source computer software and efficient algorithms to
simulate core-collapse supernovae in full 3D, study the associated emission of
gravitational waves and neutrinos, and establish the understanding of how these
messengers can be profitably used to probe the astrophysics of supernovae and
fundamental physics. The education program consists of a bi-annual summer school
at the California Institute of Technology that will bring together astronomy and
gravitational-wave physics graduate students to train them in the physics and
astrophysics of gravitational-wave sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core-collapse
supernovae are among the most energetic events in the universe. They are
triggered by the collapse of supergiant stars and their explosions enrich the
interstellar gas with the elements of life (carbon, oxygen, iron). This research
program is motivated by the pressing need to understand how core-collapse
supernovae work. It is known that these extreme events are connected to the
collapse of massive stars, but it has not yet been clearly established how the
initial collapse is reversed and turned into an explosion. An observation of the
next galactic core-collapse supernova by Advanced LIGO and by neutrino
observatories may shed light on the supernova phenomenon and this research
project strives towards creating the theoretical foundation for the
interpretation of such signals. The educational part of this program is
motivated by the need, in preparation for Advanced LIGO, of training the first
generation of true GW astronomers -- scientists who are trained in the physics
and observation of gravitational waves and in the physics and astrophysics of
their sources.