* 1151364
* CAREER: A Metal-Catalyzed Strategy for Enantioselective Additions to Oxocarbenium Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Mary Watson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry supports the work of
Professor Mary Watson of the University of Delaware to develop a metal-catalyzed
approach to the enantioselective addition of carbon nucleophiles to oxocarbenium
ion intermediates. This research focuses on developing a general and practical
solution for the preparation of enantioenriched, alpha-substituted oxygen
heterocycles from a wide range of readily available, racemic acetal starting
materials. The methods being developed rely predominantly on commercially or
readily available carbon nucleophiles and inexpensive, first-row transition
metal catalysts to maximize their practicality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal of this research program is to enable efficient access to chiral
oxygen heterocycles that would have a positive and significant impact on
discovery and development of new pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and functional
materials. Of equal importance to the PI are the mentorship, education and
training of the next generation of scientists. This research provides education
and research training to undergraduate and graduate student researchers.
Further, this CAREER award supports the PI's efforts to increase the
accessibility of organic chemistry to undergraduate students via peer-led team
learning (PLTL) workshops in sophomore organic chemistry at the University of
Delaware and to inspire Delaware high school students with the power of
chemistry using a video she produced about Richard Heck's Nobel Prize-winning
achievements and by performing demonstrations in Delaware high schools.