* 1151786
* CAREER: Theoretical Investigation of Interacting Topological States of Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Xiaoliang Qi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 405,774.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education to systematically investigate interacting topological
states of matter. In recent years, a systematical understanding has been
obtained for non-interacting topological states of matter in generic symmetry
classes. However, interacting topological states of matter are much less
understood, and novel physical phenomena such as quantum number
fractionalization are expected to occur, as has been learned from fractional
quantum Hall states. The PI plans to systematically characterize interacting
topological states of matter in different dimensions and symmetry classes,
through a combination of three approaches:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i) Construction
and characterization of many-body ground state wavefunctions. The many-body
ground state wavefunction provides a complete description of the ground state
properties. The PI plans to generalize the wavefunction approach to fractional
quantum Hall states, and construct ground state wavefunctions and corresponding
model Hamiltonians of two-dimensional and three-dimensional topological states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ii) Topological field theory description. Topological
field theory describes topological states by their observable physical
properties. The PI aims to develop new topological field theories for
topological states especially for topological superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;iii) Quantum entanglement properties of topological states and their
relation to dynamical properties of the system. The PI will study the
entanglement spectrum of topological states and also develop new characteristics
of quantum entanglement properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will be integrated with education of graduate and undergraduate students. This
project will provide graduate students with a unique research experience
involving both solid training in theoretical condensed matter physics and a
broad view of many related fields. The PI will make sustained efforts to
introduce the proposed research to undergraduate students through lectures,
classes and research projects. The PI has been active in organizing tutorials
and workshops, writing review articles and pedagogical articles to benefit both
junior and senior members of the community, and to introduce research results on
topological states of matter to a broader audience. The PI plans to prepare
public lectures on topological physics to disseminate the research results of
this project and to attract broader interest in this subject beyond the physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education to systematically investigate topological states of matter involving
electrons that interact strongly with each other. The first topological states
of matter discovered are the quantum Hall effects which arise in electrons
trapped in two dimensional sheets that are exposed to a large perpendicular
magnetic field. A new topological state is the topological insulator. Like
ordinary insulators, for example rubber, topological insulators do not conduct
electricity through the interior of the material. Unlike ordinary insulators,
topological insulators are able to conduct electricity on their edges or
boundaries through the formation of a new state of matter. Among the known
topological insulators are compounds made of the elements bismuth and selenium,
and bismuth and tellurium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to study the effect
of the correlated motion of electrons that arise from strong interactions
between electrons in topological states of matter. The current understanding of
topological insulators largely neglects correlations. The PI aims to
systematically characterize interacting topological states from several
complimentary aspects. Correlations may lead to the discovery of new states of
matter with properties that may be exploited for device applications. The PI
will study the properties and the quanutm mechanical structure of these states.
The PI will propose experimentally observable signatures of new topological
states that qualitatively from familiar well understood states of matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be integrated with education of
graduate and undergraduate students. The PI will make sustained efforts to
introduce the proposed research to undergraduate students through lectures,
classes and research projects. The PI has been active in organizing tutorials
and workshops, communicating science to benefit both junior and senior members
of the community, introducing the research results on topological states of
matter to a broader audience. The PI will prepare public lectures on topological
physics to disseminate the research results of this project and to attract
broader interest in this subject beyond the physics community.