* 1151468
* CAREER: Controlling the Morphology of Polymer/Fullerene Solar Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Gila Stein, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2017
* USD 517,720.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research program
is to identify the critical morphological parameters that control optoelectronic
function in polymer/fullerene solar cells. The active layer in polymer-based
solar cells is usually prepared by arresting the phase separation of a
polymer/fullerene blend. The structures formed with this non-equilibrium process
are difficult to control and accurately characterize, so it is hard to
understand how film morphology influences the device efficiency. This award will
develop three integrated tasks to investigate the effects of domain size,
interfacial area and polymer crystallinity on charge generation, recombination,
and transport processes, respectively. First, conductive polymer nanostructures
are prepared by electron-beam patterning. These nanostructures are solvent-
resistant and thermally-stable, and variables such as nanostructure geometry,
polymer crystallinity, and polymer cross-link density are all tunable. Second,
the optoelectronic performance of model nanostructure/fullerene solar cells is
evaluated with established spectroscopic and device characterization techniques.
Last, domain size, interfacial area, and crystallinity are accurately quantified
with detailed analysis of X-ray scattering data. A particular focus of this work
is interfacial engineering: It is hypothesized that polymer/fullerene
interfacial composition profiles can be controlled through polymer cross-link
density (in addition to annealing temperature and time), offering a simple route
to study the effects of interfaces on charge generation and losses. The
knowledge acquired through these systematic studies will identify the optimal
design attributes for a benchmark polymer/fullerene system and guide morphology
optimization for a variety of high-performance materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer-based
solar cells show promise for low-cost solar energy conversion, but the
technology will not be viable as an alternative source of energy until the power
output is improved. This research program facilitates those improvements by
establishing a system to study the relationships between active layer structure
and electronic function. These findings will help optimize the efficiency of
polymer-based solar cells. Education and outreach activities are integrated with
this research program in four ways. First, the PI encourages research
participation for a diverse pool of high school, undergraduate and graduate
students, and participates in numerous K-12 outreach programs that introduce
polymer science to under-represented groups in science and engineering. Second,
students will be equipped with the necessary skills for multidisciplinary
research through a new nanofabrication course and a multi-institutional workshop
that will teach the fundamentals of X-ray scattering. Third, through connections
to the local Houston materials industry, students will learn about
commercialization of polymers for energy conversion and storage. Finally, to
enhance the global awareness of student participants, the PI will coordinate
complementary research collaborations with the Korea Advanced Institute of
Science and Technology.