* 1151288
* CAREER: Community Adaptation to Changing Environmental Disasters
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* So-Min Cheong, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 410,000.00

This CAREER project investigates community adaptation to changing environmental
disasters and highlights the significance of dependence and external linkages in
times of rapid environmental change. An increase in environmental disasters
around the world compounded by a possible increase in the intensity and
frequency of extreme climatic events and an increased probability of their
occurrence in different locations poses serious challenges for people. This
research project investigates the way that communities adapt from one disaster
to another by examining coastal Louisiana's shift from frequent hurricanes to
the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010. Such a transition increases
dependence on others, and dependence, instead of or in addition to self-
reliance, is addressed as a missing cornerstone of research on community
adaptation. As a result, external linkages become more important as communities
depend on nonlocal inputs. The research focuses on the dynamic interactions
between external linkages and internal community cohesion and capability that
facilitate the penetration of external resources and knowledge at the community
level. The project applies and tests an innovative approach to coupling
community management with the theories of organizational innovation. The
investigation begins with the structured content analysis of archival and
documentary evidence and key informant interviews. The data analysis addresses
the effects of changed regulatory structures on community adaptation to
disasters and the extent to which previous adaptations to adverse environmental
events can increase community vulnerability. It is followed by the selection of
two of the most impacted communities in coastal Louisiana to examine whether
dependence on external resources and knowledge after the oil spill has
increased. It will also investigate the nature of the dependence and external
linkages of these communities using participant observation and in-depth
interviews. The project culminates with the collection of survey data to assess
the communities' ability to absorb resources and knowledge. Data analysis using
multilevel structural equation model will evaluate the relationship between
internal and external linkages and the role of boundary organizations in the
examination of community adaptation and innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project provides an improved understanding of vulnerability to new threats at
the community level. It enables governments and aid agencies to formulate plans
and policies to foster and sustain those external linkages necessary for
anticipatory adaptation to future disasters. It also encourages and supports the
capacity of communities to absorb new resources and information. This research
also contributes to advancing knowledge regarding multiple hazards approach by
studying and comparing the effects of different hazards and their adaptation
mechanisms in the same location. Results from this research will be of utility
to emergency managers, policy makers, and community leaders concerned with
climate change, hazards, and disaster management. In addition, the integrative
education plan focuses on student-society interactions and peer mentorship.
Student participation at local workshops and service learning will provide
students with valuable experiences. This project also includes the participation
of undergraduate and graduate students and offers new courses and summer scholar
programs. These educational activities will help students build careers in
adaptation research and practice.