* 1151738
* CAREER: Efficient DFT-based computational approach for correlated systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Matteo Cococcioni, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2014
* USD 164,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education to develop, validate, and disseminate a
new first-principles density-functional-theory-based computational approach that
will be able to describe correlated and weakly correlated materials at a higher
level of accuracy than existing density-functional-theory-based calculations.
This objective will be pursued through a correction to the approximate total
energy that selectively acts on 'correlated' electronic states. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The new correction functional will be designed to capture specific
many-body properties. This functional will be shaped on second-quantization
model Hamiltonians that have been formulated and broadly used to study the
behavior of correlated electrons. The correction will be incorporated into the
density-functional-theory energy functional and will include effective
interactions computed from first principles. The extension of computational
methods already in use with standard density-functional-theory methods will
further expand the descriptive power of the new computational tool. This project
is envisioned to proceed along the following steps:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1)
Formulation of a generalized functional that acts differently on occupied and
semi-occupied states. This generalization will be used to study optimal
refinements to improve the flexibility and the general applicability of the
functional.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Definition of an efficient and accurate
computational method for the run-time calculation of effective electronic
couplings from the interaction kernel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Development of a
general corrective Hamiltonian able to reintroduce, within controlled
approximations, selected many-body terms of the electronic energy into
approximate exchange-correlation functionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
corrective functional is aimed to greatly improve the accuracy and the numerical
efficiency of electronic structure calculations enabling the screening and
optimization of materials for technological applications. Of particular interest
is predicting novel materials for solar cells, catalytic conversion of alkanes,
functional metallic alloys and oxides, parent compounds of high temperature
superconductors, oxides for advanced electronics, and photo-
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational activities
with the aim of making first-principles electronic-structure calculations
accessible to students and senior scientists who are not familiar with
computational techniques. Specific objectives include: developing a course on
how to perform reliable density functional theory calculations accessible to
graduate students who work in experimental groups, and developing hands-on
computational sessions and integrating them into other courses. The PI will
continue to participate in summer schools and tutorials organized by the
developers of the first-principles electronic-structure code Quantum-ESPRESSO.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research, and education to
develop computational techniques for efficient and accurate modeling of
materials that contain electrons that interact with each other particularly
strongly. Notable examples of these correlated materials are transition-metal
and rare-earth compounds that usually contain electrons that are very localized
around a transition metal or rare earth atom. These electrons play an important
role in determining essential properties of strongly correlated materials.
Correlated materials may appear in a broad spectrum of technological
applications that includes: high temperature superconductors, solar cells,
catalysts, energy conversion and storage systems, and emerging electronic device
technologies that, in addition to charge, exploit magnetic properties of the
electron for their operation. Accurate computational modeling of correlated
materials is a fundamental challenge; the capability would greatly facilitate
the design and optimization of materials with desired properties through both
the precise characterization of the microscopic factors controlling their
behavior, and the efficient use of computers to screen many candidate materials
to predict materials which will be optimally suited for a particular
application. Most available predictive computational approaches to perform
materials specific calculations are either very computationally expensive or not
accurate enough to capture the physical properties of materials with strongly
interacting electrons. This award supports developing and implementing new
techniques to predict accurately and efficiently the properties of correlated
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational activities
to teach students and senior scientists who are not familiar with computational
techniques how to use effectively advanced computational materials modeling
tools. Specific objectives include: developing a course on how to perform
reliable predictive materials modeling calculations, focusing particularly on
graduate students who work in experimental groups, and developing 'hands-on'
computational sessions integrating them into other courses. The PI will continue
to participate in summer schools and tutorials organized by the developers of
the first principles electronic structure code Quantum-ESPRESSO.