* 1151554
* A Systematic Approach to Targeting Protein Interfaces with Nonpeptidic Helix Mimetics
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Paramjit Arora, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division of the National Science Foundation, Professors Paramjit Arora and
Richard Bonneau, of the Departments of Chemistry and Biology at New York
University, will study synthetic mimics of protein subdomains that can modulate
the function of chosen proteins. Targets include nonpeptidic oligomers that
mimic the alpha-helical conformation and display protein-like functionality. The
oxopiperazine helix mimetic oligomers will be synthesized using standard
procedures from natural and nonnatural amino acids. The researchers will develop
experimental and computational approaches for screening libraries of nonpeptidic
helix mimetics against model protein targets to identify high affinity,
selective ligands. They will implement computational tools that can accurately
predict local conformations of nonpeptidic oligomers and estimate optimum
constructs for chosen protein receptors. Furthermore, they will explore the
potential of oligooxopiperazines to target the DNA major groove. With this
award, these researchers will demonstrate computational and synthetic design
principles, and synthetic organic methods to develop new classes of biologically
active compounds. This approach will result in biomimetic oligomers that are
anticipated to become valuable reagents for the biomedical community. This work
represents a new direction in bioorganic chemistry: providing access to
nonpeptidic oligomers that assemble from amino acids while preserving the chiral
backbone and side chain functionality.

Students engaged in this work will gain broad experience in molecular design,
conformational analysis, synthesis, and biochemistry. Members of the research
team will include graduate and undergraduate students, drawing also from
underrepresented groups. Students trained on the project may go on to careers in
the pharmaceutical or biotechnology industry, or academia, and will thus
contribute to the US scientific endeavor and the economy. Professors Arora and
Bonneau will continue to engage educators that teach at predominantly minority
institutions by organizing workshops that discuss research and teaching advances
at the interface of chemistry and biology.