* 1151639
* The Fourth Annual Conference of the NEXT GENERATION INFRASTRUCTURES (NGInfra) Challenges and Research for the 21st Century, November 16-18, 2011, Hampton Roads,  VA
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2013
* C. Ariel Pinto, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2013
* USD 25,680.00

1151639 (Pinto). This is an award primarily for participant support for the
Fourth Annual Conference on Next Generation Infrastructures (NGInfra):
Challenges and Research for the 21st Century. This conference is scheduled for
November 16-18, 2011 in Hampton Roads, VA. The overall goal is to increase US
participation in next generation infrastructure research and education, and to
strengthen the nation?s position in the field, given the great importance of
this vitally critical and developing topical area. The effectiveness and
efficiency in addressing next generation critical infrastructure issues will be
a primary challenge of this century. Pressured by increasing complexity, scarce
resources, and emerging threats, the future of critical infrastructure
development will continue to be a source of societal emphasis. The objectives of
this conference are (1) to identify existing and future infrastructure
challenges that must be addressed for societies to more fully realize their
potential, (2) to provide a forum for highlighting advances in research and
practice to address current and future infrastructure challenges, (3) to expose
young or new researchers (especially underrepresented minorities, women, and
persons with disabilities) to the state of the art in the field, and (4) to
actively encourage students, especially under-represented minorities, women,
persons with disabilities, and those in Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU), to pursue careers in engineering and applied sciences, and
participate in the frontier of scientific research.