* 1151232
* CAREER: Imaging-Driven Fluid Dynamic Engineering of Modified Biomedical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* David Frakes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2017
* USD 429,474.00

1151232&lt;br/&gt;Frakes, David&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiovascular fluid
dynamics are deeply involved in the onset, progression, and treatment of many
major diseases. Heart disease and stroke are two examples, both of which are
among the three leading causes of death in the United States (US). Intracranial
aneurysms (ICAs), which are ballooning blood vessels in the brain, are another
example. They are present in an estimated 6% of the world?s population and
account for approximately 20,000 deaths each year in the US alone. Preventing
and/or treating cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) can be extremely difficult
because of their complex, multifactorial etiologies and because of constraints
inherent to the human body. However, the treatment problem becomes more
tractable if medical devices can be used to control cardiovascular fluid
dynamics. For example, the use of endovascular devices to treat ICAs (by
occluding blood flow) has led to 50% fewer deaths over the last decade than the
best option for treatment without the devices. Unfortunately, endovascular
treatments for ICAs are still unsuccessful up to 50% of the time. Failure rates
of this disturbing magnitude, which are consistent across many device-based CVD
treatments, are a direct result of current gaps in fundamental knowledge and
resources that limit the capabilities of fluid dynamic engineering.
Specifically, the state-of-the-art in fluid dynamic engineering is lacking in
fundamental knowledge of biomedical flows and in resources for medical device
modeling. These costly shortcomings prohibit the design of treatments that
achieve optimally healthy flows in modified biomedical systems (e.g. ICAs
treated with devices). This CAREER program will develop novel and markedly
improved methods for the design of effective device-based CVD treatments.
Synergetic combinations of imaging-driven engineering tools including in vivo
and in vitro imaging, physical and computational modeling, and fluid dynamic
measurement and simulation will provide the methodological basis for
development. Specifically, the program will build a foundation of new
experimental knowledge and computational device models to inform and execute
simulations of treated ICAs that are both dependable and realistic. The proposed
research has direct potential to transform ICA treatment from loosely-founded,
uncertain convention to well-informed, optimal engineering. More broadly, this
program represents an instantiation of a novel research paradigm wherein multi-
disciplinary techniques are repurposed to address the emergent class of unsolved
fluid dynamic problems presented by modified biomedical systems. The program
will underpin long-term advancement of fluid dynamic engineering in the context
of human health, leading to advances in fundamental knowledge, more effective
research techniques, enhanced clinical capabilities, and cross-cutting impacts
that transcend the biomedical field. The specific program objectives (POs) of
this CAREER proposal are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Construct physical models of
ICAs for use in fluid dynamic experiments&lt;br/&gt;2. Treat physical models
with medical devices and measure fluid dynamics experimentally&lt;br/&gt;3.
Develop improved computational models of medical devices for use in fluid
dynamic simulations&lt;br/&gt;4. Use experimental results and improved device
models to inform and execute fluid dynamic
simulations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits of the research program
are: 1) an unprecedented physical and computational library of ICAs including
fluid dynamic data and treated cases, 2) advanced methods for measuring fluid
dynamics experimentally in modified biomedical systems, 3) novel medical device
models and methods for simulating fluid dynamics in modified biomedical systems,
and 4) enhanced knowledge of fluid dynamic outcomes in treated
ICAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of the research program include: 1)
enhanced infrastructure for research and education in the form of an ICA
library, 2) broad dissemination of valuable physical and computational models
and novel fluid dynamic data, 3) newly generated partnerships in both academia
and industry, and 4) impacts on society including reduced healthcare costs and
improved quality and duration of human life. The primary educational goals of
this CAREER program are to increase exposure to crucial but highly unavailable
engineering technologies and to broaden participation in engineering. Toward
those ends, the Inside Out education program will engage broad student
populations (high school, undergraduate, and graduate) through innovative
curricula based on multi-sensory experience and the core technologies that drive
the research program (medical imaging and rapid prototyping). By focusing on
those technologies and their synergy in the research program, the education
program directly integrates the proposed research with education. The research
program is particularly significant to Hispanics and women because those groups
are disproportionately affected by ICAs. That significance will be leveraged to
recruit participants from groups that are underrepresented in science and
engineering to both the research and education programs. The programs will
benefit multiple groups (researchers, patients, students, underrepresented
groups) and institutions (academia, industry, healthcare, education) both
locally and globally.