* 1151533
* CAREER: Deep-UV resonance Raman spectroscopy for detection of protein insertion into lipid vesicles and determination of transmembrane content
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Renee Jiji, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 06/30/2018
* USD 599,971.00

This CAREER award by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program supports
work by Professor Renee Jiji at the University of Missouri-Columbia to create an
innovative research program focused on enhancing structural analysis of
transmembrane (TM) proteins using deep-ultraviolet resonance Raman (UVRR)
spectroscopy. This research will establish the unique UVRR spectral features of
TM proteins and the degree to which solvent exclusion and vibrational coupling
over the membrane embedded structural elements play a role in unique resonance
enhancement found in the UVRR spectrum of TM proteins. The methods in this
proposal will lay the foundation for future structure and functional studies of
TM proteins and make the interpretation of the their UVRR spectra more facile.
In sum, this research will enable simultaneous resolution of spectral
contributions from both solvent accessible and inaccessible regions of TM
proteins and the quantification TM protein content, which currently is untenable
by a single technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
include outreach programs to provide high school students with the hands-on
experience integral to their becoming adept at using scientific instrumentation,
and to generate greater interest in chemistry and chemical analysis at the high
school level. An initial needs assessment will give an understanding of high
school teachers' perceived current needs and iteratively inform the development
of hands-on activities. A spectroscopy mini-unit will be designed and
implemented to address the assessed needs. Single-day teacher development
workshops featuring spectroscopy will increase the teachers' comfort level with
scientific and spectroscopic instrumentation while multi-workshops will expand
high school students exposures to research instrumentation, highlight applied
areas of chemistry, and provide students with stimulating and in depth
activities, thereby fostering a greater understanding and interest in chemistry
and its professional applications.