* 1151475
* Electron correlation effects on excited state behavior of carbon-based semiconductors.
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Sumitendra Mazumdar, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2017
* USD 480,000.00

Sumitendra Mazumdar from the University of Arizona is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program of the Chemistry Division and
the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program of the Division of Materials
Research in an award for theoretical and computational research and education on
(1) electron correlation effects on carbon-based semiconductors, and (2) layered
organic charge-transfer solids and cobaltates. In (1), the principal
investigator (PI) aims to understand (a) spin-triplet excitations in carbon-
based semiconductors, (b) determine their roles in photoinduced charge-transfer,
if any, and (c) determine the relative ordering of one- versus two-photon states
in graphene molecular fragments. Carbon-based semiconductors of interest include
those in which the triplet is very close in energy to the optical singlet
exciton, such as wide single-walled carbon nanotubes and graphene nanoribbons;
and systems in which the triplet is considerably below the optical singlet
exciton and which are therefore candidates for singlet fission. In (b), the goal
is to determine whether photoinduced charge-transfer involving spin-triplets
gives enhanced yields of charge carriers. Excited state ordering in graphene
molecular fragments will be investigated theoretically in (c). Occurrence of the
lowest two-photon state below the lowest one-photon optical state will indicate
strong electron-electron interactions in graphene. In (2) the PI will
theoretically investigate (a) broken symmetries in the semiconducting states
proximate to superconductivity in organic charge-transfer solids, and (b)
layered cobaltates. The PI has proposed a paired-electron crystal (PEC) phase
within the correlated-electron description of layered charge-transfer solids for
moderate lattice frustration, and has suggested that the quantum spin liquid
like behavior in charge-transfer solids is due to transition to the PEC.
Excitations of the PEC will be investigated to understand the thermodynamic
behavior of charge-transfer solids. In (b) the PI will investigate layered
cobaltates in which the cobalt ions form an isotropic triangular lattice and the
carrier-concentration can be tuned over a wide range. Cobaltates with large
(small) carrier concentration exhibit behavior associated with weak (strong)
correlations. The PI will perform numerical calculations on finite triangular
lattice clusters to understand this unusual carrier concentration-dependent
electronic behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education seeking to understand (1) the interaction
of light with carbon-based semiconductors and nanostructures, and (2) the
consequences of strong electron correlations and lattice frustration on layered
organic and inorganic materials. Strong interactions between electrons lead to
unusual optical properties and exotic phases in the above materials. The PI uses
computer simulations and theory to gain insight at a microscopic level. During
the past two decades carbon-based semiconductors have evolved from laboratory
curiosities to new optical materials, while the layered organic materials and
cobaltates to be investigated by the PI have strong similarities with the high
temperature copper oxide based superconductors. The work supported by this award
will contribute to the intellectual foundation from which new technologies based
on nanoscale optoelectronics will emerge, and also provide a theoretical basis
for understanding unconventional superconductivity. The proposed theoretical
research will probe issues that are highly relevant for the device physics of
carbon-based semiconductors. Graduate students and the postdoctoral fellow
working on the project will gain experience at the interface of physics,
chemistry and optics. Undergraduate students will be involved in the research.
Developing scientific potential within underrepresented communities is one goal
of this program. The PI has established a Bridge Program between the University
of Arizona and several Minority Serving Institutions in the southwest to expose
underrepresented U.S. minority students to summer research. One Bridge student
will work in the PI's group each summer. The PI has a long track record of
international collaborations. These collaborations will be continued.