* 1151588
* CAREER: On the Engineering of Light Metals for Enhanced Dynamic Properties and Fatigue Performance
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Diana Lados, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2019
* USD 525,049.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER award to
Worcester Polytechnic Institute is to build and integrate fundamental knowledge
of materials science and fracture mechanics to aid in the optimization of
existing light metal alloys and the development of new and lighter alloys
designed for improved fatigue and fatigue crack growth resistance in structural
applications. This research will also lead to the creation of original
experimental, analytical, and computational tools and strategies for accurate
fatigue life predictions and design of fatigue-critical and high-integrity
structural components. The proposed work will provide a fundamental
understanding of the fatigue crack growth mechanisms at the micro-/nano-
structural scale of light metals, as well as methods for improved design. In
addition to their contributions to the scientific community, the results of this
work will also impact the industry -- both the materials and processing and
design communities. On a larger scale, complementary to the improvements in
materials design and fatigue performance, these developments will contribute to
important reductions in fuel consumption and carbon
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our nation's ambitious energy goals and reduced
carbon pollution can only be achieved if the transition to renewable and clean
energy will be complemented by effective venues to reduce vehicle weight. Weight
reductions will translate into reductions in fuel consumption, and consequently,
reductions in the carbon footprint. One way to reduce vehicle weight is to
replace ferrous materials in structural components with well-engineered lighter
metals. In structural components, the dynamic properties and fatigue performance
of the materials are critical as more than 90% of all mechanical failures are
fatigue related. Therefore, a transition to lighter metals in such applications
needs to be based on a fundamental understanding and optimization of the fatigue
behavior of the materials. Another means to reduce weight is to use accurate
life prediction tools to design structural components with a higher degree of
confidence, which requires appropriate fatigue data generation, interpretation,
and use. This will allow applying sufficient yet not excessive safety factors,
which will result in further weight and cost reductions. The CAREER award to
Worcester Polytechnic Institute will support both fronts by providing a
mechanistic understanding of fatigue in light metals, as well as methods for
improved design. The ultimate goal of the work is to facilitate the design of
better, lighter, and more reliable structural components for the transportation
sector. Through direct collaborations with the industry, the knowledge, data,
and techniques emerging from this work will be effectively validated and
implemented. In the broader impact of this award, a wide spectrum of activities
will be used to stimulate the interest and engagement in fundamental and applied
science and materials science of a range of students from undergraduate and
graduate to middle- and high-school to professionals.