* 1151062
* CAREER:  Organic Aerosol Volatility, Phase and Partitioning
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,10/31/2019
* Christopher Cappa, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 668,682.00

Atmospheric aerosol particles play an important role in the Earth's climate
system through their ability to absorb and scatter solar radiation and influence
the properties of clouds. To a large extent the specific influence of aerosol
particles on climate is determined by their composition, yet much remains
unknown with respect to their formation, chemical evolution and removal,
especially when considering organic aerosols. As a result, the climate forcing
due to atmospheric aerosols remains highly uncertain, thus hampering current
understanding and predictions of future climate change. This CAREER award
supports detailed experiments and analysis that will address fundamental
questions related to gas-particle partitioning of organic compounds in
atmospheric aerosols, with a particular focus on making connections between
particle composition, phase and volatility. Currently, there exists a
significant discrepancy between ambient and modeled organic aerosol volatility,
indicating that the physical properties of the modeled aerosol are incorrect.
Absorptive partitioning theory forms the basis of most regional and global
models that include organic aerosol formation, thereby determining the eventual
impacts on air quality and climate. Recent experiments suggest that absorptive
partitioning theory may not be as broadly applicable as is typically assumed,
perhaps because the organic aerosol exists with a glassy, as opposed to liquid-
like, phase. If correct, this finding has implications for understanding not
only organic aerosol formation, but also the lifecycle of organic aerosol in the
atmosphere. The studies will address, through laboratory experiments and
analysis of field data, our understanding of under what conditions partitioning
theory does (or does not) work to describe the physical behavior of organic
aerosols, to what extent this is determined by particle phase, and how this
influences particle volatility.

Educational activities will include: (1) Authoring a new chapter on global
climate change for the textbook Physical Geology, which is used in hundreds of
introductory geoscience classrooms across the country; (2) Developing and
teaching a module focused on air pollution issues in Mexico City for
incorporation in an introductory-level "place-based" geoscience course with the
objective of engaging Hispanic students, who are extremely under-represented in
the geosciences. The module will provide a new, hands-on element for the
students, provide some of them with research opportunities in the principal
investigator's laboratory and serve to strengthen ties between UC Davis and
nearby California State University, Sacramento, which is a predominately
undergraduate-serving institution. Graduate students will be involved at all
stages of the development and teaching of the module, providing them a chance to
develop as educators; and (3) Organizing a multi-institution, web-based joint
group meeting that involves early-career faculty members whose research focuses
on atmospheric chemistry. The primary intention of this project is to provide
graduate students opportunities to more frequently engage with their peers,
develop a greater sense of community as scientists and to obtain feedback from a
broad spectrum of people at the "in progress" stage of research.