* 1151529
* CAREER: Multifunctional Dynamic Surfaces for Engineering Cell Microenvironments
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Wei Shen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 12/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1151529 PI: Shen, Wei ORG: University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Multifunctional Dynamic Surfaces
for Engineering Cell Microenvironments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT:
Using synthetic materials to engineer artificial cell microenvironments that
recapitulate the essential characteristics of their in vivo counterparts to
guide stem cell fate selection has become an important strategy in regenerative
medicine. However, it remains a challenge to create materials that mimic dynamic
presentation of insoluble ligands, limiting the ability to control and study
stem cell fate selection in well-defined biomimetic cell microenvironments. The
goal of the project is to develop a method to engineer dynamic biomaterials that
enable reversible and orthogonal regulation of multiple insoluble ligands to
cell surface receptors without exposing cells to the soluble counterparts of the
ligands and to use such engineered materials to study mesodermal differentiation
of human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) in cell microenvironments
presenting dynamically controlled integrin ligands as a model system. The
specific objectives of this proposal are: (1) design, preparation, and physical-
chemical characterization of substrates capable of presenting multiple insoluble
ligands reversibly and orthogonally, (2) investigation of reversible and
orthogonal regulation of cell-accessible and cell-inaccessible states of the
insoluble ligands, (3) investigation of mesodermal differentiation of human
iPSCs toward myocardial and hemato-endothelial progenitors in response to
dynamically modulated ligands for two specific integrins. Completion of this
project will bridge the gap between the need for understanding and controlling
stem cell fate selection in response to dynamically modulated insoluble ligands
and the lack of enabling dynamic biomaterials. Multifunctional dynamic
biomaterials based on this method will allow creation of cell microenvironments
that better emulate their in vivo counterparts. These biomimetic artificial cell
microenvironments will not only guide more efficient stem cell differentiation
toward desired lineages for cell-based therapy, but also enable the study of
fundamentals of developmental biology in well-controlled systems, which is
difficult to access with animal studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS:
The approach developed in this project can be adapted for dynamic modulation of
many insoluble ligands of interest to construct a variety of biomimetic cell
microenvironments. Study and control of cell behavior, fate selection, and
functions in these engineered systems will have implications for both
technological development and fundamental understandings. The proposed education
activities, aimed at creation of a qualified and diversified workforce in the
biomaterials and tissue engineering fields, will be completely integrated with
the PI's research interests. The PI will give hands-on demonstrations of smart
biomaterials (glucose-sensitive gels, temperature-responsive materials for
engineering cell sheets, hydrogels allowing cell encapsulation), a seminar on
smart biomaterials, and summer research opportunities to the students in the
Minneapolis Public Schools High Tech Girls Society and the Exploring Careers in
Engineering and Physical Science programs. She will promote the research
activities of underrepresented minority and women undergraduate students through
participation in the North Star STEM program, and she will help to establish a
strong Biomaterials and Tissue Engineering track in the Biomedical Engineering
curriculum at the University of Minnesota.