* 1151836
* CAREER: Hearing and Seeing the Universe Through Multi-Messenger Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Daniel Holz, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

This work will focus on the inspiral and merger of compact-object binaries, one
of the most interesting and powerful of multi-messenger sources. Questions to be
explored include how often these sources happen, how we might detect them (both
in gravitational waves and electromagnetically), and what we will learn from
them. Light will be shed on the inner engines of gamma-ray bursts (among the
brightest events in the Universe), including elucidating the heart of these
events (are they neutron star black hole binaries?) and the processes by which
they happen (are the gamma-rays beamed?). In this way, the scientific potential
of gravitational-wave astrophysics will be more fully
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational waves are likely to be directly
observed within the next five years, and will open an entirely new window on the
Universe. We already see the Universe in optical light (e.g., with our eyes, or
with the Hubble Space Telescope), in X-ray, in gamma-rays, in radio, in
microwave, and across the entire electromagnetic spectrum. Gravitational waves
offer an entirely new way to the listen to the Universe. We've been searching
for these waves for many decades, and within the next five years the LIGO
instrument (based in Washington and Louisiana) will finally allow us to hear
them! Fully exploiting this new window on the Universe will require multi-
messenger astronomy: coordinated observations of sources in both the
gravitational wave and electromagnetic spectra. This work will help develop our
understanding of these multi-messenger sources. Gravitational-waves provide a
natural "hook" into science, and are an excellent way to appeal to students of
all ages. The history of gravitational waves is irresistible, with Einstein's
original (and contentious) prediction finally on the verge of being directly
confirmed. The waves are generated by black holes and gamma-ray bursts
(representing some of the largest explosions in the Universe), and these sources
are universally fascinating. The technology behind gravitational-wave detection
is mind-blowing ("You can detect the surf crashing on the Oregon coast hundreds
of miles away", "You can measure fractional changes in distance over 4 km to
much smaller than the size of a proton"). The science content ranges from wave
mechanics, through Newtonian gravity, interferometry, and wave optics, all the
way to general relativity and quantum measurement. In short, we have a rich,
timely, and fundamentally fascinating subject. We take a multi-pronged approach
to share the excitement of the impending discovery of gravitational-waves, as
well as to convey the science behind our research program to students and the
broader public. We work directly with inner-city, minority high-school students
in the South Chicago area. We are also partnering with a world-class museum, the
Adler Planetarium, by presenting at the museum and helping to develop material
on gravitational waves that will reach nearly half a million people a year, as
well as leveraging existing educational material from LIGO. All of this will
help share the excitement of a truly new way to listen to the Universe.