* 1151933
* RUI: The Development and Application of Gold(I) Catalysts for Asymmetric Organic Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Anna Wenzel, Claremont McKenna College
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2016
* USD 180,778.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program, Professor Anna G. Wenzel
from the Claremont McKenna, Pitzer, and Scripps Colleges will explore catalytic
methods in organic synthesis focusing on the design and development of new
ligand systems for asymmetric gold(I) catalysis. She and her students will make
use of the ability of gold to function as a carbophilic, soft Lewis acid to
preferentially activate carbon-carbon multiple bonds in the presence of
unprotected, Lewis-basic moieties, thereby allowing for the formation of new
bonds via nucleophilic attack upon these activated substrates. The proposed
research will examine a series of sulfur-based ligands for gold(I) catalysis.
Once prepared, these gold(I) complexes will be investigated in two target
reactions: the gold-catalyzed hydroamination of alkenes and an allenoate Claisen
rearrangement. These reactions have been selected for their synthetic utility
because they allow for atom-economical generation of valuable chiral reaction
products.

This work will address a growing demand for mild, selective, and sustainable
synthetic routes for the preparation of organic compounds. Gold catalysts have
the potential to fulfill this role in the preparation of pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals, and other materials. The proposed research addresses a
fundamental need for readily available, "user friendly" catalysts. Students will
have the opportunity to explore modern problems in synthetic chemistry and
catalysis, while gaining practical training in laboratory techniques, problem-
solving, presentation skills, and working as part of a team.