* 1151244
* EAGER: Nano-resolution microscopy studies of signaling in presynaptic terminals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Thomas Abrams, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2014
* USD 303,000.00

The presynaptic terminals of nerve cells are the sites where neurotransmitters
(such as glutamate, acetylcholine and dopamine) are released during synaptic
transmission. Synaptic function is critical for all forms of behavior, for
normal learning and memory and for motivation and mood. Understanding synaptic
function is key to understanding and intervening in numerous disorders including
addictive behavior and dementia. Arguably, the presynaptic terminal, with a few
dozen different proteins, is the most complex region of nerve cells within what
is the most complex organ of the body, the brain. At synapses, neurotransmitter
is contained in small sacks or vesicles 30 nanometers (3/100,000 of a
millimeter) in diameter. These vesicles are translocated within the terminal by
different proteins and docked at release sites, where they can fuse with the
membrane, releasing neurotransmitter. The complex, diverse group of proteins,
the small size of synaptic terminals and the irregular morphologies of synaptic
sites has made the analysis of synaptic terminal function at the molecular level
difficult to analyze. Moreover, synaptic vesicles are below the resolution of
traditional light or confocal microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past 5
years, there have been dramatic advances in novel strategies for imaging single
molecules in living cells at the resolution of single vesicles. The complex
geometry of synapses in the brain or even in cell culture is now the limiting
factor. The objective of this project is to develop a novel technology for
inducing nerve cells in culture to form synaptic terminals onto submicron
islands of the membrane protein neuroligin. These neuroligin nanospots will be
immobilized on chromium-gold spots generated on glass coverslips using computer
chip photolithography technology. Inducing artificial presynaptic release sites
on the surface of cover slips will create an optimal situation for imaging the
behavior of single photoactivatable molecules in real time, using a technique
called PALM. The development of this artificial synapse approach will be done
using the highly robust neurons of the marine snail Aplysia, which has been a
highly favorable model for analysis of synaptic mechanisms. Once this technique
is validated, it will be tested with mammalian neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
general NLG nanospot technology that will be developed will promote future
interactions between engineers and neuroscientists. Dr. Abrams has a long
history of introducing undergraduate students to research, and several will be
involved in this project, including a student who is already playing a major
role in producing submicron chromium-gold spots at the Maryland NanoCenter.