* 1151225
* CAREER: Analog-Assisted Sensing and Repair for Achieving Robust Near-Threshold Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Patrick Chiang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,000.00

ECCS-1151225 Patrick Chiang, Oregon State University CAREER: Analog-Assisted
Sensing and Repair for Achieving Robust Near-Threshold Computing

Intellectual Merit: The goal of this CAREER proposal is to explore analog/mixed-
signal sensing circuits and systems that will enable process-robust computing
operating in the near-threshold regime. Sub/near-threshold computing, where the
supply voltage is aggressively scaled to near the threshold voltage, has been
shown to improve energy-efficiency by approximately an order of magnitude, but
is not viable for most research and commercial applications due to two critical
limitations. First, near-threshold operation can exhibit exceedingly large,
process-varying delays, leading to unpredictable performance and throughput.
Second, an increase in the number of parallel cores operating in near-threshold
is required in order to compensate for the reduction in clock frequency. The
result is a greater dependence on the low-power on-chip interconnect that
connects these multiple cores. Low-voltage swing on-chip interconnect for near-
threshold operation are therefore essential, but these reduced signal amplitude
levels can significantly impair bit-error rates. Previous techniques to combat
the excessive delay variations, such as Razor-like error detection sequentials,
are unsuitable for the expected 10x delay spreads observed in near-threshold. We
propose a new completion detector using analog sensing of the current consumed
in computation, detecting sub/near-threshold delays with significant
improvements in power, area, and throughput over conventional techniques. We
will build upon this analog-assisted sensing by then exploring the merits of
semi-asynchronous pipelining. For on-chip interconnects operating in near-
threshold, we propose analog sensing of these parallel low-swing transceivers,
periodically monitoring and assessing the bit-error rate. In-situ measurement
and calibration of process non-idealities exacerbated by near-threshold
operation will be investigated, providing the ability to optimize the trade-offs
between on-chip link reliability and power consumption.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research promises to impact related academia,
industry, and society at large by laying the groundwork for the design of next
generation, energy-optimal computing platforms. Applications include energy-
constrained medical devices, where reliable performance at minimal consumed
power is critical in order to improve battery size and lifetime. Furthermore,
our fundamental research into unexplored problems in near-energy-optimal design
and delay-variation resilient architectures opens new avenues for reducing the
cost of chip testing and design verification. The education goals will be to
increase enrollment and retention of minority undergraduate/graduate students in
engineering, and apply the newly discovered research innovations directly to the
curriculum. Furthermore, this proposal promotes international collaboration in
the design and fabrication of low-power, near-threshold prototypes. By providing
US students, especially minority students, the opportunity to work first-hand
with international colleagues, this proposal will furnish US engineering
students with the leadership qualities necessary for the future globalized
workplace.