* 1151247
* CAREER: Paleotopography using Clumped Isotopes in the Basin and Range: Refining the Three Dimensional Evolution of a Continental Extensional Province
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Nathan Niemi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 523,366.00

The Basin and Range province of the western United States is perhaps the best
exposed and most accessible example of an intracontinental extensional province
on Earth today. Although a variety of lines of geological and geophysical
evidence indicate that this region has experienced approximately 200% east-west
extension since middle Miocene time, the Basin and Range is underlain today by
continental crust of typical (30 km) thickness, but that lies at an average
elevation (1-1.5 km) substantially higher than one would expect based on simple
geophysical calculations. How the continental crust of the Basin and Range has
evolved throughout Cenozoic time to have the characteristics that it has today
is an outstanding question that bears directly on the nature of diffuse
continental deformation, far away from plate boundaries, and the processes that
lead the crust to stretch and thin without rupturing to create new oceanic
basins. A variety of tectonic models have been invoked to explain the evolution
of the Basin and Range, but the geologic observations that would allow one to
discriminate between these models are unresolved. One potential discriminant
between these models is the predictions each makes for the paleoelevation
history of the western United States. Recent advances in the development of
paleo-thermometers, using clumped isotopes in lacustrine carbonates, offers a
new approach to determining paleotemperatures from the geologic record, and
thus, indirectly the paleoelevations at which the carbonates formed. By applying
these new methods to measure the temperature differences between a suite of low-
elevation, near sea-level lacustrine carbonates, and coeval lacustrine
carbonates in the Basin and Range, this project will develop new constraints on
the temporal and spatial evolution of topography across the Basin and Range
throughout its Cenozoic evolution, and thus address several key questions about
the tectonic evolution of the Basin and Range, including: (1) Was the Basin and
Range a high-standing plateau prior to extension?; (2) What was the spatial
extent of such a plateau, if it existed?; (3) How did the elevation of the Basin
and Range change during late Cenozoic extension?; and (4) What processes
accommodated large-magnitude extension in late Cenozoic
time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be incorporated into an education
and outreach program directed at early middle-school-aged students in the
Greater Detroit area through the development and production of a full-dome
planetarium movie on plate tectonics, in collaboration with the Exhibit Museum
of Natural History and the 3DLabs at the University of Michigan. Early in middle
school is the time when many students begin to lose interest in science. This
educational project will incorporate the research data gathered from this
project, along with the wealth of geological and geophysical data being
collected from other ongoing NSF projects, such as Earthscope, into a fully
immersive film on the history of the Earth, the processes that drive plate
tectonics, the hazards associated with plate boundaries, and the technology we
can apply to study modern plate motions. This movie will be incorporated into
outreach days on earth sciences at the Exhibit Museum, which reach 3,000-6,000
students annually, and which are designed to get students to think of science as
an active and evolving field of study. By developing new and engaging ways of
presenting earth science that demonstrate the elements of excitement of
discovery and societal relevance that draw in so many who study the earth, the
project aims to increase the participation of students in STEM subjects through
middle school and beyond.