* 1151147
* CAREER:  Using Haptically  Augmented Tactile Communication Methods to Foster the Inclusion of the Visually Impaired in STEM Professions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Christian Schwartz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 12/31/2012
* USD 400,000.00

1151147&lt;br/&gt;Christian, Swartz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Community
Survey reports that there are more than 3.5 million non-institutionalized
individuals in the U.S. of working age that are blind or visually impaired
(BVI). Within this population are technically talented individuals who have the
potential to contribute very substantially to our economy, but face obstacles
because of their disability. There is a substantial opportunity cost of their
inability to fully participate. A large percentage of BVI individuals are able
to effectively enter many areas of the workforce due to the prevalence of
Braille; however, many talented people in the BVI community are not able to
enter STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) related fields
because of the substantial hurdles is using Braille in STEM education and
professional practice. Scientific graphics (e.g., chemical or biological cycles,
flowcharts), mathematical formulas, and common data plots can be extremely
cumbersome, if not impossible, to express using existing Braille methods. These
tools are essential in any STEM field. A critical need exists to enhance the
usefulness of Braille in communicating STEM-related information both in
education and in professional practice to allow BVI individuals to participate
more fully. This work will investigate the use of 'secondary' tactile cues
(haptics) integrated within Braille text, to transform Braille into a more
usable communication method for STEM information. The fundamental hypothesis of
the work is that haptic attributes (e.g., topological elements, temperature,
prickle/fuzziness, slip/stick) can be incorporated within Braille text to
dramatically improve information content within the same page space. The three
project objectives are to investigate: &lt;br/&gt;1. Integration of
topological/textural elements (TE) within standard Braille text to understand
psychophysical relationships involving TE enhancement, and to determine its
contribution to overall Braille information density, &lt;br/&gt;2. Integration
of non-topological haptic elements (prickle/fuzziness, slip/stick, temperature)
within Braille to understand perceptibility of these enhancements and determine
their contribution to overall Braille information density, and &lt;br/&gt;3. How
the design of haptic-based assistive technology can be used within a project-
based learning environment to educate engineers to effectively address the needs
of the BVI community, and attract BVI students to consider college careers in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;This work will involve an extensive experimental approach
including human sensory assessment of the tactile response of various Braille
enhancements in order to determine their effectiveness. Novel platforms for
investigation of topological and non-topological haptic sensitivity will be
developed as well, as a means of determining psychophysical relationships and
the extent that they increase useful information density. All research tasks
will be integrated into an educational plan targeting undergraduates, graduate
students, and pre-college BVI students.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The PI,
with expertise in skin tribology and engineering education, is uniquely suited
to successfully complete this work which will contribute to existing research
fields as well as foster new fields. The anticipated results have the potential
to enhance and transform, rather than replace, the Braille system. Results will
be of immediate use to others in the field of tactile communication, including
those who design other types of assistive technology for the BVI community. The
quantitative psychophysical models that relate surface topology to tactile
sensitivity will also be useful to designers of user interfaces whether they be
consumer, medical, or military applications.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. These
results will have far-reaching impact on the understanding of how to enhance
Braille to foster inclusion of BVI individuals in STEM-intensive activities. The
work will also serve as an instructional platform to expose students to design
experiences that incorporate the unique needs of the BVI community. Results will
be integrated into the PI's graduate tribology course, while a problem-based
pedagogical approach, enVISIBLE, will include pre-college BVI students on
engineering design teams in the undergraduate capstone design course at Texas
A&amp;M University.