* 1151563
* CAREER: Total Synthesis of Complex Alkaloid Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Seth Herzon, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2017
* USD 550,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the National Science Foundation supports the
work of Professor Seth B. Herzon in the area of complex alkaloid total
synthesis. The proposal builds on prior research which provided efficient
strategies to synthesize the hasubanan alkaloids, a large family of botanical
natural products. In the proposed work, the application of these strategies
toward the synthesis of more complex alkaloid natural products will be pursued.
In parallel, the development of new synthetic methods, inspired by the synthetic
studies, will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of efficient
methods for the synthesis of hasubanan alkaloids will improve access to
molecules with diverse biological effects. This research will provide training
for students in sophisticated organic synthesis preparing them for a career in
academia or pharmaceutical industry. The adaptation of new teaching methods for
sophomore organic chemistry and a systematic, research-based approach to
undergraduate education is another important component of this project. The goal
is to increase the number of students (including students of underrepresented
groups) pursuing chemistry and related fields of study by improving the way
undergraduate organic chemistry is taught, and learned. A University-wide
program to provide high school students with hands-on experience in chemistry is
also planned.