* 1151648
* CAREER: Nuclear Physics from Lattice QCD in the Chiral Regime
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Andrei Alexandru, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2019
* USD 550,000.00

A primary challenge of Nuclear Physics today is to understand the internal
structure of hadrons and their complex interactions as they emerge from Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD), the fundamental theory of the strong force. The objective
of this project is to explore the effects of chiral dynamics on hadron spectrum
and structure. In particular, I will focus on electromagnetic polarizabilites,
the masses of the lightest hadrons and the behavior of dense nuclear matter at
high temperature. To investigate the properties of quarks in the energy region
where hadrons are the dominant excitations, I will use a numerical approach,
lattice QCD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the educational side, I am developing a
seminar series, "Modern Physics for Science Teachers" and an undergraduate
"Computational Physics" course. The seminars will be designed to help teachers
connect the K-12 science curriculum to modern Physics research. The seminar
series will constitute a valuable educational opportunity to science teachers
and local K-12 students, in a area where the socio-economic and educational
indicators are particularly low. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a broader
perspective, this project is part of an effort to understand the properties of
visible matter in the universe. Complementing a rigorous experimental effort, my
research explores the properties of nuclear particles as predicted by QCD. This
will help answer questions relating to the composition of the early universe,
exotic phases of matter inside neutron stars, charge distributions inside
hadrons, origin of nuclear forces, etc. A significant part of my research
involves developing numerical methods for QCD that exploit the tremendous
computing power of graphics cards (GPUs). The expertise gained in using GPUs to
solve nuclear physics problems will have direct applicability to all scientific
and engineering fields that use finite-difference methods.