* 1151323
* Relations Between Perceived Discrimination and Romantic Relationship Functioning Among African American Couples
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Tracy DeHart, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* kerry marsh
* 04/30/2015
* USD 150,000.00

This research examines the relations between perceived racial discrimination and
romantic relationship functioning among African American couples. Very little
research has examined the relations among perceived discrimination and romantic
relationship functioning, and very little is known about how perceived
discrimination affects interpersonal relationships or how romantic relationship
interactions influence people's response to perceived discrimination. The
proposed research seeks to fill this important gap in the literature by
employing a prospective daily diary study to examine the unfolding context of
African American couples' daily lives. These couples will complete a one-time
background survey and a 3-week daily diary survey. Every day for 21 days,
participants will log onto a secure website to access the daily diary portion of
the study to record their daily experiences and feelings. Ultimately, the
investigators will examine how feeling accepted or rejected by romantic partners
influences the relation between perceived discrimination and intra-personal
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is consistent with NSF's goal to
support research that has broader scientific impacts in a number of ways. It
will fill an important gap in the psychological literature by examining African
Americans' perceptions of racial discrimination, the impact it has on their
romantic relationship functioning as well as how relationships can influence the
negative consequences of perceived racial discrimination. Examining factors that
moderate the harmful physiological responses to discrimination and the resulting
negative health outcomes should help contribute to reducing existing health
disparities facing African Americans. In addition, several ethnic minority
graduate and undergraduate students are likely to be included in the conduct the
research.