* 1151479
* Cationic Cobaltocenium Polyelectrolyte Polymers: Synthesis, Self-Assembly and Utilities
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Chuanbing Tang, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Chuanbing Tang of the University of South
Carolina will explore the synthesis and properties of cobaltocenium-containing
polymers, the isoelectronic analogues of the more widely studied ferrocene-
containing macromolecules. The approach is to synthesize and characterize
cobaltocenium-containing polymers by controlled polymerization of cobaltocenium-
containing monomers and by post-polymerization modification routes; to study the
assembly of cobaltocenium-containing block copolymers and explore the template
synthesis of cobalt oxide nanoparticles; and to perform preliminary studies into
the use of the cobaltoceneum-containing polymers in battery electrodes The
broader impacts involve training undergraduate and graduate students in
research, broadly disseminating research results through publications and
presentations at conferences, as well as participating in integrated educational
activities for high school, undergraduate and graduate students to stimulate
their interest in science and technology with enhanced global research and
education training opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastics are long chain
organic molecules and are found in many facets of everyday life, including food
packaging, structural materials for automotive and aerospace transportation, and
lightweight electronic devices. This research will explore new approaches to
include metal atoms within the polymer structure, which can impact the polymer's
electrical properties and potentially lead to materials for light-weight,
flexible electrochemical batteries. The metal-containing polymers could also be
used to template the creation of technologically important magnetic or catalytic
nanoparticles (small pieces of material with dimensions on the order of 1 to 100
nanometers, which is about 10,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair).