* 1151076
* CAREER: A dynamic game theoretic approach to cyber-security of controlled systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Cedric Langbort, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

As infrastructure and industrial control systems are increasingly being
connected to the Internet and other widely accessible networks, their
vulnerability to cyber attacks is fast becoming a growing concern and a national
priority. Successfully weathering these attacks calls for stringent security
measures and, in turn, imposes unique requirements on control algorithms, which
must be able to ensure some level of closed-loop stability and performance in
the presence of malicious and strategic intrusions, and complement the first
line of defense provided by more traditional cyber-security techniques. In order
to be implementable on today?s&lt;br/&gt;SCADA systems, these algorithms must
(1) be able to face a wide variety of attacks, (2) be easy to deploy and require
relatively low computational resources and, (3) come with theoretical guarantees
of resilience for at least some well-defined classes of
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project proposes to explore the design
of such secure control algorithms using the tools of Game Theory, more
specifically dynamic zero-sum games, stopping games, and team theory. The
flexibility afforded by this modeling paradigm makes it possible to capture
various characteristics of attacks through the attacker?s and controller?s
information and action sets, as well as through the kernel of the game. In
addition to readily implementable control strategies, this game theoretic
approach also provides fundamental insights into the influence of an attack?s
point of entry and stealthiness on its outcomes, and points towards specific
resilient architectures for networked control systems. The resulting algorithms
will be implemented and validated on three experimental testbeds of increasing
complexity and degree of realism. One of these testbed is an actual small scale
SCADA-enabled power grid located in Stockholm, Sweden, which the PI will be
granted access to via ongoing collaboration with the Royal Institute of
Technology (KTH). Tightly integrated with this research plan are education and
outreach activities, which will partly leverage the testbed implementations, and
are aimed at extending the use of game theoretic tools in the cyber-security
community and among engineering students, and demystifying cyber-attacks for the
general public, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
novelty and pertinence of the proposed approach for designing provably secure
control systems lies in its focus on the resilience of the control algorithm
itself, and its combination of the complementary strengths of dynamic game
theory and robust control techniques to achieve this goal. This is in contrast
with traditional cyber-security approaches, which are typically concerned with
decreasing software and hardware vulnerabilities, and thwarting attacks at their
point of entry. In addition, while game theoretic methods have proved successful
in the formulation and resolution of security problems in the context of
computer and communication networks, the use of these tools for studying and
designing secure networked control systems under cyber-attacks is relatively new
and unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: We expect the algorithms
and approach resulting from this project to be widely applicable, and to provide
additional options for the design of ?defense in depth? strategies for networked
control systems. In order to disseminate these results to a broad community of
students, researchers, and practitioners, a yearly summer school on ?Game Theory
for Decision-Making and Security? will be organized either as a stand-alone
event, or as part of UIUC?s Information Trust Institute?s (ITI) offering of
dedicated summer workshops. Undergraduates will be recruited through ITI?s
Summer Internship Program, and will be involved in the implementation and
characterization of the two in-house testbeds. These testbeds will also be used
in outreach efforts to the local and global public. Finally, this project will
help strengthen the research and educational ties between UIUC and KTH,
including student exchange.