* 1151920
* CAREER: A Longitudinal, Cross-Cultural Investigation of Psychosocial and Neurobiological Aspects of Emotion Development in Adolescence
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2018
* Mary Helen Immordino-Yang, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 05/31/2018
* USD 616,000.00

Adolescence is a time of intense brain development in systems that support
abstract thinking, social cognition and emotional feeling. It is also a time of
intense social maturation, in which youths struggle to adapt to cultural norms
and to reconcile the values and expectations of parents, peers, schools, and the
broader society with their own desires and feelings. Yet, relatively little is
known about how brain growth and social growth interact during this critical
developmental stage, and how brain growth is influenced by the adoption of
cultural norms for emotional behavior. This project examines how youths from two
ethnic groups with different norms around emotional behavior, Mexican-American
and Chinese-American urban adolescents, come to feel complex social emotions--
emotions like admiration, inspiration, gratitude and compassion--in culturally
appropriate, individually variable, ways. By combining neurobiological measures
of social emotion processing with psychosocial interviews about the meaning
youths make of social situations and personal experiences, the project seeks to
transform knowledge about relations between adolescent brain and social
development. The project has a special focus on the impact of urban community
violence on youths' social connectedness, empathy and compassion, and on the
ways that acculturation may promote neurobiological and psychosocial resilience
over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the possibility of contributing
fundamental scientific discoveries about how neural development is shaped by
socio-cultural processes, this project will make significant contributions to
society through the development and testing of educational materials that
promote compassion, well-being and academic achievement among at-risk urban
youth. Urban adolescents from a range of ethnic groups will participate in a
science summer camp in which they conduct collaborative research on the
neurobiology of emotion, and in the process learn skills for scientific
discourse, emotion recognition, self-reflection and cultural literacy. The
impact of the camp experience will be assessed and results will inform a
curriculum on emotions in academic contexts that will be broadly implemented,
assessed and disseminated through strategic partnerships with Mental Health
America, The Ball Foundation, SERP and Annenberg Media, and through the
researcher's established series of internationally-attended workshops for
teachers.