* 1151726
* Reduced colloidal metal-oxide nanocrystals as novel redox reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* James Mayer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/29/2016
* USD 552,779.00

James M. Mayer of the University of Washington is supported by an award from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in collaborative
research that seeks to examine the chemical reactivities and physical properties
of colloidal oxide semiconductor nanoparticles containing extra electrons. Pure
and doped ZnO and TiO2 nanoparticles of different sizes, band gaps, and with
different surface-capping groups will be studied. Photoexcitation of these
particles followed by hole trapping yields stable solutions of reduced
nanoparticles, containing electrons in conduction-band orbitals or in "trap
states". Synthetic, analytical, and spectroscopic techniques will be integrated
to develop a fundamental understanding of the structure/function relationships
that govern the reactivities of these nanoparticles. The nanoparticle charging
chemistries will be examined by tracking the organic products and protons that
are formed upon hole trapping, and by following the evolution of the
photoexcited nanoparticles spectroscopically. The ability of the reduced
particles to perform multi-electron/multi-proton reactions will be examined
using molecular and nanocrystal substrates. The influence of nanocrystal doping
and surface modification will be examined. Connections among the spectroscopic,
thermochemical, and kinetic properties of the reduced particles will be
developed. This research will yield new fundamental scientific insights that
could alter the ways such materials are understood and applied in various
technologies including the oxide/solution interfaces of photoelectrochemical
cells or batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address fundamental
reactivities of metal-oxide nanostructures. Such nanostructures are ubiquitous
in energy conversion, energy storage, and photocatalysis technologies, and the
information gleaned from the proposed research will have broad implications in
each of these technologies. This project could furthermore result in the
development of inexpensive, robust, and environmentally sound multi-electron
reducing reagents with tunable potentials for application in a variety of
scientific contexts from fundamental research to catalysis. Finally, this
research will provide new fundamental insights into general electron transfer
chemistries and will deepen our understanding of this important class of
reactions. In addition to yielding new fundamental scientific insights and new
materials, this research will also provide undergraduate and graduate students
with opportunities for advanced interdisciplinary education and training to
prepare them for future careers in science and engineering. Emphasis will be
placed on integration of research and education at the undergraduate level
through involvement of undergraduates in the research, incorporation of
experiments and concepts from the research into the undergraduate laboratory
curriculum, collaboration with faculty and students from undergraduate
institutions, and outreach activities at regional community colleges and high
schools.