* 1151851
* CAREER: Combining Field Data and Computational Models to Characterize the Distribution of Oceanic Transform Fault Deformation throughout the Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2020
* Sarah Titus, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2020
* USD 444,065.00

This project seeks to quantify deformation across oceanic transform faults,
which are places where two tectonic plates slide past each other. Because
oceanic plates are difficult to study directly, the research portion of this
proposal focuses on three field sites in New Caledonia, Cyprus, and Iceland
where oceanic transforms are exposed on land. These sites were chosen because
they also record transform deformation from different levels (mantle, mid-crust,
and upper crust) of oceanic plates. Two techniques will be used to study each
transform system: the collection of detailed field measurements and the
development of quantitative models based on the field data. Both are common ways
to examine transform fault deformation, although they are rarely used in tandem.
Comparing field data to model results will be a feedback process, to refine
model set-ups and explore which kinds of parameters are important for matching
field observations. Ultimately, the results from all three sites will be
synthesized to better understand the plate-scale patterns of transform fault
deformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research objectives of
this study, the educational components of this CAREER project involve two age
groups of students: college students from Carleton College and 13-to 15-year old
girls from Northfield, Minnesota. The Carleton undergraduate students will be
involved directly in research projects, forming interdisciplinary science teams
for the structural analysis and modeling of each field site. The geology majors
will complete field-based projects for senior theses, and other STEM students
will be recruited for summer research experiences involving computational and
modeling projects. A desired outcome of the project will be that STEM students
will recognize geoscience as a possible career path following college. The
middle-school students will participate in a summer program that will examine,
among other topics, a local example of a transform fault that is part of the
Midcontinent Rift system. Although the fault cannot be observed directly, it can
be imaged using geophysical methods. The objective of this summer program is to
increase the interest of young girls in the geosciences, and more broadly, in
science in general. Overall, the project supports the research and educational
program of an early career scientist, and contributes to the research
infrastructure of undergraduate institution. Research results will be broadly
disseminated in the peer reviewed scientific and education literature and by
presentations at professional society meetings.