* 1151966
* SBIR Phase II:  Single Molecule NanoTweezers
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Bernardo Cordovez, Optofluidics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,276,249.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop a
commercial optically-resonant nanotweezer chip and corresponding
instrumentation. The nanotweezer technology, originally developed at Cornell
University, uses localized optical forces to directly manipulate biological
(nucleic acids &amp; proteins) and non-biological (nanoparticles) materials as
small as a few nanometers in size. Efforts will be focused on developing a
commercial system which facilitates the study of single-molecule interactions,
as this sector has immediate market appeal and is experiencing very high growth.
At present, research into the understanding of how single molecules interact is
greatly impeded by the lack of a fast and simple technique which can: (1)
capture and suspend small molecules in free solution for an indefinite period of
time, (2) effectively "concentrate" the set of molecules of interest to a point
where protein-protein or other multi-molecule interactions can be studied, and
(3) allow rapid modulation of the external environmental conditions. The
nanotweezer product line to be developed here, consisting of optical chips which
carry the core technology, as well as a driving instrument, represents a quick
and cost-effective system that allows researchers to solve all three of these
problems simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this project will be a commercially-available product that can
directly manipulate extremely small biomolecules and particles, and could be
transformative to scientific and industrial advancement in a number of areas
including: (1) the understanding of faulty protein-protein events and other
single-molecule interactions, (2) the analysis of individual nucleic acids for
rapid sequencing, and (3) the directed assembly of new forms of nanomaterials
for energy production. The importance of the first item (which is the target
application for the initial version of this platform) is highlighted by the
large number of sufferers of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's, which are diseases that have been linked by protein misfolding
events. The development of tools that can facilitate experimental studies of how
single biomolecules and small aggregates interact can reveal information about
the fundamental molecular processes that lead to these deficiencies. The
nanotweezer technology has a series of key advantages over existing commercial
methods that can enable researchers to better understand these phenomena in
environments closer to the physiological state. We believe that these advantages
will create a significant commercial advantage over competing products.