* 1151168
* CAREER: Analysis of Prices, Informational Rigidities and Productivity Differences
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Yuriy Gorodnichenko, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 420,366.00

This project is aimed to address three key questions in macroeconomics.
&lt;br/&gt;The first question is, To what extent are prices inflexible, what is
the best way to measure the degree of price stickiness, and what are the
implications for macroeconomic dynamics and optimal policy design? This question
is related to one of the central debates in macroeconomics, which is whether
nominal shocks have significant real effects. While there is evidence that
prices at the micro level could indeed be fixed for short periods of time, sales
often interrupt fairly long intervals of otherwise stable prices. Specifically,
temporary sales could be a form of price flexibility for firms that are unable
to adjust their regular or ?reference? prices, i.e. prices that tend to remain
fixed for prolonged periods of time. Thus, when firms want to lower prices, they
do not have to change their regular prices. Instead, they introduce deeper and
more frequent sales so that the effective price paid by consumers is lower than
suggested by the regular price. In this scenario, the effective prices could be
much more flexible and procyclical over the business cycle than regular prices
and therefore the rationale for countercyclical policy could be considerably
undermined. Likewise, consumers can change outlets to seek better prices and
thus make prices actually paid in transactions more flexible than is implied by
posted prices. The latter could be particularly important in e-commerce where
search costs are minimal and consumers can easily switch outlets not only from
one seller to another in response to economic conditions but also switch away
from regular brick-and-mortar stores which typically charge higher prices for
identical goods relative to online stores. This project will study cyclical
properties of sales and outlet substitution as well as properties of prices in
online markets which is an increasingly important segment in the retail
industry. Apart from improving design of countercyclical policies, this project
will also be informative for enhancing price indexes constructed by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics and other private and public agencies. For example, this
project can provide guidelines on sampling techniques (e.g., sample discount
stores and online markets more during downturns), types of collected data (e.g.,
use prices actually paid rather than posted prices; collect quantities), and
aggregation (e.g., use expenditure weights potentially differentiated across
types of stores rather than apply a uniform weight for a product category).
&lt;br/&gt;The second question is, What is the role of information rigidities in
determining the behavior of macroeconomic aggregates and individual economic
agents? How economic agents form their expectations has long been one of the
most fundamental questions in macroeconomics. Indeed, the abandonment of
adaptive expectations in favor of rational expectations was one of the defining
features in the rebuilding of macroeconomics starting in the 1970s and most
modern macroeconomic models assume full-information rational expectations on the
part of all agents. Recent events, however, have called into question the
general validity of models analyzed under the assumption of full-information
rational expectations. For example, the freezing of interbank lending markets in
2008 reflected in part uncertainty about the financial positions of other
institutions, a feature at odds with the full-information assumption of modern
macroeconomic models and the notion that prices incorporate all pertinent
information. Coming to grips with such informational constraints will
undoubtedly be a fundamental component of post-crisis macroeconomic models.
While there has been some recent theoretical work focused on better
understanding the frictions and limitations faced by economic agents in the
acquisition and processing of information, this research has been hampered by a
lack of robust empirical evidence that quantifies these concepts. This project
will develop and use a general framework to document, classify and quantify the
nature of information rigidities faced by different agents. This framework can
not only be used to directly map models of informational imperfections to
empirical counterparts but can also be readily applied to a variety of economic
agents such as professional forecasters, consumers, firms, central banks, and
financial markets. Since informational frictions can explain numerous features
of the data which are difficult to reconcile with the common assumption of full-
information, this project, by providing a robust set of stylized facts about
informational rigidities, will lay the groundwork for a more empirically
justified theory of information constraints. This will shed light on one of the
most fundamental questions in economics, the nature of the expectations
formation process, and will be directly applicable to a variety of fields in
economics. The results of the project will be relevant to policy-makers for
several reasons. First, the nature of the informational frictions has critical
implications for welfare calculations and hence the design of optimal policy. By
assessing which informational frictions are quantitatively important, this
project will provide a key ingredient for policy analyses. Second, the project
will formally investigate the interaction of informational frictions faced by
different types of agents especially when one type of agents (e.g., the central
bank) may have an informational advantage and thus policy changes may induces
indirect effects on the economy through agents? learning about economic
conditions from policy changes. Finally, the nature of informational frictions
can impact how policy changes should be implemented. For example, whether
policymakers should be opaque or transparent about the current and future course
of actions crucially depends on how economic agents collect and process
information. &lt;br/&gt;The third question is, What is the source of
productivity and income differences across countries? It is widely perceived
that the key conduit of economic growth and productivity enhancements is
innovation that brings new goods and services to the economy as well as new ways
to produce existing goods and services. Obviously, many factors such as quality
of property rights, development of financial markets and ownership structure
affect the intensity of innovation and a great deal of effort was put into
studying these factors. However, it is surprising that although Max Weber and
others have argued that culture played a fundamental role in explaining the
wealth of nations and the literature on the economic effects of culture is
growing fast, there has so far been little systematic work examining
theoretically and empirically the effect of culture on innovation, productivity
and development. This project is aimed to broadly explore sources of variation
in productivity and innovation with an emphasis on cultural differences.
Specifically, the project will investigate how culture affects individual
choices to deviate from norms and try new technologies and goods, how culture
influences allocation of resources and specialization in trade, how culture
contributes to political constraints on economic behavior and provision of
public goods. The project will also study co-evolution of genes and
cultural/economic outcomes over long periods of time. The results of this
project will be instrumental in understanding cultural constraints and thus will
help to enhance developmental policies by building on existing cultures and
their strengths instead of transposing policies that are not adequate to a given
cultural environment. Apart from providing economists with new insights into key
questions about development and its interplay with culture, this project is
meant to bridge economics to other disciplines such as sociology, political
science, anthropology, psychology, and genetics.