* 1151208
* CAREER: Quantum Critical Points around Topological Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Cenke Xu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 425,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education focused on the
study of unconventional quantum critical points around topological order. These
quantum critical points are beyond the classic Landau-Ginzburg paradigm, and
they carry important and experimentally testable information on the nature of
the topological phases. In particular, the PI will pursue the following
directions:

(1) Understanding the experimental candidates of strongly correlated topological
states, for example frustrated spin-1/2 quantum magnets. The PI will identify
the nature of the exotic states observed in these materials by studying the
phase diagram of these materials under magnetic field, pressure, and other
external fields.

(2) Investigating the quantum critical points driven by topological defects with
nontrivial quantum numbers. In topological states such as a fractional
topological insulator, a topological defect usually carries topologically
protected quantum numbers such as charge, spin, and anyon statistics. The PI
will develop a many-body theory of such topological defects, and understand the
universality class and quantum entanglement at the quantum critical points
driven by these defects.

(3) Exploring unconventional phases and quantum critical points of strongly
interacting Dirac fermions. Dirac fermions are related to many topological
states such as topological band insulators. The PI will explore the novel
physics due to the interplay between the strong interaction and topology of
Dirac fermions. For example, the PI will investigate the 5d transition metal
oxides with both strong spin-orbit coupling and interaction.

This award also supports educational activities. These include developing new
courses with emphasis on new techniques in condensed matter theory. The PI will
organize group meetings and seminars for students, where the students will not
only broaden their scientific disciplines, but also practice their presentation
and communication skills. An interactive online Forum will be developed in order
to stimulate discussions between students and to evaluate the effectiveness of
education. The associated outreach activities include partnerships with a
Research Experience for Teachers program, and California Alliance for Minority
Participation program which will provide resources and opportunities in
scientific research to secondary school teachers and under-represented students.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This CAREER award supports theoretical research and education programs to study
new states of matter called topological states that are exhibited by electrons
in materials. An example of a topological state is a topological insulator. Like
ordinary insulators, for example rubber, topological insulators do not conduct
electricity though the interior of the material. Unlike ordinary insulators,
topological insulators are able to conduct electricity on their edges or
boundaries through the formation of a new state of matter. Among the known
topological insulators are compounds made of the elements bismuth and selenium,
and bismuth and tellurium. The PI aims to advance understanding of topological
states of matter by investigating the transformations between states of matter
than involve topological states. Topological states fundamentally differ from
more familiar states of matter like insulators and metallic states.
Transformations involving these states do not fit the standard theory of phase
transitions. The PI aims to use transformations among states that occur at the
absolute zero of temperature called quantum phase transitions to determine the
properties of topological states and connect to experiments on materials that
exhibit electronic states that are candidates for topological states and to
computer simulations on model systems.

This research has immediate relevance to materials that are frustrated magnets.
In these materials the interactions between fundamental microscopic units of
magnetism, the electron spin, cannot be satisfied because of the geometric
arrangement of atoms. The PI aims to understand the nature of these
unconventional states by comparing the experimentally determined diagram of
phases with the PI's theoretical predictions.

This award supports educational activities with the goal to improve creativity
and innovation in research while students learn basic physics. New courses with
emphasis on modern condensed matter theory will be developed. A new online forum
will be designed to stimulate discussion, and evaluate teaching effectiveness.
The PI will carry out outreach activities that provide research opportunities to
secondary school teachers and under-represented students.