* 1151930
* CAREER: Towards a Better Understanding of Wildfire-Atmosphere Interactions-Integrating Fire Weather Research and Education
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2019
* Craig Clements, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 10/31/2019
* USD 900,337.00

The research represents an effort to advance the understanding of wildfire-
atmosphere dynamics by obtaining new observations from a comprehensive field
program and integrating these observations into education and community
outreach. The key objectives of the project are: 1) to develop a better
understanding of the physical mechanisms responsible for wildfire-atmosphere
interactions and how these processes influence fire behavior; 2) to improve
student understanding of fire weather science through the development of an
innovative fire science and fire safety outreach and education program.

The research seeks to identify the processes responsible for fire-atmosphere
interactions that affect fire behavior. The research methods are based on
executing an intensive measurement program that incorporates carefully planned
experiments with rapid-deploy wildfire monitoring (RaDFIRE) using the newly NSF
funded CSU-MAPS, mobile atmospheric profiling system. Observations will be
integrated with numerical simulations made with the coupled WRF-Fire model to
investigate: 1) the dynamics of fire-induced winds and their impact on fire
behavior; 2) the thermodynamic structure of fire plumes and the near-surface
environment.

The education component of the project plans to build a university program in
fire weather research that links San Jos√© State University and the community.
This component will integrate fire weather content into general education
courses, improve 6th grade science learning through a teacher training workshop,
and develop fire danger awareness among students living in fire danger zones by
providing a novel and modern fire safety education program. The component
concepts are: 1) integration of Fire Weather content into university courses; 2)
K-12 Teacher Training workshop called Weather of Wildfires; 3) Red-Flag Days: A
community outreach program for middle schools in the Wildland-Urban Interface
aimed at providing fire safety education.

Intellectual merit. The work will potentially transform wildfire research by
measuring critical wildfire-atmosphere properties that have rarely been
observed. This will provide the first comprehensive data set for the validation
of coupled atmosphere-fire modeling systems. New observations of extreme fire-
induced winds and plume thermodynamic structure will lead to major advances in
knowledge and understanding of wildfire dynamics.

Broader impacts. The broader impacts of this work include: 1. Educational
activities are developed to improve student understanding of fire weather
processes by developing new teacher training modules and a novel middle-school
program aimed at fire danger awareness with the use of red flags as fire weather
props. 2. Greater understanding of critical fire-atmosphere processes
responsible for extreme fire behavior. 3. Increased firefighter and public
safety from the development of better prediction tools. 4. Web-based data portal
developed to provide modeling community long-term access to datasets.