* 1151733
* CAREER: Quantitative Education and Analysis toward Integrating Scales of Water Exchange between Land and Sea
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Holly Michael, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 08/31/2018
* USD 665,010.00

CAREER: Quantitative Education and Analysis toward Integrating Scales of Water
Exchange between Land and Sea&lt;br/&gt;Holly A. Michael&lt;br/&gt;University of
Delaware&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water and chemical fluxes between aquifers and the
ocean are critically important to biological, geological, and geochemical
processes at the coast. Groundwater inputs to the sea can cause algal blooms and
modify ocean chemistry, and seawater infiltration to land causes aquifer
salinization and alters solute and mineral composition of the subsurface. A
unique challenge in quantifying aquifer-ocean fluxes is the wide range of
spatial and temporal scales over which the mechanisms that drive exchange
operate. Forcing occurs on timescales of waves, seasons, and glacial cycles,
with corresponding spatial scales from ripples to continental shelves.
Integrating the scales of exchange is essential for understanding and predicting
the impacts of these fluxes through geologic history and as sea level changes in
the future. The long-term vision of this work is to improve understanding of
physical processes that connect aquifers and the sea through research and
education that link geosciences and mathematics. The research project will
explore the influence of geologic heterogeneity (spatial variations in
hydrogeologic properties) on continental shelf-scale ocean-aquifer water
exchange processes. Geostatistical modeling and variable-density groundwater
flow and solute transport simulation will be used to understand the influence of
the geometry of heterogeneity on (1) spatial patterns of seafloor water
exchange, (2) density-driven saltwater circulation in the subsurface, and (3)
seawater intrusion into aquifers, processes important for water resources,
coastal ecosystems, and ocean chemistry. Two systems that display very different
geometry and connectivity of geologic features will be modeled: the Bengal Delta
and the Hawaiian Islands. This research will be linked to an educational program
designed to integrate mathematics into geoscience curricula. A groundwater-
surface water exchange activity for high school students in Delaware and Hawaii
will be developed and implemented through cooperation with the Delaware Nature
Society and Kamehmeha Schools, and new and modified undergraduate and graduate
courses that incorporate aspects of the research will be offered at the
University of Delaware. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create new
knowledge of the physical processes that generate water exchange between
aquifers and the ocean and the water and chemical fluxes that they produce. The
work will fill a gap in understanding of the role of the geologic structure of
an aquifer in translating these physical processes into groundwater salinization
(flux from sea to land) and groundwater flow to the ocean (flux from land to
sea) on the scale of the continental shelf. The work will have impacts on
education, water resource management, and ecological preservation. Scientific
results will provide water resources managers with a basis for improving
management models and risk assessments. Insights gained will improve design of
future field studies, enhance efforts to protect fragile coastal ecosystems, and
may have implications for offshore drilling activities and siting of wind farms.
Improved prediction of land-sea fluxes will also allow us to better anticipate
and adapt to potential effects of climate change on coastal water resources and
ecosystems.