* 1151935
* SBIR Phase II:  Photochemical Reactor for CO2 Separation in Carbon Capture Process
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Bamidele Omotowa, Pearlhill Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 571,135.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will stimulate
the acceptance of carbon capture by companies that own and operate coal-fired
plants. The Department of Energy considers the amine absorption of carbon
dioxide (CO2) from flue gas of coal-fired power plants as the most advanced,
most well understood, and most successful method for carbon capture. In this
process, monoethanolamine (MEA) solvent is used in a thermal process for
desorption and carbon capture. Unfortunately, the thermal process is very
inefficient, requiring a 30% increase in coal usage for to capture the CO2. The
Phase I research proved the feasibility of replacing the inefficient thermal
process with a new, innovative photolytic process that has the potential to
dramatically cut the 30% increase in coal usage by more than half. The first
part of the Phase II project will focus on developing an efficient photolytic
prototype reactor that will dramatically reduce the costs of capturing CO2 as
preparation for field tested at a power plant. The Phase II objectives will
focus first on optimizing the reactor processes that affect desorption and
capture. Then, using the resulting data, the team will design and build the
prototype reactor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research
are that it has the potential to make carbon capture at coal fired power plants
significantly more cost effective for the power producer. For example, by
retrofitting the photolytic technology, a 100-500 MWe power plant could save as
much as $17 MM annually. With this type of saving, an investment by a power
plant in the photolytic technology is likely to produce a very high rate of
return, whereby the cost of adding the photolytic reactor process could be
recouped in approximately three years. The World Coal Institute reports that
coal&amp;#8223;s share of global electricity generation is set to increase from
41% to 44% by 2030. In the United States, electricity generation accounts for
approximately 40% of total CO2 emissions and more than 80% of these emissions
come from coal fired power plants. Near-term CO2 capture technologies raise the
cost of electricity (COE) produced at these plants by 60-90%, and impose a
25-35% parasitic coal-burning load. As the U.S. searches for ways to reduce CO2
emissions, maintaining coal as a viable source of low-cost electric power
critically depends on finding more cost effective ways to capture the CO2
produced. The energy efficient photolytic process developed in this project has
the potential of reducing the increase in the COE for carbon capture from the
current 60-90% for the thermal process to less than 35%.