* 1151172
* CAREER: Semiconductor Clusters: Chemistry at the Interface of Small Molecules and Quantum Dots
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Jonathan Owen, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 03/31/2017
* USD 585,205.00

This CAREER award by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program supports work by Professor Jonathan Owen at Columbia University -
endowed to understand the nucleation and growth of nanocrystalline
semiconductors and their relationship to the conversion of precursor molecules.
The core focus of the proposed work consists of two parts: (i) The kinetics and
mechanisms of precursor conversion and their relationship to the crystallization
of clusters and their subsequent conversion into larger nanocrystals, whether by
assembly or atom-by-atom growth processes; (ii) To characterize and modify the
surface structural features that cause surface state luminescence in these
materials by systematic tailoring of cluster coordination chemistry. By studying
atomically precise clusters, the assignment of specific structural elements
responsible for trapping of excitons and investigations of crystal growth
mechanisms all become possible with a level of detail not possible using
traditional materials and methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this proposal rests in its importance to classical models of surface tension and
the nucleation of colloidal crystals. Understanding the origins of cluster
stability will clarify how clusters are distinct from larger nanocrystals where
the stability increases with the particles dimensions according to the Gibbs-
Thompson relationship. This difference has important consequences for
nanocrystal nucleation and growth mechanisms and is in stark contrast to the
free energy arguments that underpin classical nucleation theory. The study of
structure function relationships is integrated into a K-8 curriculum that
teaches the importance of molecular structure to tangible aspects of everyday
life. By integrating this context into the teaching of scientific concepts,
chemical structure is made relevant to young students, promoting broad interest
in scientific thinking.