* 1151839
* CAREER: Developing Hybrid Quantum Systems Using Superconducting Circuits
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2017
* David Schuster, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Sokol
* 01/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

****TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to study cavity quantum
electrodynamics, many-body dynamics, and eventually quantum information, using
electrons floating above superfluid helium. Electrons on helium form a unique
two-dimensional electron gas levitated by zero-point motion above the superfluid
surface. It is exceptionally clean, having the highest known mobility, and is
predicted to have long spin coherence, but while it has been studied for many
years, little is known about the properties of individual electrons. This
project will use superconducting transmission line cavities coherently coupled
to first ensembles, and eventually individual trapped electrons. Calculations
predict that both the charge and spin dynamics of single electrons on helium
possess long coherence times, but these will be the first experimental
measurements. These experiments are only possible now because of recent advances
in superconducting circuit technology. This project will support the education
of a PhD student in these advanced technologies, which has historically shown
itself to be excellent training for many scientific careers from academia to our
most advanced technology industries. This research combining multiple quantum
coherent systems is expected to be of broad interest to the scientific
community, and serve as a template for efforts in other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT****&lt;br/&gt;When
electrons are sprayed onto the surface of an insulating liquid, they stick to
the surface. Amazingly, at low temperatures, just a few degrees above absolute
zero, they begin to levitate a few nanometers above the surface due to quantum
mechanical effects. When working with atoms or particles, most of the technical
challenge is in trapping them in vacuum, but in this special system, the
electrons naturally float, like microscopic buoys on the ocean. Because they are
levitated, they have pristine properties, but like buoys, they also have complex
interactions with waves in the fluid below. This project will pursue experiments
to isolate single electrons floating on helium, and probe their complex
interactions with light, superfluid waves, and each other. This will be
accomplished by employing the most advanced tools of experimental science:
nanofabrication, ultra-low temperature physics, and quantum computing electronic
devices. This project will support the education of a PhD student in these
advanced technologies, which has historically shown itself to be excellent
training for many scientific careers from academia to our most advanced
technology industries. These studies will advance our understanding of this
fascinating system and eventually could lead to quantum computers in which bits
are stored by individual electrons, using little power and exponentially
speeding important classes of computations.