* 1151746
* CAREER:   Modeling the Observable Effects of Gravity Waves in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere (MLT) Region
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Jonathan Snively, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 08/31/2018
* USD 478,720.00

This is a CAREER award to investigate observable effects of gravity waves in the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) region (&#8764;80-100 km), while
supporting and enhancing student research, teaching, and public outreach at
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU). Gravity waves play a crucial role
in defining the structure, dynamics, and variability of the MLT region by
carrying and ultimately depositing momentum and energy between regions of the
atmosphere. They are observed via their perturbations to chemical species and
processes, by passive optical measurements of airglow, and active measurements
by lidar and radar. Theoretical and modeling studies, inspired by both ground-
and space-based observations, continue to expand our scientific understanding of
gravity wave sources, processes, directionality and seasonality. The principal
research objectives of this project are to model and quantify the evolution and
observable effects of gravity waves in the MLT region, to improve the
understanding and interpretation of wave processes measured by airglow
instruments. Data from established sites will be used for studies of mountain
waves over the Andes, and data from a new infrared airglow imager will be used
for studies of convectively-generated gravity waves over Daytona Beach, Florida.
The principal educational objectives of this project are to mentor and train
students for careers as independent scientific researchers, and to inspire
interest and enhance understanding of the atmospheric and space sciences among
the general public. These teaching and outreach goals will be achieved through
(1) undergraduate and graduate student research projects, (2) curriculum
development for a new graduate-level course in computational methods for
atmospheric dynamics, (3) construction of an educational website for the
infrared imager, and (4) incorporation of a new upper-atmospheric outreach
program into future ERAU Astronomy Open House events. The project will support
and educate undergraduate and graduate student researchers, contribute to
development of the new ERAU Engineering Physics Ph.D curriculum, enhance public
awareness of atmospheric and space sciences through outreach, construct a
website for the infrared airglow imager for general and scientific audiences,
develop and refine a comprehensive generalized model for simulation of gravity
waves and their observable effects, and disseminate results in refereed
publications and conference presentations.