* 1151693
* CAREER:  Geometric Applications of Gauge Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Andrew Neitzke, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2018
* USD 417,498.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-1151693&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Andrew Neitzke &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's research is focused
on the interface between physics and geometry. In a long-running collaboration
with Davide Gaiotto and Greg Moore, he has studied mathematical applications of
N=2 supersymmetric quantum field theory. This work has recently led to quite
unexpected connections between physics and mathematical subjects such as
enumerative geometry, hyperkahler geometry, and cluster algebras, and hence also
to purely mathematical connections between these subjects. The proposed research
builds on and extends this recent work in several directions. First, in
continuing collaboration with Gaiotto and Moore, the PI will investigate new
examples of generalized Donaldson-Thomas invariants, which "count" certain
networks of geodesic trajectories on Riemann surfaces. This counting problem
corresponds to determining the numbers of stable particles in certain physical
theories. Also in collaboration with Gaiotto and Moore, the PI will continue
development of a new method for constructing hyperkahler metrics on total spaces
of integrable systems. In this new method the generalized Donaldson-Thomas
invariants play a key role; the eventual goal is to produce asymptotic or
convergent series representations for K3 metrics. Finally, in solo work, the PI
will explore new mathematical structures which appear when the N=2
supersymmetric field theory is studied taking spacetime to be Taub-NUT space.
This construction is expected to lead to new insights into the science of
nonabelian theta functions. The PI will also produce a library of video clips,
explaining concepts from physics for mathematicians at a variety of levels (from
undergraduate level to other researchers). These clips will be freely available
over the Web. In addition the PI will continue his active program of teaching,
expository writing and talks, aimed at disseminating his methods and results
more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI studies geometric problems using tools
imported from particle physics. Recently, he and his collaborators have devised
a new scheme for solving the "field equation" which governs the curvature of
spacetime. This equation, first written down by Einstein, is notoriously
intractable. In particular, it is known that this equation has a large family of
solutions describing a closed four-dimensional universe (so-called "K3
metrics"), but nobody has ever been able to write down actual formulas
representing these solutions. The PI and collaborators have found a surprising
connection between Einstein's equation and particle physics, which relates the
problem of finding K3 metrics (and other similar solutions) to the problem of
understanding how subatomic particles can decay. This connection has led to
insight into both problems, which the PI and collaborators are now actively
developing. The PI will also produce a library of video clips, explaining
concepts from physics for mathematicians at a variety of levels (from
undergraduate level to other researchers). These clips will be freely available
over the Web.