* 1151343
* CAREER:   Investigation of RNA Unwinding And Ribosomal Frameshifting
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Peter Cornish, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 813,026.00

Intellectual Merit: The ribosome is a large, macromolecular machine found in all
organisms that primarily functions to produce protein. This process, referred to
as translation, is very complex and highly regulated with many accessory factors
that facilitate efficient protein production. In normal translation, the
ribosome translates a message by interpreting three positions on the message
(RNA) into one amino acid. By advancing three positions at a time, the ribosome
continues to build the protein sequence until a specific sequence on the message
known as a stop codon is encountered at which point the full length protein is
released from the ribosome. Often, complex three dimensional structures are
present within the message and must be unwound for translation to continue. In
some cases, these structures can induce the ribosome to slip back one position.
This causes the ribosome to be in a different frame or frameshift and will cause
the ribosome to skip over the stop codon that would have been encountered in the
original frame generally producing a longer protein sequence. While much is
known about frameshifting, there are still important questions that remain to be
addressed in detail. In this project, the following questions related to
frameshifting will be addressed by employing advanced biophysical techniques.
First, the mechanism by which the ribosome unwinds complex three dimensional
structures within the message in order to continue translation will be
elucidated. Second, how these structures influence the global and local motions
within the ribosome will be investigated. Finally, why some structures have a
greater propensity to induce frameshifting than others by probing the inherent
dynamic motions of a subset of structures that vary in frameshifting efficiency
will be investigated. These experiments will provide a comprehensive description
of unwinding and lead to a greater description of the process of frameshifting.
Further, these experiments will have a profound impact on the ribosome and
biophysics fields as well as a general impact on the scientific community
particularly at the University of Missouri by pushing the limits and
capabilities of biophysical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
With only 5.5% of the population in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) in the United States, it is essential that education and
awareness is emphasized for both the general public and in our public schools
and higher education institutions. A committment to develop and implement
several specific activities that will have a direct and immediate impact in
several areas with a special emphasis on underrepresented and lower income
populations has been made. Education and outreach activities include: to assist
with an MU teacher training program intended for grades K-8; to develop new
curricula to expand the teacher training program to include high school teachers
in chemistry and biochemistry with the intention of integrating cutting edge
science into the classroom; to provide undergraduate research opportunities to
high achieving students and to minority students preparing them for careers in
STEM; to continue mentoring graduate students and encourage outreach activities;
to engage in public speaking opportunities in the immediate area as well as in
Universities with minimal research opportunities; and to develop undergraduate
and graduate level course material that will challenge and provide hands on
experience in scientific research.