* 1151492
* CAREER: Beta-Acyloxysulfones as an Enabling Alkene Protecting Group in Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Gregory O'Neil, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2018
* USD 430,000.00

This CAREER award supports the research group of Professor Gregory W. O'Neil of
the Department of Chemistry at Western Washington University to explore the use
of beta-acyloxysulfones as a general alkene protecting-group strategy, with an
emphasis on its use in olefin metathesis to prepare important polyene compounds
unobtainable by standard metathesis technology. Early work will investigate an
acyloxysulfone metathesis/elimination sequence as a versatile and
stereoselective approach for the construction of synthetically challenging
polyene and carbocyclic targets. Additional expected insights include a detailed
mechanistic understanding of samarium-mediated acyloxysulfone elimination and
further data toward a general predictive olefin metathesis model. Examples of
targets that can be readily prepared using the proposed strategy include a class
of algal lipids known as polyunsaturated long-chain alkenones (PULCAs). A series
of these compounds are to be synthesized and explored for the advancement of
algal biodiesel technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of this work is to be
conducted by undergraduate students, providing these students with valuable
training in modern synthetic organic techniques. This research is closely
integrated with an educational plan aimed at leveraging broad student interest
in renewable energy to increase student participation in chemistry and related
STEM fields. This is to be accomplished in part through the creation of a cross-
discipline cooperative biodiesel experiment involving students at both the high
school and college level in collaboration with local renewable energy
industries. Specific results from the proposed research will also be
incorporated into a "Biofuels" course developed by the PI and a proposed
capstone "Chemistry of Energy" course. These courses are to be part of a new
cross-college Clean Energy curriculum at Western Washington University.