* 1151102
* CAREER: Impacts of Amazon Deforestation on Earth's Climate, Water, and Ecosystems: The Ebb of the Green Ocean?
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2012,03/31/2017
* David Medvigy, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ming Cai
* 03/31/2017
* USD 555,824.00

The principal goal of this CAREER project is to understand and quantify the
impacts of contemporary deforestation and projected future deforestation on
climate, hydrology, and terrestrial ecosystems. A multi-scale analysis will be
conducted with the following objectives (i) to determine how the size, shape,
and organization of deforested areas alter atmospheric dynamics; and (ii) to
study how the atmosphere communicates these changes to intact areas of
rainforest, other parts of South America and other parts of the world. Climate
vegetation feedbacks will also be analyzed. One of the deliverables of this
project is an integrated framework for understanding how Amazon deforestation
affects local, regional, and global climate, hydrology, and ecosystems. This
framework will be extended to analyze deforestation in tropical Asia and
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on integrating research and
education at the Middle School level. The primary goal is to bring improved
understanding of Earth's atmosphere, land surface, and human elements of global
change into the middle school classroom. A new teacher-in-service unit will be
developed and organized under the aegis of QUEST, a professional development
program with a 25-year track record of success and administered by Princeton
University's Program in Teacher Preparation. Students will gain hands-on
experience collecting and analyzing local weather station data, and will also be
taught how to access Amazon-relevant data from the Internet. Students will
present their work at a local science fair. This research will also support a
graduate student. Thus this project has substantial broader impacts.