* 1151566
* Organosilanols as Universal Donors in Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Scott Denmark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2015
* USD 502,156.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Scott E. Denmark will conduct research to implement the use
organosilanols to access the catalytic organometallic chemistry of a myriad of
transition metal elements. Organosilanols are inexpensive, non-toxic, air- and
water-stable compounds that have the remarkable ability to exchange the carbon-
silicon bond with many other carbon-metal bonds through the agency of a discrete
Si-O-M linkage. The program will involve a rational, structurally-based
exploration of the synthesis, reactivity and subsequent catalytic chemistry of
transition metal silanolates derived from nickel, copper, rhodium, iridium and
chromium. The first component of the research plan will involve detailed
mechanistic resolution of the elementary steps in the catalytic cycle for the
well-established, palladium-catalyzed, cross-coupling reactions of silanolates.
These insights will be of great value for the major thrust of the research plan
that involves other, less well-investigated transition metals. The bulk of the
research program will involve the exploration of the ability of silanols
(silanolates) to form Si-O-M linkages with existing catalytically active
intermediates or to create those intermediates in the reactions of transition
metal reagents. In many cases, such transition metal silanolate complexes can be
independently prepared and studied, whereas in other cases, the in-situ
generation and product analysis will be needed.

Progress in all areas of chemical synthesis is driven by the creation,
optimization and understanding of new chemical reactions. The preparation of
molecules with challenging chemical structures (natural products, or molecules
of theoretical interest) or molecules with desirable chemical, physical or
biological properties (with applications in materials science or the
agricultural, pharmaceutical or commercial sectors) will require the ability to
design executable synthetic routes. The most important lesson gleaned from the
evolution of organic synthesis during the second half of the 20th century is
that strategy and planning of synthetic routes is driven by tactics. In other
words, the scope, selectivity and efficiency of chemical synthesis are
inexorably tied to the discovery, development and optimization of new chemical
reactions. These activities to be carried out in this project are ideal for the
intellectual and practical training of graduate students and postdoctoral
coworkers. The interplay of reaction design, development and application
represent the essence of the scientific method. Students will be presented with
hypotheses for the outcome of planned experiments and they must learn to collect
and interpret data to substantiate or eliminate the hypothesis. The unifying
theme of this activity will be the invention of new chemical reactions on the
basis of current mechanistic paradigms. This will provide a platform for
creativity within the guidelines of the project for students to identify new
directions. In addition, the diversity of new types of carbon-carbon bond
forming processes that will be accessible from inexpensive, non-toxic, and air
and water stable silanolates will be significant.