* 1151773
* CAREER: Functional Metal-Ligand Assemblies: Self-Sorting, Supramolecular Catalysis and Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Richard Hooley, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports the research group of Dr. Richard Hooley of the University of
California-Riverside to create new water-soluble functional synthetic receptors
via metal-ligand based self-assembly and investigate their application towards
molecular recognition and supramolecular catalysis. This research aims to
address one of the main deficiencies faced by current synthetic receptors when
compared to enzymes; the inability to present a functional group towards a guest
bound on the interior of the cavity. The synthetic route to the metal-ligand
clusters is modular and easily tunable, allowing access to a wide scope of
introverted groups. By orienting functional groups towards the bound guest,
selective substrate recognition and supramolecular catalysis will be enhanced.
The presence of chiral species, hydrogen bond donors or nucleophiles on the
interior of the clusters allows a number of novel receptor properties to be
studied. In addition, by positioning catalytically active groups in close
proximity with bound substrates, biomimetic reactions and catalysis are
possible. NMR spectroscopy will be used to investigate guest binding, ligand
exchange and reaction kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will extend
the capabilities of synthetic host molecules in a number of fields including
molecular recognition and catalysis and will introduce new avenues of research
in biomimetic organic chemistry. This interdisciplinary project will offer a
stimulating research environment for the education and training of students,
including members of underrepresented groups. In addition, this research is
integrated with an educational component that aims at increasing retention of
undergraduate students (and especially underrepresented minorities) in STEM
fields by engaging students through the use of collaborative problem-based case
studies in the lower division organic chemistry course sequence.