* 1151979
* Heterocycle Synthesis Through Reversible Allylic Alcohol Transposition and Stereoselective Capture
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Paul Floreancig, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

In this project funded by the Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof.
Paul Floreancig at the University of Pittsburgh develops new chemical reactions
in which reversibility is coupled with a secondary step to increase molecular
complexity and generate stereocenters. The approach is to expose allylic
alcohols that contain an electrophilic group to rhenium oxide or other catalysts
that effect non-stereoselective transpositions. The transposition will proceed
until an intramolecular reaction occurs in which stereochemical control will be
dictated by thermodynamic, kinetic, or catalyst control. A number of elements
will be incorporated into the reaction substrates to demonstrate that reaction
outcomes can be manipulated rationally through applications of basic principles
and molecular modeling. The target structures have been selected due to their
relevance to the synthesis of natural products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
coupling of stereocontrol with ring formation that will be developed in this
work can significantly reduce the effort that is required for complex molecule
synthesis. This will benefit the fields of medicinal chemistry and materials
science. The mild conditions that are used for these reactions will make the
processes attractive for chemical manufacturing applications. The broader
impacts of this work lie in the use of these processes as a tool for
highlighting the manner in which thermodynamics and kinetics can be manipulated
for complex reaction design, and in the use of travel funds to present seminars
at colleges that have a high enrollment of underrepresented minority students.
In addition, this project provides research training to graduate students and
contributes to workforce development.