* 1151443
* CAREER: A Multi-Scale Approach to Assessment of Climate Change Impacts on Hydrologic and Geomorphic Response of Watershed Systems within an Uncertainty Framework
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Valeriy Ivanov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 548,334.00

The current ways of assessing the impacts of climate change on watershed systems
are inadequate: they are based on ad hoc selection of climate models; they focus
on metrics at very coarse scales detached from the reality of human activities
and ecosystem services at the local (often the stream reach or floodplain)
scales; and they do not yield any assessment of uncertainty associated with
watershed modeling and projections into the future. This research will bridge
the multi-scale, space-time connectivity of watershed systems and address
uncertainty associated with their predictions through a comprehensive program of
inter-disciplinary modeling and field observations and outdoor, lecture, and lab
educational activities. The project will focus on the state of Michigan, where a
number of observed metrics already demonstrate trends consistent with a warming
climate, including shorter winters, higher mean annual temperatures, and higher
frequency of heavy precipitation events. In the research component of the
project, a number of case studies will be developed throughout the state along
the south-southeast ? north-northwest climatic, hydrologic, and agricultural
activities gradient. In addition to a synthesis of a large array of existing
data sets, in situ monitoring of climatic forcing and characteristics of flow
regime will be carried out to provide data for model evaluation. Multi-model
ensembles of climate change projections from the World Climate Research
Programme's Coupled Model Intercomparison Project will be downscaled using
?fossil-intensive?, ?mid-?, and ?lower-level? future emission scenarios of
carbon dioxide (defined according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change). The inferred probabilistic information will be used to assess climate
change impacts on watershed systems for early (2010?2039), mid- (2040?2069), and
late century (2070?2099) periods. Specifically, changes in essential
characteristics of hydrological and hydrodynamic regimes will be investigated
for the case study basins using a multi-scale, physically-based framework of
modeling watershed surface/subsurface processes and flow hydrodynamics,
integrated through a capability of Nested Dynamics Modeling. The total
uncertainty associated with biases of climate projections and inaccuracies of a
watershed model will be quantified. An extensive data set of downscaled climate
projections and outputs of hydrologic and hydrodynamic modeling generated in
this research will provide a comprehensive volume of information required in
climate change compensation and mitigation planning. The outreach component of
the project will implement educational activities focusing to enhance the
science class program of 7th graders in Title I schools and increase awareness
of the consequences of human activities on watershed processes. The emphasis of
educational activities of a week-long summer-school will be placed on
underserved and underrepresented groups of students of Native American youth of
Michigan, Wisconsin, and Minnesota tribes. Through the integration of research
and outreach programs, the project will benefit the hydrological sciences
community, middle-school, undergraduate, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global climate models are the tools used for
exploring how earth?s climate will evolve in future under different scenarios of
human activity. Outputs of these models are used in climate impact studies. The
typical applications of these studies concern large-scale hydrologic variables
for areas of hundreds-to-thousands of square miles; very rarely they can provide
the associated uncertainty; currently, there are no studies that can address
future impacts on flow hydrodynamic characteristics or floodplain inundation.
Yet, most of climate change compensation and mitigation strategies require
information that is relevant to scales of human activities and ecosystem
services, which typically focus on watersheds, streams, agricultural fields,
etc. They also require an estimate of uncertainty associated with projection
into the future to make better informed decisions in conditions of climate
projection inaccuracies. Responding to these societal needs, this research will
use maximum available information on climate change in the form of multi-model
projections and develop methodologies that will infer uncertainty of climate
change predictions. In contrast to previous studies, the project will synthesize
a range of hydrologic/hydrodynamic models and observational data to create
capabilities for propagating information on climate signals through the entire
watershed system: from headwater (source) areas to stream channels, and to the
details of flow characteristics. To ensure that the issues of model applications
are addressed specifically and that research findings make a practical impact,
case studies will be developed throughout the state of Michigan. Furthermore,
this CAREER project will integrate educational activities focusing to enhance
the science class program of underserved/underrepresented student groups (low
income families and Native Americans) targeting to empower their mind-sets to
become future leaders and pursue science and engineering as their career choices