* 1151005
* IDBR:  Plasmonic-based electrochemical impedance microscopy for studying molecular binding and cellular processes
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Nongjian Tao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 07/31/2016
* USD 651,205.00

IDBR: Plasmonic-based electrochemical impedance microscopy for studying
molecular binding and cellular
processes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Electrical impedance has been widely used to detect and study
biological processes, but it lacks spatial resolution or imaging capability. The
PIs have shown that the impedance can be converted into a plasmonic signal. This
paradigm shift approach allows the measurement of local impedance optically, and
leads to a novel plasmonic-based electrochemical impedance microscope (P-EIM)
that can image electrical and electrochemical responses of a biological sample.
P-EIM can study binding affinity of small molecules and proteins in microarray
format, follow the binding events of single viruses, and image various cellular
and subcellular processes, including ion channel and G protein coupled receptor
activities, with sub-micron spatial resolution and sub-millisecond temporal
resolution. P-EIM is label free, which overcomes limitations associated with
label-based detection and imaging technologies. This project will integrate
P-EIM with total internal reflection fluorescence and surface plasmon resonance
microscopy, and work with researchers in different fields, including proteomics,
immunology, neurology and cell biology, to develop new applications. Specific
aims include developing and demonstrating P-EIM capabilities to: 1) Measure
molecular interactions and kinetics, particularly small molecule-protein
interactions; 2) Monitor virus binding kinetics and statistics; 3) Study single
cell and sub-cellular kinetics with milliseconds time
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description: Optical microscopy
has enabled many breakthroughs in biological research, and become a truly
indispensable tool in nearly every life science lab. Continued advances in
biology will benefit from new imaging capabilities that provide unique and
complementary information to the current microscopy technologies. The present
project will introduce an impedance-imaging mode to optical microscopy, allowing
for optical imaging of electrical and electrochemical responses of biological
samples, a capability that current optical microscopy lacks. In order to
transform the new imaging capability into a powerful tool for biological
research, the PIs will collaborate with over ten research groups to develop
different biological applications, create tutorial materials via Youtube,
Wikipedia, and a dedicated website, and work with the university technology
transfer office to facilitate commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide unique opportunities for interdisciplinary training and nurturing the
next generation of scientists and engineers. In addition to training graduate
and postdoctoral students, the PIs propose new educational initiatives in
undergraduate research taking advantage of several existing programs and
infrastructures at ASU. Examples include the NSF REU program, Biodesign high
school student internship, and Fulton Undergraduate Research Initiative (FURI)
at ASU, which provide additional resources for recruiting and supporting
undergraduate students, including groups underrepresented in science and
engineering, at the early stages of their studies in the college. The project
will also provide students with unique international and interdisciplinary
collaboration experience.