* 1151268
* Parallacs: Research in Storage and Compute Cloud Diversity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Hakim Weatherspoon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2014
* USD 200,000.00

The increasing popularity of cloud storage and cloud computing is leading
organizations to consider moving data and computation out of their own data
centers and into the cloud. However, success for cloud providers can present a
significant risk to customers; namely, it becomes very difficult and expensive
to switch providers. This research agenda will explore methods that allow cloud
customers to diversify the set of cloud storage and cloud computing providers
they use. Further, it will model, measure, and optimize the resulting more
diverse systems.

To diversify cloud storage, the research agenda includes investigating how to
apply RAID-like techniques used by disks and file systems, but at the cloud
storage level. By striping user data across multiple providers, customers can
avoid vendor lock-in, reduce the cost of switching providers, and better
tolerate provider outages or failures. A redundant array of cloud storage
providers (RACS) acts as a proxy that transparently spreads the storage load
over many providers. To diversity cloud computations, the research agenda
investigates a data model and structure that allows computation to be sent to
where the data is stored and performed directly on local data. This new
diversified storage cloud and diversified compute cloud has the potential to
return control back to the user for assurance on the integrity of data and
computation, while still benefiting from the whole cloud paradigm.