* 1151646
* CAREER: Effect of Electric Fields on the Miscibility of Polymer Blends and Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Connie Roth, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2017
* USD 475,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major materials science objective at
present is to create nanostructured morphologies of different blend components.
For example, it is believed that the efficiency of ion and exciton conduction in
energy related applications such as batteries and solar cells may be optimized
by adjusting the morphology of the nanometer-sized polymer domains to form
conducting pathways or channels. One route to such ideal morphologies is through
alignment of microdomains via the application of electric fields, particularly
advantageous for these applications where electrodes are already part of the
device. Currently there is still limited understanding of how the presence of
electric fields affects the miscibility of polymer blends and block copolymers.
In particular, what is the free energy contribution to mixing caused by the
presence of an electric field? Theory of this phenomenon is limited by a lack of
unambiguous experimental data characterizing the shifts in miscibility with
electric fields, which can be quite large, up to 50 K decrease in the phase
separation temperature for field strengths around 10 V/micrometer. The proposed
research will use fluorescence to measure the phase separation temperature of
polymer blends and the order-disorder transition temperature of block copolymers
as a function of composition in the presence of electric fields. The
experimental results will be fit to a modified Flory-Huggins expression to
ascertain the free energy contribution to mixing caused by the presence of an
electric field. These results will provide improved fundamental understanding of
the polymer-polymer interactions that control miscibility and a means to locally
tune and control the enthalpic interaction of a blend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use of
polymers in technologically advanced applications is widespread, with many of
these applications using multiple polymer components arranged into nanometer-
sized domains. The alignment of these domains could be optimized by the
application of electric fields across the existing electrodes of the device. The
PI will develop a fundamental understanding of how the presence of electric
fields affects the blending interactions in polymers, a phenomenon which is
currently not understood. The educational component will develop a network of
mentoring resources for practical career advice. The centerpiece will be a web-
based discussion forum where students of all ages and walks of life can exchange
advice on potential career plans and first-hand experience in ways of
accomplishing their goals. Such a venue will help fill a void in practical
career information that is currently lacking. This is especially important for
students from economically limited backgrounds, most frequently from
underrepresented minorities, who typically do not have relatives or family
friends in related careers that can provide the needed guidance. The PI will
directly motivate students at a range of levels about career opportunities,
taking groups of graduate and undergraduate students to visit local public
schools to share their aspirations about careers in science and technology.