* 1151387
* CAREER: Designing quantum computers and understanding glassy systems using numerical simulations and statistical mechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Helmut Katzgraber, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2018
* USD 490,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education that represents a synergy among quantum
computing, glassy systems, computational physics and education. The research and
education foci are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Computing: A promising
alternative to current computing paradigms is given by quantum computers that
allow for massive parallelism. Nonetheless, many practical challenges remain,
such as overcoming the effects of decoherence and showing that quantum
algorithms are more efficient than current technologies in solving a broad range
of problems. Using methods from the study of disordered systems, the PI will
address these problems by understanding the stability of new quantum storage and
processing schemes based on topological error codes to different error sources,
testing the feasibility of device implementations, and studying the efficiency
of quantum optimization algorithms. Given the potential impact on information
technology, it is imperative to better understand these quantum computing
schemes on theoretical, device-centered, and software
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glassy systems: Many problems across disciplines
can be mapped onto glassy systems, for example decision problems in social
sciences or the stability of proposals for quantum computing. The PI aims to
capitalize on novel algorithms to answer key questions in this area. These
include the fundamentals of the behavior of spin glasses in a field, direct
simulation of materials, and interdisciplinary applications ranging from
decision problems on complex (social) networks to quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computation: A crucial aspect for the successful
outcome of the aforementioned scientific goals is the development and
improvement of efficient numerical algorithms. The numerical methods developed
by the PI can be applied to a wide variety of problems. By making these
algorithms and data sets freely available in an archival fashion the proposed
research will have a broad impact across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education: Computational methods are
fundamental for both experiment and theory. However, current physics curricula
do not address this need. By developing an innovative computational physics
course that combines class work with hands-on research, the PI will address this
issue. The course is designed with an inter-institutional component in mind: all
modules will be freely available online. Furthermore, students will be trained
in modern programming techniques and the use of high-performance computers,
skills that are extremely valuable in academic and industrial settings. The
proposal also includes an outreach component aimed at Hispanic minorities, as
well as engaging the interest of middle and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advent of fast and cost-effective computers as well as efficient algorithms has
made computational physics into a powerful third way, besides experiment and
theory, to do research. This CAREER award supports the study of quantum
computing proposals and glassy materials by using tools and methods from
computational physics and developing new computational tools and methods.
&lt;br/&gt;Moore's law has accurately described the speedup of current computer
technologies for half a century. However, quantum mechanics suggests exciting
possibilities lie beyond Moore's law. A promising alternative is the
manipulation of quantum mechanical states for computation. This technique may
far surpass the performance of current technologies due to the intrinsic
parallelism of quantum mechanical states. A goal of this project is to
numerically develop proposed ways to achieve quantum computing by studying their
tolerance to different error sources. Many problems across disciplines can be
mapped onto spin glasses; a spin glass is a type of magnet in which interactions
among the smallest magnetic units at the atomic or molecular level differ
significantly and are vary randomly from unit to unit. Unlike an ordinary magnet
in which aligning the directions of all the uniformly interacting microscopic
magnetic units satisfies the interactions among the magnetic units, the random
nature of the interactions makes them difficult to satisfy leading to a
challenging computational problem. Understanding the properties of spin glasses,
as well as limitations of theoretical pictures describing them can lead to
insights across disciplinary boundaries. This project focuses on answering
fundamental questions in the field of spin glasses, including the study of spin-
glass materials and interdisciplinary applications of the
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop an innovative computational
physics course that combines class work with hands-on research. The course is
designed with an inter-institutional component in mind; all modules will be
freely available online. Furthermore, students will be trained in modern
programming techniques and the use of high-performance computers, skills that
are extremely valuable in academic and industrial settings. The proposal also
includes an outreach component aimed at Hispanic minorities, as well as engaging
the interest of middle and high-school students.