* 1151795
* CAREER: Towards a Definitive Test of DAMA's Annual Modulation Signal
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Reina Maruyama, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 12/31/2014
* USD 408,000.00

Astrophysical observations and cosmological data have led to the unambiguous
conclusion that nearly a quarter of the Universe consists of dark matter. The
search for dark matter addresses one of the fundamental questions in particle
astrophysics. Current models predict that our galaxy is encased in a halo of
dark matter. As the Sun orbits around the galaxy and the Earth around the Sun,
we expect there to be an annual modulation in the flux of dark matter that
passes through the Earth. If the modulation observed by the DAMA experiment in
Italy is due to dark matter, an experiment in the Southern Hemisphere with the
same target material would expect to observe modulations with the same phase and
amplitude. This would be unambiguous evidence for the observation of dark
matter. If the modulation is due to an environmental background related to the
seasons, it will be opposite in the two hemispheres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will fund an integrated research and education program focused on the
development of sodium iodide-(NaI)-based detectors for dark matter physics. The
research program consists of three main activities: analysis of data from a 17
kilogram NaI detector currently operating 2500 meters below the surface in the
South Pole ice, a systematic study of the characteristics and pulse shape
discrimination techniques of NaI detectors, and the simulations and sensitivity
studies for a proposed 250 kilogram NaI detector to be mounted in the Southern
Hemisphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This award will also fund a
series of educational and outreach activities designed to recruit and retain
physics majors and physicists in STEM fields by showcasing the wide range of
careers available to physicists. A special focus will be given to recruit and
retain women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in
physics.