* 1151477
* CAREER: Biophysical investigations of immune-mediated pathogen trapping in mucus
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Samuel Lai, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is to investigate the
role of mucus, a viscoelastic biopolymer composed of a dense matrix of mucin
fibers and secreted by human body, as a barrier against virus. This research
project will combine bioengineering, biophysics and computational modeling to
investigate the protective role of antibodies in mucus. Most infections are
transmitted at mucosal surfaces, and viruses have evolved to readily penetrate
mucus. Nevertheless, how antibodies are secreted into mucus protect against
infections remain poorly understood. This study is based on the hypothesis that
antibodies can immobilize viruses in mucus with permanent avidity via polyvalent
and low-affinity crosslinks, thereby blocking viruses from reaching target
cells. Most previous studies have failed to detect possible polyvalent-adhesive
trapping effects of mucus because these studies attempted to measure only the
low-affinity mono-valent interactions between a single antibody and mucus
constituents. To overcome these drawbacks of the previous studies, this project
will focus on quantifying the potency of anti-biotin immunoglobulin-G mediated
trapping by mucus using biotin-coated, mucus-penetrating and mucus-inert
polystyrene-based nanoparticles as the model system. Numerical modeling of
particle diffusion across mucus, accumulation of antibody on particle surface,
and trapping by surface-bound antibody are parts of this research. The proposed
studies are expected to develop an overarching set of equations that will
attempt to predict the effectiveness of antibody-mediated trapping against a
wide range of viral pathogens. In addition, this study could elucidate a largely
unrecognized mechanism of immune protection of human body, and could lead to
development of new vaccines and passive immunization against viral infections
such as Herpes, HIV, etc. Through this multidisciplinary research, graduate and
undergraduate students will receive training across nanoscience, biophysics,
mathematics and immunology. Additionally, the PI plans to develop a new
curriculum, focusing on the role of mucus in health, and will be used by the
outreach programs at the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center to reach out to
many K-12 students in North Carolina every year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
infections take place in organs coated with mucus, such as the airways,
gastrointestinal tract, etc. Viruses have evolved to quickly move through mucus
to infect; thus, methods that can block viruses from penetrating mucus
represents an attractive approach to reinforce our body?s defense against
infections. In this project, we will explore how the immune system can be tuned
to transform mucus into a sticky mesh against diverse pathogens, effectively
trapping them in mucus and reducing infections in the process. Specifically,
this project will prepare synthetic nanoparticles that will rigorously quantify
the stickiness of mucus as a function of basic parameters such as virus particle
size and surface characteristics. In addition it will develop an overarching set
of equations to predict how one could protect against a wide range of viral
pathogens. A successful outcome of this research could not only explain with
which immune system can protect against infections, but also could guide in the
development of new generations of vaccines. Due to the multidisciplinary nature
of this research, the project will train students across nanoscience,
biophysics, mathematics and immunology. The researcher plans to leverage
existing outreach programs at the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center, and
will develop a new science curriculum focusing on the role of mucus in health
that will reach many K-12 students in North Carolina. These efforts are expected
to motivate students to pursue higher education in Science, Technology,
Engineering, &amp; Mathematics.