* 1151832
* CAREER: Ruthenium(II)-Cobalt(II)/Cobalt(III) Mixed-Metal Complexes for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production from Water
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Alvin Holder, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Bessel
* 03/31/2014
* USD 294,276.00

Through this CAREER award funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Alvin A. Holder of the University of Southern
Mississippi (USM) will be applying his expertise in the area of catalysis
towards the development of photocatalysts. The work targets the important
problem of developing improved catalysts capable of photolytic hydrogen
generation in aqueous media. It will address the synthesis and characterization
of ruthenium(II)-cobalt(II)/cobalt(III) mixed-metal complexes, and investigate
their photocatalytic properties using homogeneous schemes. These photocatalytic
schemes will exploit reductive quenching pathways that should lead to
significantly enhanced catalytic turnovers. In addition, Professor Holder will
integrate and bring the chemistry of energy and catalysis in the laboratory to
high school students and teachers from the Hattiesburg and surrounding areas, as
well as undergraduates and graduate students at USM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary project will make key contributions to the fundamental
knowledge base of converting solar energy to environmentally-friendly, carbon-
free, combustible chemical fuels. In addition, the interdisciplinary nature of
the proposed work is expected to impact diverse fields, including synthetic
chemistry, analytical chemistry, photochemistry, materials chemistry,
electrochemistry, and catalysis. The research further involves several teaching
points which will be integrated into educational activities at all levels, and
involve groups generally underrepresented in science and technology.