* 1151815
* CAREER: Using mechanical force to probe conformational switching in riboswitches
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Maumita Mandal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of a CAREER award from the Chemistry of Life Processes at the
National Science Foundation, Professor Maumita Mandal of Carnegie Mellon
University will lead a research program that will focus on understanding the
dynamics of structural rearrangements in riboswitches and other regulatory RNAs
in single-molecules by combining the fluorescence and force spectroscopy using
high resolution optical tweezers. This advanced technique opens new
opportunities to visually monitor pathways of allosteric switching in RNA
molecules in real time that are key to the regulatory activities. Riboswitches
exhibit a myriad of secondary and tertiary structures and the ligands they bind
to regulate gene expression. These allosteric rearrangements are central to
perform the required biological functions in these structures as in
riboswitches; a mechanism that may be far more widespread in other RNA-based
systems too. Although the structure of ligand binding and mechanism of
riboswitch action is fairly comprehensible, it is the allosteric modulation
between distant domains that is yet to be understood mainly because the RNA
secondary structures are less well defined under low ionic conditions which make
them difficult to study by biochemical means. While theoretical descriptions of
this behavior abound, experimental approaches to test the theories are
challenging using biochemical toolkit alone, and different approaches often lead
to complicated interpretations of the molecular events. The results of this
research will be important in unraveling how RNA structural domains play a
regulatory role in bringing components together both spatially and temporally to
form a functional complex in the presence of small molecules. Additionally, the
role of molecular motors such as RNA polymerases that utilize this information
during transcription will be also investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed here by Professor Mandal is highly interdisciplinary that
incorporates elements of physics, biophysics, chemistry and biomedical
engineering with a goal of addressing the fundamental gene regulatory problem in
biology. An important objective of the proposed activity is to create a two
semester curriculum in physical chemistry directed towards biology, chemistry,
physics and engineering students, wherein the students are exposed to the
emerging areas of single-molecule research in upper division undergraduate
courses, while focusing on the meaningful conceptual learning in the classroom
settings. The curriculum developed by the investigator at Carnegie Mellon
University is in its first year that brings together undergraduates from
different disciplines with an aim to create an excitement and generating an
understanding of the physical chemistry and its usefulness and applicability of
the material in interdisciplinary research.