* 1151182
* CAREER:Computer-Aided Molecular Design of Environmentally Benign Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Arunprakash Karunanithi, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 05/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

Arunprakesh Karunanithi Proposal Number: 1151182

Research goals, objectives and approach: The PIs career research goal is to
improve understanding of the properties of ionic liquids in relation to their
molecular structures and facilitate discovery of new functional ionic liquids.
To further this goal, the research objectives are to test the following
hypotheses: 1) It is possible to account for long range electrostatic
interactions, which are unique to ionic liquids, within the framework of group
contribution theory; 2) It is possible to tailor new ionic liquid molecular
structures having unique task specific properties. The research approach
employed to test these hypotheses is: 1) combine solution of group concept and
Debye-Huckel theory to represent ionic liquid structures in a manner that
captures long range ion-group and ion-ion interactions; 2) develop and extend
group contribution based structure-property models and parameters, including
UNIFAC group interaction parameters, with an aim to relate ionic liquid
properties to their cation and anion structures; 3) integrate group contribution
models with global optimization methods to reverse engineer optimal ionic liquid
structures with targeted properties for applications such as CO2 capture and
chemical separations

Intellectual Merit: This project will have significant impact on the
understanding of ionic-liquid structures and their relation to thermo-physical
properties. The intellectual merit is in the extension of solution of group
concept to ionic .liquid systems by accounting for long range electrostatic
interactions. Another important aspect of intellectual merit of this project is
the integration of structure-property models with global optimization techniques
to develop computer-aided ionic liquid design (CAMD-IL) methods. This opens up
the potential to screen millions of ionic liquid structures for their properties
in a very short period of time. These methods will enable one to computationally
explore new variations of ionic liquid structures, with an aim to optimizing
their properties for specific applications. This exploration can potentially
lead to the discovery of tailored ionic liquids with unique functional
properties. Education goals, objectives and approach: The education goal is to
promote green engineering and sustainability education through experience-based
learning. To further this goal, the PI plans to introduce university and K-12
students to green chemistry/engineering through experiential learning theory.
The approach employed will be to: 1) develop an experiential learning continuum
model; 2) to visit several underserved K12 schools through an innovative topsy-
turvy bus tour program, with an aim to introduce green chemistry/engineering and
excite them to pursue higher education in STEM areas; 3) to prepare and teach a
green engineering design course, featuring experiential learning; 4) to conduct
workshops for middle and high school teachers at UCD with an aim to introduce
and promote experience based teaching strategies and green
engineering/chemistry.

Broader Impact: 1) Societal benefits: progress made through this project, will
accelerate discovery of new ionic liquids with unique functional properties that
can lead to breakthroughs in cleaner technologies for emerging applications.
Future replacement of organic solvents with inherently benign ionic liquids will
result in significant health and environmental benefits to the society; 2)
Broaden participation: Through his topsy-turvy educational bus tours, the PI
expects to directly impact 500 minority K-12 children; 3)Research-Education
integration: Graduate students will translate research results into educational
hands-on activities for bus tour program; professional development of teachers;
4) enhance infrastructure for research and education by establishing
collaboration with industry (TDA Research) and creating seed project for
undergraduate students to explore new applications for green ionic liquids