* 1151627
* CAREER: Quantifying Inadvertent Weather Modification and Education through Museum Programs
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2020
* Brian Ancell, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2020
* USD 721,883.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric perturbations can be created by a
variety of human activities. Turbulence downstream of wind turbines that
produces warming and drying, the urban heat island effect, and increased dew
points near irrigated agricultural lands have all been shown to be ways that
human beings change the atmosphere. Although some prior studies have focused on
the effects of anthropogenic forcing on local climate, few have addressed how
human-induced perturbations evolve to affect downstream atmospheric flow on a
variety of spatial and temporal scales. Supporting the idea that these
downstream effects may be significant, previous work involving adjoint
sensitivity analysis has shown that high-impact aspects of the weather, such as
the evolution of midlatitude cyclones, can be highly sensitive to localized,
near-surface regions where human-induced perturbations can exist. The
coexistence of these circumstances, anthropogenic perturbations and their
potential to grow rapidly, suggest inadvertent weather modification may be a
virtually unknown reality with serious consequences. As Earth's growing
population will likely exacerbate the degree of present-day anthropogenic
atmospheric forcing in the coming years, understanding inadvertent weather
modification now is crucial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to gain a
holistic understanding of the various means by which humans modify high-impact
storm-scale, mesoscale, and synoptic-scale aspects of the weather. The
approaches to achieving these goals are unique in that they focus on the
interaction of estimated anthropogenic forcing and adjoint sensitivity analysis,
which can effectively elucidate the important dynamics associated with different
anthropogenic perturbation scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this research will leads to an invaluable
foundation of scientific results needed for society to responsibly mitigate
current and future inadvertent weather modification. Similar to how the human
race is currently addressing the role of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emission
on global and local climate, a strong base of knowledge produced through this
work can provide the information needed to strike a balance between beneficial
human activities that perturb the atmosphere and the modification of sensible
day-to-day weather such perturbations produce. In turn, this project has the
potential to be intimately connected with the development of important
government policy decisions worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this work, which includes a museum exhibit, summer science camps,
and portable educational kits for area schools, will likely make positive
impacts to society well outside the confines of academia. Museums provide a
casual learning environment that attracts a large number of mostly nonscientific
visitors. Thus, it is expected that the museum education activities will reach
many who would otherwise be unexposed to important scientific issues like
inadvertent weather modification that can affect society, the economy, and the
environment. In turn, this work has the potential to provide science education
to the general public in a unique and effective way, improving the ability for
society to intelligently address inadvertent weather modification in the coming
years.