* 1151435
* CAREER: Biological chemistry of Pb2+ revealed through Pb2+ mediated protein-membrane interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Tatyana Igumenova, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 550,000.00

In this CAREER award, funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Tatyana Igumenova describes an integrated research and
educational program focused on the biological chemistry of lead (Pb). Despite
the well-known effect of Pb(II) exposure on humans, the molecular mechanism of
Pb(II) action is poorly understood. Dr. Igumenova PI will use a synergistic
structural and functional approach to conduct the first in-depth systematic
investigation of Pb(II)-protein interactions. The focus is on a class of
peripheral membrane proteins called conserved homology 2, or C2, domains. This
protein system enables the PI to tackle an unexplored aspect of Pb(II) action:
how it mediates the protein-membrane interactions. The C2 domains selected for
these studies are from three parent proteins that are molecular targets of
Pb(II). These proteins have different structures and functions, such as signal
transduction and membrane trafficking. Dr. Igumenova has assembled a toolkit of
biophysical techniques that will enable characterization of Pb(II)-protein
interactions in the absence and presence of lipid membranes. The results of the
proposed studies will report on how the change in the chemical environment of C2
domains, brought about by Pb(II) binding, affects the downstream reaction, which
is the association of C2 with lipid membranes. These results have a potential to
transform the conventional view of Pb(II) as a ligand whose action is limited to
the formation of high-affinity protein complexes to a ligand that serves as a
functional Ca2+ surrogate. The obtained data will enable the PI to identify the
predictors of coordination geometries and Pb(II) affinities in membrane-bound
and membrane-free C2 domains. This, in turn, will facilitate the identification
of other potential Pb(II) targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lead (Pb) is
a heavy metal that became enriched 1000-fold above its natural level due to
human activity. The most prevalent form of lead in the environment, Pb(II),
interacts with biological molecules in the cell. Many of these biological
molecules are proteins that bind calcium ion under normal conditions. Lead(II)
ion successfully competes with calcium ion and binds to these proteins -
referred to as molecular targets of Pb(II) - with high affinity. Dr. Igumenova's
objective is to determine the features of these proteins that make them bind
Pb(II) more tightly than calcium ion and understand the effect of Pb(II) on
protein function. One of the broader impacts of the proposed work is entry of
students from under-represented groups into graduate programs. Dr. Igumenova
will offer ten-week summer research internships, with recruitment facilitated by
her activities as a faculty mentor in the NSF-sponsored Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (LSAMP) and Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) programs. Professional development and mentoring of the student will be
accomplished through research activities, the use of high-end research
instrumentation (an 800 MHz NMR instrument), and REU-affiliated programs. As an
outreach activity, Dr. Igumenova's laboratory will develop an educational web
application (app): "Lead (Pb): the toxic chemistry in action" for the
iPhone/iPad/iPod mobile platforms. The objective is to enhance public knowledge
of the harmful effects of Pb2+ on the society, from the ancient and modern
sources of Pb(II) in the environment to specific Pb(II)-complexed molecular
structures generated as a result of Dr. Igumenova's research activities. The
benefit for society will be an increase in public awareness to the fact that
there is no safe level of Pb exposure.