* 1151180
* CAREER:  Effects of Immigrant Scientists and IPRS on Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Petra Moser, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2018
* USD 407,144.00

This CAREER research produces urgently needed empirical evidence on the effects
of intellectual property rights and science policies on innovation. To
investigate the effects of contemporary policy changes, which cannot be measured
with contemporary data, it exploits substantial historical policy shifts that
were exogenous to U.S. innovation. The research also constructs new data sets -
including both patents and alternative measures of innovation - to improve our
understanding of intellectual property rights and science policy on innovation
in historical settings and today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Individual projects investigate the effects of immigrant scientists, compulsory
licensing, patent pools, and the creation of patent rights for food crops on
U.S. innovation. For example, the research uses the inflow of highly trained
Jewish scientists, who fled the Nazi regime in Germany, as an exogenous event to
help understand the potential benefits of receiving immigrant scientists. While
existing studies of immigration have emphasized direct effects on wages and
employment opportunities for native workers, this research investigates the
potential long-run effects of receiving immigrant scientists on innovation by
domestic scientists and engineers. Understanding these changes is essential
because increases in innovation encourage economic growth and create new
opportunities for employment. Complementary projects investigate effects of
intellectual property rights policies, such as compulsory licensing, on
innovation and examine improvements in food crops after the creation of
intellectual property rights for plants in 1930 and in 1986 to test whether
contemporary policies that strengthen intellectual property rights for
biological innovations may help to secure world food
supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Results from this CAREER research
help guide government policies on immigration, patent laws, and innovation.
Organizations like the USPTO and the World Intellectual Property Office (WIPO)
have already requested presentations of new results on patent pools and plants
patents. The CAREER-funded training of graduate students helps increase long-run
research output on the impact of patents and innovative research-centered
undergraduate courses encourage the dissemination of research output. Targeted
mentoring and research collaborations increase the participation of minority
students and women in academic research, and help to strengthen the
representation of these groups among economists and scholars of innovation.