* 1151555
* CAREER: Controlling non-adiabatic reaction dynamics in solution: A window on the fundamental details of photochemical reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Christopher Elles, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2018
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms Program in
the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation, a group led by
Professor Christopher Elles at the University of Kansas will study the ultrafast
excited-state dynamics of color-changing photochromic molecular switches using
time-resolved spectroscopy. Their research will probe the fundamental details
that control the transformations of these molecules from one isomer to another
following absorption of one or more photons. For example, different excitation
schemes allow the dynamics through a conical intersection to be probed via
different reaction pathways. Selectively controlling the dynamics for a range of
model compounds will provide new insight on the non-adiabatic transitions that
are ubiquitous in photochemistry and photophysics, in addition to providing
detailed insight on the properties and limitations of the photochromic compounds
that will be studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of these experiments
will be widely applicable to understanding the dynamics of photon-initiated
chemical reactions. In addition to the broad scientific impact, this five-year
program also includes an educational outreach program that will train future
science teachers to incorporate advanced topics into the high school curriculum.
The educational program will engage undergraduate students enrolled in the
UKanTeach teacher licensure program and work with them to develop novel lesson
plans that will translate key concepts from the field of chemical dynamics into
the classroom. Providing meaningful scientific training for prospective
secondary science teachers will enhance the impact of the research and
invigorate the high school curriculum with a direct connection to modern
research.