* 1151895
* An Ethnographic Investigation of the Cultural and Social Adaptation of a New Immigrant Russian Community in Delta Junction,Alaska.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Sveta Yamin-Pasternak, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 08/31/2015
* USD 359,524.00

This is an EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project to do
ethnographic research among the ex-Soviet immigrant settlers living in the Delta
Junction area of Alaska, self-designated "Delta Russians." The project is an
interdisciplinary social cultural investigation of the migration history, food
procurement strategies, material culture, and worldview of this diasporic
Russian community in Alaska. The Delta Russians are a rapidly growing community,
ranging in population from 3,000-3,500, with large extended family households
that exploit diverse and abundant wild resources as well as supplementing their
food with crop cultivation and animal husbandry and their incomes with the
domestic production of goods for the local market. Although 20th century Russian
migration to Alasksa has been the subject of social science research, this work
has focused on Old Believer populations, a religious sect that fractured from
their Far East Russian roots in the 19th Century to settle in California and
then again in the 20th Century to settle in Alaska, this project is will be the
first time that new Russian settlers have been the subject of social science
research. More importantly, this research builds on the recommendations from
other scholars in the discipline to begin working with immigrant diasporas soon
after they arrive in order to understand the full range of adaptation strategies
employed toward settlement. The Delta Russians provide a unique opportunity for
the research team to investigate "a human ecological niche emerging in real time
and in a [established]social context."