* 1151241
* CAREER: Understanding the Solid Earth's Influence on Sea Level
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Clinton Conrad, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 263,596.00

Sea level lies at the intersection of Earth's solid, liquid, and gaseous
components, and thus forms a fundamental boundary on our planet that affects
both biology and geology. Human society must adjust to changes in this boundary,
which is currently thought to be rising at 2-3 mm per year. Although it is known
that climatological factors such as seawater warming and glacial melting are
major contributors to sea level rise, deformation of the solid Earth also
affects sea level in ways that are poorly constrained. This project uses
numerical models of solid Earth deformation to understand the mechanisms by
which the solid Earth influences sea level change over timescales ranging from
decades to billions of years. By comparing predicted patterns of sea level
change with observations, we will place new constraints on the solid Earth's
effect on sea level. The scientific results from this effort will be translated
directly into an educational program designed to teach undergraduate students
about the interactions between the solid earth and sea level.&lt;br/&gt;This
project will focus on three timescales relevant to modes of solid earth
deformation. For timescales of decades to centuries, we will compute spatial
variations in rates of sea level rise associated with Earth's elastic response
to regional melting of glacial ice. For timescales of millennia and longer, we
will compute the Earth's time-dependent viscous response to deglaciation. For
timescales of millions of years and longer, we will use numerical models of
mantle convection to determine how exchange of water between the oceans and
Earth's interior affects sea level both directly and indirectly by changing
ocean basin properties such as mid-ocean ridge volume, ocean area, and average
seafloor depth. For each timescale, we will calibrate the sea level response to
specific imposed forcing. By comparing these predicted patterns of sea level
change with observations (obtained from satellite, tide gauge, sedimentary, and
geologic constraints), we will place constraints on the historical and geologic
causes of sea level change. This understanding will be incorporated into
education modules that will be used by undergraduate students (first at the
University of Hawaii and later everywhere via a publicly-available website) to
probe the interaction between the solid earth and sea level in an interactive
way. This research will help quantify the causes of sea level change and its
spatial variations during the past decade and century, and thus will help inform
coastal planning for future sea level rise. It will also help us understand the
solid Earth's influence on sea level change over thousands and millions of
years, which will help scientists understand the geologic record of sea level
change and its coupling to the dynamics of Earth's interior.