* 1151394
* CAREER: Using Functionalized Protein-based Materials to Control and Pattern Cell Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Sarah Bondos, The Texas A&M University System  HSC Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,995.00

This Career award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials
Research to the Texas A&amp;M Health Science Center is to develop methods in
incorporation and patterning active, structured proteins in a three-dimensional
scaffold, thus greatly extending the ability to manipulate cell behavior in cell
biology and tissue engineering studies. Common approaches in generating or
functionalizing materials can harm sensitive molecules. Cytokines, proteins that
control growth, migration, apoptosis, and differentiation, are particularly
vulnerable. With this award, functionalized materials will be prepared in a
single step using the Drosophila protein Ultrabithorax (Ubx). Ubx rapidly self-
assembles in mild buffers, allowing cytokines that have been genetically fused
to Ubx to remain active. Cytokine-Ubx fusion materials will be used to direct
and pattern angiogenesis within a three-dimensional scaffold. The properties of
proteins will defined that permit incorporation, benchmark the activity of
cytokines embedded in materials relative to soluble monomers, and assess the
ability of uncharacterized cytokines to regulate angiogenesis. By collaborating
with an undergraduate laboratory course, this project will enable 60-70 students
per year to participate in cutting-edge research while learning basic
biochemistry techniques. Outstanding students will be invited to continue their
research during the school year and in summer
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building artificial tissues or organs requires
a scaffold, which ideally would both support cells in three dimensions and
instruct cell behavior. These "instructions" are often powerful proteins which
interact with the cell to control cell attachment, identity, shape, movement,
and growth. However, it is difficult to attach these proteins to a scaffold
without damaging them. The investigator has developed a unique material that
assembles itself quickly in gentle conditions, allowing one to attach a variety
of proteins without harming them. This proposal will position these instructive
proteins in a three dimensional scaffold to control and pattern cell behavior.
The resulting materials will also allow in identifying new proteins with useful
effects on cells. In the long term, the methods developed in this proposal could
be adapted to pattern cells in the same scaffold (for instance, build blood
vessels in a block of liver cells), a necessary step in producing artificial
tissues and organs. As part of this research, graduate and undergraduate
students will receive interdisciplinary training. Research is a critical
component of STEM training, but the number of undergraduates exceeds the number
of research opportunities. Collaboration with a class at University of Houston,
which has a large minority student population, will allow 60-70 undergraduates
per year to participate in this research as they learn laboratory skills.