* 1151717
* CAREER: Phases and Dynamics of Cold Atomic Gases
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Daniel Sheehy, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexios Klironomos
* 07/31/2018
* USD 428,200.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education on new states of matter in cold-atom systems. Recent
advances in the cooling and trapping of atomic gases have led to observations of
correlated states of matter. Cold-atom experiments, in addition to being
impurity-free, are remarkably controllable, so that quantities such as the
particle number, the shape of an external potential and atomic interactions can
be tuned. This level of control enables the study of a wide parameter space of
interacting cold-atom systems. The PI will focus on research areas that are
pertinent to current and future cold-atom experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will compute signatures of predicted p-wave superfluid phases of three-
dimensional imbalanced Fermi gases and study phase transitions to other ordered
states of matter. To address recent experiments on imbalanced gases in a quasi-
one-dimensional trap, the PI will predict the dynamical evolution of the Fulde-
Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state after the gas has been released from the trap,
to see how such experiments can detect the elusive Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-
Ovchinnikov pairing. Additional calculations will examine imbalanced gases in
two dimensions to stimulate future experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
compute the properties of cold bosonic atoms in a periodic optical lattice
across a broad range of lattice amplitudes, including the low amplitude regime
where the conventional Hubbard model breaks down. Another exciting area of
research is inspired by the recent achievement of an artificial spin-orbit
coupling for cold atoms. The PI will analyze how spin-orbit coupling modifies
states of matter, such as states of bosons in optical lattices and the Fulde-
Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov state of fermions, and study the question of how
spin-orbit coupling can be used to create cold-atom analogues of topological
insulating phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component includes course
development for undergraduate students that will incorporate novel teching
methods. This will include making courses communication intensive. This award
also supports aspects of an outreach project to the public and high school and
middle school students. An in-school demonstration program is aimed to increase
the interest of minority students in science and careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical research and education on how atoms organize
themselves at very low temperature when they are trapped in beams of laser
light. The atoms in these "crystals of light" are like the electrons in
materials, except that it is easier to control the interactions among the
electrons and learn about the states of electronic matter. While it is unclear
whether and how some states of matter that may occur in gases of cold atoms can
be realized by electrons in cystals, their discovery would still provide insight
into electronic states in materials. The PI will explore whether a
superconducting state that has been predicted to exist but has been difficult to
observe in materials can be observed in trapped gases of cold atoms.
Superconducting states are quantum mechanical states that are able to transport
electricity without dissipation. The PI will aslo seek whether a recently
proposed novel insulating state, a topological insulator, can be observed in
"crystals of light". Topological insulators do not conduct electricity through
the bulk of the material, but have metallic surface states with unusual
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributes to the intellectual
foundations that underlie possible future device technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education component includes course development for
undergraduate students that will incorporate novel teching methods. This will
include making courses communication intensive. This award also supports aspects
of an outreach project to the public and high school and middle school students.
An in-school demonstration program is aimed to increase the interest of minority
students in science and careers in science.