* 1151701
* CAREER: Development of Environmentally Benign Piezoelectric Materials for Sustainable Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Brady Gibbons, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 438,944.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Piezoelectrics are an incredibly useful family of
materials that are used in sensors and actuators. In sensing, when they are
deformed an electric charge is created in proportion to the deformation; for
actuation, when they are subjected to an electric field a shape change is
induced in proportion to the applied field. This behavior leads to applications
such as ultrasonic imaging, fuel injection, micropositioning, energy harvesting,
and microelectromechanical systems (ink jet print heads, microsensors, etc.).
Unfortunately the most ubiquitous piezoelectric materials contain lead. The
toxicity of lead has resulted in its elimination in paints and solders.
Worldwide efforts are now underway to eliminate lead from all devices, including
piezoelectrics. The aim of this research is to develop piezoelectric materials
that do not contain lead for use in small-scale sensing and actuation
applications. The elimination of lead is highly desirable in terms of processing
and device fabrication, disposal at end-of-life, as well as opening up new
application areas (in vivo sensing and actuation). In addition, this project
acts as a vehicle for both recruiting and retaining a future generation of
engineers and scientists that is diverse in terms of both gender and ethnicity.
By integration with two mentoring programs that bring Oregon high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and the professor together, a pyramid of
mentorship in the laboratory is being created and diversity is
increased.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The most prevalent
piezoelectric material is based on Pb(Zr1-xTix)O3 (PZT). Recent worldwide
regulatory restrictions on the use of lead have resulted in numerous groups
searching for and examining lead-free replacement piezoelectric materials. The
primary candidates to replace PZT are Bi, Na, and K based perovskites. However,
to date research has largely neglected taking a thorough approach to thin film
implementation of these materials, which is ultimately desired. Therefore a
major opportunity exists to provide insight to the significant thin film
processing issues and defect-related phenomena in these complex, volatile,
multi-cation systems (which are exacerbated by the anisometric nature of thin
film architectures). This work is designed to develop synthesis methodologies to
high performing lead-free piezoelectric thin films using chemical solution and
physical vapor routes. Novel elemental and structural characterization methods
are used to understand the stoichiometry and defect equilibria present in these
complex materials, and their impact on the ultimate ferroelectric and
piezoelectric properties. Finally, this program acts as a critical vehicle for
both recruiting and retaining a future generation of engineers and scientists
that is diverse in terms of both gender and ethnicity. A culture of mentoring in
the professor's laboratory is being fostered that enhances the connection of
students to the field while also reaching out to recruit high school level
students and attracting them to engineering and the sciences. This goal is being
accomplished by collaborating with two programs at Oregon State University that
bring underrepresented high school students to campus every summer to
participate in research projects that are based on deposition and
characterization of lead-free piezoelectric thin films.