* 1151444
* Explaining Prehistoric High-Altitude Hunter-Gather Residential Occupations in  Wyoming's Wind River Range
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Christopher Morgan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 84,498.00

With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Christopher Morgan, David Rhode
and Richard Adams will conduct one season of archaeological research in the
subalpine and alpine regions of the Wind River Range, in western Wyoming. The
team brings together experts in hunter-gatherer and mountain archaeology and
ecology, prehistoric settlement and subsistence systems, and paleoenvironmental
reconstruction to explain the economic, environmental, and social contexts
leading to the anomalous and intensive occupation of a hunter-gatherer village
known locally as High Rise Village. This site is at an elevation of 10,700 ft
and, for a hunter-gatherer village, very large (19 acres). It contains at least
52 flattened housefloors representing the remains of ancient living structures
and a diverse and dense archaeological deposit composed of hunting, plant
processing, and tool making remains. Pilot study radiocarbon dating indicates
site occupations between 4500 and 150 years ago, making it the largest, oldest,
and longest-running, continuously-occupied high-altitude prehistoric village in
North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wind River project will generate new
empirical and theoretical information about North American prehistory and human
adaptation to marginal habitats like high mountains. Its intellectual merit
rests on its testing of fundamental models of human behavior in such settings
and expressing in concrete, quantitative terms how and why humans move to and
settle in such regions, ultimately coming to populate nearly every terrestrial
ecological niche on the planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental questions
driving the proposed research are: were High Rise Village inhabitants pushed to
live in a marginal, limiting habitat, or where they pulled into a habitat that
was so seasonally productive as to offset the costs of living at the site? The
goal of the project is to answer these questions by reconstructing prehistoric
investments in technology and subsistence relative to the economic benefits of
living at the site, with high-cost, low return behaviors indicating people being
pushed to occupy the site, and the opposite incentive for doing the same. This
research requires data that provides meaningful measures of the time and energy
expended constructing the houses, manufacturing the tools and feeding the
populations who lived at the site, as well as a reasonable estimate of the size
of the groups who lived there at any one time, all within a context of overall
environmental productivity. Generating these types of data entails excavating a
large sample of the site and its house features and analyzing house construction
methods, tool types and subsistence remains and other indicators of past
environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts
rest on its engagement and training of a large and diverse group of
undergraduates, Native Americans and graduate students in cutting-edge
archaeological inquiry, countering trends in declining scientific literacy in
American students and among historically disenfranchised groups while developing
increased scientific capacity and infrastructure among public universities in
five states (Utah, Wyoming, Nevada, Washington, and California) and private
laboratories from Maryland to California.