* 1151614
* CAREER: Plasmonics with a Twist - Chiral Nanostructures for Advanced Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Oded Rabin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Oertel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 559,304.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER proposal is
to improve the detection sensitivities of chiral molecular spectroscopy tools
using the concept of plasmonic enhancement. Plasmonic nanostructures display
unique optical properties that can be used to manipulate the propagation and
polarization of light at a length-scale smaller than its wavelength. This
research, sponsored by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program,
will experimentally and theoretically investigate the interactions between
light, plasmons, and chiral molecules with the goal of achieving preferential
optical excitation or scattering from one enantiomer over the other. The
researchers will develop new fabrication methods for 3-dimensional nanoscale
objects, model the polarization evolution in plasmonic systems, and demonstrate
enhanced circular dichroism and optical activity in engineered metal
nanoparticle-molecule complexes. Industrial collaborations will accelerate the
technology transfer to pharmaceutical and analytical laboratories in industry.
Undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Maryland will carry out
the research activities and will be involved in outreach programs to generate
excitement among the broad public towards scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular "handedness", known as Chirality, is
ubiquitous in Nature. The "handedness" of biomolecules leads to specific lock-
and-key interactions that govern the way enzymes, receptors, DNA, RNA, etc.
fold, assemble, interact and function. Mixtures of "left" and "right" chiral
molecules are often unacceptable in medicinal products, as one isomer could be
toxic while the other is therapeutic. The task of distinguishing between chiral
molecules is not trivial, because they have the same physical and chemical
properties. This project will use nanostructures with unique optical
characteristics to increase the sensitivity of optical spectroscopy tools used
to identify the "handedness" of biological products. These improvements will
lead to higher standards in pharmaceutical product quality control, the
generation of reference libraries of spectral signatures of biological products
and pathogens, and better tools for the study of molecular conformations and
their role in cellular regulatory functions and diseases (e.g. Alzheimer's and
mad-cow). Integrated in this project is the scientific training of a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Maryland,
outreach activities emphasizing student involvement in their communities, and
the design of artistic displays illustrating unique optical properties of
nanomaterials.