* 1151151
* CAREER:  Research and Education for a Solar Future:  Fundamentals of Nanocrystal Photochemistry and Integration of Solar Energy Research into Physical Chemistry Curriculum
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Gordana Dukovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2018
* USD 630,125.00

Prof. Gordana Dukovic of the University of Colorado Boulder is supported through
a CAREER award by the Supramolecular, Macromolecular and Nanochemistry program
of the Chemistry Division to study the photochemistry of semiconductor
nanocrystals. These materials have intriguing potential applications related to
driving chemical reactions with visible light. However, the mechanisms of
photochemical reactions mediated by semiconductor nanocrystals are poorly
understood. The aim of this project is to correlate nanocrystal structural
parameters with photochemical reaction mechanisms and provide a rational basis
for the design of practical materials. Prof. Dukovic will also develop an
educational program that integrates current research problems in solar energy
harvesting into the curriculum for undergraduate Physical Chemistry (Quantum
Mechanics and Spectroscopy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve the
fundamental understanding of how nanocrystals can facilitate useful light-driven
chemical reactions. The scientific discoveries will impact exciting potential
applications of nanoscale semiconductors in technologies of broad interest
(e.g., solar fuel generation, environmental remediation and disinfection). The
educational program that integrates solar energy research with teaching of
quantum mechanics and spectroscopy will be disseminated to the education
community so that it can be replicated in college classrooms. The program will
showcase researchers from diverse backgrounds, which will encourage
participation of students from underrepresented groups in scientific careers.