* 1151428
* Role of Collision Geometry in Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 02/28/2015
* USD 780,729.00

Richard N. Zare of Stanford University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program to pursue studies of the
role of collision geometry in chemical reactivity. Professor Zare and his
postdoctoral and graduate student colleagues will examine with the most
exquisite detail how elementary chemical reactions occur. Prof. Zare and his
group will continue their studies of state-to-state reaction dynamics in
fundamental chemical systems, seeking to understand how the precise geometry of
the collision of two molecules determines the chemical outcome of this
interaction. Normally, reagent molecules can be selected in particular
rovibrational levels denoted by the vibrational quantum numbers v1, v2, v3, etc.
and the rotational angular momentum quantum number J. However, no selection is
made of the projection of the rotational angular momentum vector J on the
quantization axis. Zare and his colleagues work to prepare reagents and to
detect reaction products in selected M states by combining the directionality of
polarized radiation for pumping and probing molecular states with the intense
electric field from a synchronized nonresonant laser pulse which causes
sufficiently large Stark splittings of molecular transitions that individual M
states can be accessed. Their goal is to achieve nearly 100 percent transfer of
population from a lower to an upper level in an M-state-selective manner, which
for reaction dynamics studies would be a first.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Zare
will continue to serve as a mentor to a diverse group of young scientists, and
will continue in his wide ranging efforts at educating the public about the
importance of science. In this regard, Prof. Zare's service as a host of
WONDERFEST and as a member of its board of directors is emblematic. WONDERFEST
is a Bay Area celebration of science and attracts over one thousand people a
year to learn about and debate upon current topics in science.