* 1151698
* CAREER: A phylogenetic and functional understanding of microbial sulfur cycling in oxygen minimum zones
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2020
* Frank Stewart, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,210,901.00

Oxygen concentration significantly impacts the community structure and function
of marine ecosystems. In waters with low oxygen, including the major marine
oxygen minimum zones (OMZs), biological diversity is dominated by a complex
community of microorganisms whose anaerobic metabolisms mediate key steps in
global nitrogen and carbon cycles. Surprisingly, new evidence indicates that
OMZs also support diverse microorganisms capable of utilizing inorganic sulfur
compounds for energy metabolism. This assemblage appears to include both sulfur-
oxidizing autotrophs and sulfate-reducing heterotrophs, suggesting an active
sulfur cycle with potentially substantial roles in organic carbon input and
mineralization, as well as critical links to the OMZ nitrogen cycle. Our
knowledge of the microorganisms driving OMZ sulfur cycling is based largely on
the metagenome of a single bacterial lineage (SUP05) and on surveys of
diagnostic marker genes, which have thus far targeted only a subset of the
diverse low-oxygen regions in the global ocean. The metabolic diversity,
activity, and biogeographic distribution of sulfur-metabolizing microorganisms
in the OMZ water column remain largely unexplored.

This project uses an integrated molecular and experimental approach to
critically examine the physiological and phylogenetic basis of microbial sulfur
cycling in oxygen minimum zones. Combining targeted metagenomics with gene
expression profiling, microcosm sulfur-addition experiments, and enrichment
culturing, the PI will characterize sulfur-metabolizing microorganisms in two
oceanographically and ecologically distinct low-oxygen regions: the Eastern
Tropical North Pacific (ETNP) OMZ off Mexico, which represents the largest
permanent OMZ in the world, and the seasonally hypoxic "dead zone" in the Gulf
of Mexico (GOM). Specifically, they will test the hypotheses that sulfur-
oxidizing and -reducing bacterioplankton 1) are abundant and transcriptionally
active in the ETNP OMZ, 2) are minor components of the hypoxic GOM, but increase
in activity and abundance when oxygen decreases and sulfide increases, and 3)
exhibit biogeographic variation in functional gene content and phylogenetic
diversity over vertical profiles, among OMZs, and in response to environmental
gradients.

OMZs are predicted to expand in response to future climate change, making it
imperative to holistically understand the biology of low-oxygen regions. This
project will establish a comprehensive framework for studying the genomics and
physiology of an ecologically important, but poorly characterized, functional
group(s) of marine bacterioplankton in OMZs. Results will be analyzed relative
to existing metagenomic data from the permanent Eastern Tropical South Pacific
(ETSP) OMZ, and a second seasonal OMZ (Saanich Inlet), thereby establishing a
comparative basis for describing the ecological distribution of pelagic sulfur-
metabolizing microorganisms and their relative role in OMZ community metabolism.

Broader Impacts Marine science research will be used as a platform for enhancing
science education across multiple academic levels. A Summer Workshop in Marine
Science (SWIMS) will be developed in collaboration with K-12 educators and
teacher-development experts at Georgia Tech. The 5-day SWIMS program, which
includes 2 days at the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, will engage graduate
students and Georgia Tech researchers in training local teachers to merge key
topics in marine science with new national standards in middle school Earth
Science education. In addition, through a partnership with Morehouse and Spelman
Colleges, this project funds summer internships to enhance representation of
minority students in undergraduate marine science and bioinformatics research. A
PI-graduate student working group is to be established at Georgia Tech to
develop and implement new guidelines for training in the cross-disciplinary
field of marine genomics. A new course will be created at Georgia Tech, Writing
for Scientists, to enhance the professional development of graduate students. It
will use structured, peer-driven exercises to equip students with the critical
writing and speaking skills necessary for success in science - such a course is
critically lacking at Georgia Tech. Through the activities outlined above, this
CAREER project will not only establish a research group dedicated to
characterizing an ecologically significant, but cryptic, component of the marine
microbial ecosystem, but will also develop a strong foundation through which the
PI can use the results of his work to train and motivate future generations of
marine scientists.