* 1151624
* Triplet Structure and Dynamics in Organometallic Oligomers and Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Kirk Schanze, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2016
* USD 453,200.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Kirk S. Schanze of the University of Florida
will investigate fundamental properties of carrier transport in conducting
polymer molecular wires and thin films. The overall objective of the program is
to provide a clear understanding of the structure, energetics and dynamics of
triplet exciton states in pi-conjugated, weakly conjugated and non-conjugated
model molecular and polymeric chromophore assembliles. The structures that will
be the focus of study feature platinum metal units as a primary element. These
metal centers serve to enhance triplet spin state generation in the materials
and promote room temperature phosphorescence. Understanding the properties of
photoexcited states in molecules and polymers with delocalized electronic
systems is very important because these materials are receiving a great deal of
attention from scientists and engineers for application in a new generation of
plastic electronic devices. In particular, the questions addressed in this
research program are broadly relevant to applications of organic and
organometallic materials in high efficiency light sources (organic light
emitting diodes), organic solar cells (light driven electrical power
generation), and in control and attenuation of laser light (non-linear optical
materials). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program provides also serves as
key training for postdoc, graduate and undergraduate students in the principal
investigator's laboratory. These students obtain broad training in skills
ranging from synthetic chemistry to the application of physical methods such as
optical spectroscopy and materials characterization. In addition, as part of
this project the research group will participate in the Student Science Training
Program (SSTP) with a seven-week residential program held each summer at the
University of Florida for high school students (11th and 12th graders)
interested in careers in science, math and engineering. Each summer the Schanze
group will host an SSTP student, getting them involved in the research project,
as well as interacting with the full group of SSTP students in seminar and
workshop settings.