* 1151649
* CAREER: Octahedral Control of Electronic Properties in Semiconducting Perovskite Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Steven May, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The ability to design and control the atomic
structure of materials in order to achieve a desired macroscopic property is a
grand challenge of materials research. The complex oxides are an ideal family of
compounds for addressing this challenge due to their ubiquity, societal
importance, and strong dependence of structure on properties. For instance,
properties including magnetism, ferroelectricity, catalytic behavior, and
electronic conductivity are known to couple directly to atomic structure in
oxides. This project aims to stabilize complex oxide thin films in non-
equilibrium atomic structures in order to control electronic properties relevant
to applications ranging from solar energy conversion to optoelectronics.
Outreach and educational activities, with particular emphasis on the importance
of structure/property relationships in materials, are incorporated in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The goal of the project is to
control electronic properties such as the band gap and carrier mobilities in
semiconducting perovskite films by enforcing non-equilibrium atomic structures.
While a dominant theme in oxide research has been to develop an understanding of
interfacial charge transfer, the use of interfaces to finely tune local
structure and bonding environments has yet to be fully explored as a means to
control physical properties. In ABO3 perovskites, the distortions and rotations
of the corner-connected BO6 octahedra, which determine the B-O bond lengths and
B-O-B angles, are known to couple directly to electronic structure. While
approaches to control octahedral behavior in bulk perovskites are limited to
compositional changes, oxide heterostructures offer new routes to engineering
octahedral behavior independent of composition. In this project, local atomic
structure in isocompositional perovskite films is systematically varied via
strain or substrate-film coupling. Structural and electronic properties are
probed using a combination of synchrotron diffraction, spectroscopy, and
electronic transport measurements. By directly comparing octahedral behavior and
electronic properties, the project isolates structure as a single independent
variable and provides a direct study of how mobility and band gap can be
controlled by the local bond environment. The fundamental insights gained into
these atomic structure/electronic properties relationships can be used to guide
materials design for applications in energy conversion and oxide electronics.
The participating graduate and undergraduate students receive hands-on training
with advanced materials synthesis and characterization techniques, including
molecular beam epitaxy and synchrotron-based scattering.