* 1151810
* CAREER: Collective effects in Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics - From fundamental science to devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Hakan Tureci, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2017
* USD 460,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education in physics of correlated light-matter
systems. Motivated by recent progress in cavity quantum electrodynamics on
various atomic as well as solid-state platforms, the PI will explore collective
effects in interacting light-matter systems. Collective behavior emerges when
either the light-confining medium or the material system is complex or composed
of a large number of interacting components, in a similar fashion to the
emergence of superconductivity, superfluidity, quantum magnetism, and other
states of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research thrusts include, to: (1)
understand the nature quantum emitters coupled strongly to extended light-
confining media, such as photonic molecules or crystals, where multi-mode
effects are important, (2) study collective phenomena due to coupling of complex
states of quantum matter, such as atomic condensates, to cavities, (3)
investigate collective phenomena in a lattice of cavity quantum electrodynamics
systems. In (1) the collective effects derive from many modes of a cavity, in
(2) from many degrees of freedom of the material system, and in (3) from
both.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in studying collective phenomena in
light-matter systems is the inherent non-equilibrium nature of these systems.
Correlated light-matter systems fit neither into conventional theoretical
frameworks of condensed matter physics, nor in quantum optics. The PI aims to
develop a new approach and phenomenology that combines theoretical and
computational techniques from different areas into a unified framework to
address out-of-equilibrium quantum many body systems, and to identify new
phenomena that will guide future experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
techniques and concepts that the PI aims to integrate include: stochastic
evolution methods and input-output formalism of quantum optics, matrix-product-
states and variational wavefunction approaches of strongly correlated systems
physics and Green's function methods of photonics, to address non-equilibrium
phenomena in correlated light-matter systems. Close contact will be maintained
to experiments through existing collaborative links of the PI with experimental
groups working on semiconductor- as well as superconductor-circuit based light-
matter platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the education component, the PI
aims to melt the boundaries between the fields of condensed matter physics,
quantum optics, photonics and atomic optics. In-classroom and hands-on research
experiences will be enriched by organization of workshops and summer schools
that target the formation of a new community of scientists and engineers that
can operate at interfaces of traditional disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education to explore novel properties of
interacting light-matter systems. Light-matter interactions can be enhanced by
placing optically active quantum materials into an optical resonator, a system
of mirrors arranged so that light a particular frequency is trapped and
enhanced. Under these conditions, when either the light-confining medium or the
material system is complex or composed of a large number of interacting
components, unusual phases of light and matter can be generated and studied in a
controlled setting. These novel `materials? of light and matter are sustained
away from the steady state of equilibrium. Many natural and technological
systems including living organisms are anchored on processes far from
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of collective effects and correlated
states of photons represents an emerging area, bringing together researchers
from condensed matter physics, quantum optics, atomic and molecular optics and
photonics. The next generation of optoelectronic devices will require an
unprecedented control over light-matter interactions. This research contributes
to the foundations of future device technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
aims to develop an educational program that will melt the traditional boundaries
between the fields of condensed matter physics, quantum optics, photonics and
atomic optics. The research will generate new approaches, tools and concepts
that will be part of the curriculum of the next-generation educational programs
in quantum science and engineering. In-classroom and hands-on research
experiences will be enriched by organization of workshops and summer schools
that targets the formation of a new community of scientists and engineers that
can operate at interfaces of traditional disciplines.