* 1151846
* CAREER: Elucidation of Dopant Effects in Ceria Supports on the Structure and Reactivity of Metal Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2019
* Jing Zhou, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2019
* USD 506,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jing Zhou of University of Wyoming will investigate doped
ceria-supported metal nanoparticles. The effect of dopants in ceria on the
structure and chemistry of supported metal catalysts will be elucidated by the
catalytic and surface chemistry studies of nickel and gold nanoparticles
supported on a series of well-defined model ceria thin film surfaces with
selected titanium and zirconium dopants using combined spectroscopy and
microscopy techniques. The research will have a significant impact in the field
of catalysis because it focuses on fundamental investigations of catalyst
structure and reactivity at the nano-scale regime to provide the necessary
foundation for the development of improved catalysts. The proposed research will
also provide ample training for graduate undergraduate students in catalysis and
nanoscience. Prof. Zhou will actively recruit students from underrepresented
minority groups and female students to join her
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanistic understanding of nickel and gold
particles supported by doped ceria can help improve steam-reforming of ethanol
and CO oxidation, two very important processes in chemical industry. In
addition, Prof. Jing Zhou will promote the awareness and dissemination of
knowledge in nanoscience to a broad range of students and the general public
through the Nanoscience Art Show and scanning tunneling microscopy
demonstrations to K-12 classrooms.