* 1151392
* CAREER: Dark Matter and Flavor
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jure Zupan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 429,873.00

This CAREER grant funds the research of Professor Jure Zupan at the University
of Cincinnati.

Professor Zupan will investigate unsolved issues pertaining to dark matter by
exploring the possible connections between dark matter and flavor physics.
Indeed, both topics contain deep mysteries about which physicists have
relatively little information. The Standard Model of particle physics is built
around the observation that nature contains three separate generations of quarks
and leptons. These generations of particles all appear identical in terms of
their charges and interactions, and differ only in their masses. They also mix
amongst each other in non-trivial ways. "Flavor physics" is a general term that
encapsulates the physics of this generational structure. Professor Zupan aims to
use ideas from flavor physics in order to understand properties of "dark matter"
--- i.e., matter which interacts only gravitationally but which is not luminous.
For example, it turns out that the flavor symmetries which might explain the
observed pattern of masses of the known elementary particles can also have
profound implications for the stability of dark matter and its interactions with
visible matter. This in turn has implications for dark-matter searches at
colliders, potentially leading to novel search signatures. The research proposed
by Professor Zupan will focus on the detection of dark matter in direct
detection experiments, the indirect astrophysical signatures of dark matter, and
signals of dark-matter production at colliders.

This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professor
Zupan will continue his participation in public outreach activities, such as
organization of talks in Science Cafes and other informal venues. He will also
act as a mentor in the hands-on particle-physics QuarkNet program which is aimed
at high-school educators and students. He will also establish a "Fun Science and
Math Day" at middle schools in Cincinnati, where research academics would
replace math teachers for a day in order to teach math in novel ways. To make
the experience more permanent for the students, Professor Zupan will also
distribute a series of illustrated one-line comics about everyday questions such
as "Why is sky blue?" with scientifically sound but simple answers. Such
materials will be based on the already-successful outreach materials that he
developed previously in Slovenia. Finally, Professor Zupan will also establish a
website where questions and answers from the students will be collected and made
available to a wider audience.