* 1151568
* CAREER: Controlling surface and interface relaxation mechanisms through the chemical environment: A route to 2D conductors between dissimilar materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Douglas Irving, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 457,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award, funded by the
Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials
Research, supports an integrated theoretical research, education, and outreach
effort seeking to develop a fundamental understanding of how and to what degree
atomistic and electronic compensation mechanisms compete to overcome diverging
electrostatic energies in polar-oriented oxide thin films and whether this
competition can be tuned to enable their low defect growth. It is proposed that
overcoming the barrier to low defect growth can be accomplished through the
active control of the chemical environment during epitaxy. First principles
based methods will be used to evaluate surface free energies, and to what degree
they reorder, as a function of chemical species, partial pressure, and
temperature of the growth environment. This provides critical information that
can be used by experiment to determine growth conditions that yield low defect
thin films. Identification of growth conditions that produce these low defect
thin films is a first step towards the ultimate goal of this proposal, which is
to discover new material combinations that support a two dimensional electron
gas between materials of different structure or symmetry. To this end, first
principles methods will also be used to predict functionality of the
heterogeneous interface. The goals of the theoretical research in this proposal,
which center on controlling the relative free energy of different surface
terminations, feed very well into the integrated educational outreach component.
Two modules will be developed that use intuitive hands on active demonstrations
to excite students and illustrate the subtle physical arguments of the effects
of re-ordering surface free energies. One module is experimental and the other
is computational in nature. For the experimental module, students will burn Mg
ribbons, harvest the MgO smoke crystals, submerge them in water, and image them
with a tabletop SEM. For the computational module students will interact in real
time with an atomic simulation via 3-D visualization and a force feedback haptic
device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award, funded by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the
Division of Materials Research, supports an integrated theoretical research,
education, and outreach effort with the ultimate goal of accelerating the
creation of next generation interfacial electronics by use of predictive
theoretical methods. Interfacial electronics are unique in that their
functionality is compressed down to layers of atoms. Their creation, however,
has been limited to materials that have similar atomic structure, which, in
part, has limited widespread use and integration. New functionality could be
expected as this type of active interface is created between interfaces of
dissimilar materials. For the most part, this has not been achievable due to the
inability to fabricate atomically perfect materials or materials with low defect
concentrations. It is proposed that these barriers can be overcome by changing
the gas phase chemistry used to deposit one material on another and that
predictive simulations can be used to determine what conditions should be
explored experimentally. This approach allows for the ability to focus on
materials and conditions that would be expected to be fruitful, saving both time
and money and, thus, accelerating the development of these new materials.
Ultimately, enabling low defect interfaces between structurally dissimilar
materials not only expands the catalogue of materials that can be used to create
novel devices but also endows new functionality that will impact the creation of
ultra-fast transistors, very high-density memory, and magnetic sensors. An
educational outreach program is strongly coupled to and feeds into the proposed
research. This program will have significant impact on education through the
development of the visual and active demonstration modules that will be targeted
to students in local high school, in local colleges, and to the general public.
These modules will not only excite participants about careers in STEM related
fields but will also pass along technological vocabulary, define the role of
engineers in solving real world problems, and help define Materials Science and
Engineering to the participants. Two experienced educators will aid in assessing
the outcomes and ensure meaningful impact of the modules to a wide range of
participants.