* 1151919
* CAREER: Analysis of G-equations in the modeling of turbulent flame speed and comparison with other math models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Yifeng Yu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 09/30/2018
* USD 400,003.00

This project aims to study analytically some key problems regarding the
G-equation (a noncoercive Hamilton-Jacobi equation), the strain G-equation (a
noncoercive and nonconvex Hamilton-Jacobi equation), and the curvature
G-equation (a mean-curvature- type equation) in the modeling of turbulent flame
speed. Roughly speaking, turbulent flame speed is the averaged flame propagation
speed under the effect of the flow (turbulence). The central goal of the project
is to understand the dependence of the turbulent flame speed on the turbulence
intensity. A particularly important problem is to figure out how the flow-
stretching effect contributes to the strong bending and quenching of flame
speeds. Another goal of the project is to compare turbulent flame speeds
predicted by various G-equations and other models in the mathematics literature,
such as the Majda-Souganidis model and the well-studied scalar reaction-
diffusion-advection equation model. Some proposed problems have significant
connections with the Aubry-Mather theory and weak KAM theory, which are
important for understanding nonintegrable dynamical systems. So far there are
very few rigorous analytical results on turbulent flame speeds in flows of more
than two dimensions. A long-term goal of this project is to understand how
chaotic structures in three-dimensional flows (e.g., the Arnold-Beltrami-
Childress flow) affect turbulent flame speeds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent
combustion plays the main role in important industrial issues such as energy
production and engine design. The so-called G-equation and its variants are
popular models in turbulent combustion due to their simplicity, efficiency, and
robustness in fitting experiments. All the research components of the project
are closely related to one of the most important unsolved problems in turbulent
combustion; namely, to predict the turbulent flame speed and, in particular, to
understand how it depends on the turbulence intensity (e.g., think of the
relation between the spreading velocity of a wild fire and the strength of the
wind). A very important part of the project is its educational component.
Besides supervision of graduate students, the principal investigator also plans
to participate in several well-established educational programs at UC-Irvine,
ranging from the K-12 to the undergraduate levels: California MathCounts, a
6-8th grade math competition; the Irvine Area Math Modelers (IAMM), which is a
training program that prepares local high school students for the National High
School Mathematical Contest in Modeling (HiMCM)); the SURF program, which is an
undergraduate summer research program; the Freshman Seminar Program, which
provides introductory lectures on research to undergraduate students at UC-
Irvine. The project will generate broad impact on combustion science and
engineering, with implications for clean energy, as well as further the
education of the next generation of STEM scientists.