* 1151140
* CAREER: Device Engineering for High-Performance Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Dawen Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2018
* USD 408,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to address some major issues of polymer solar cells related to the efficiency
and reliability, and enrich current understanding of the fundamental structure-
property relationships involved in polymer photovoltaics. The approach is to
engineer active layer morphology in both lateral and vertical directions using
polymer brush structure with incorporation of block
copolymer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: With controlled morphology
from nanodomain pre-patterning followed by polymer brush growth, a composite
bilayer structure will be built to facilitate both exciton dissociation and
charge transport. The polymer brushes in the down layer provide direct pathways
for hole transport, while the up donor-acceptor blend layer mediated by block
copolymer keeps the large interfacial area for efficient exciton dissociation
and harvesting. Moreover, the enhanced crystallinity and optimized vertical
composition profile facilitate charge transport and collection. The fundamental
structure-property relationships, such as how chain conformation and packing
from polymer brush and block copolymer affect efficiency and thermal stability,
will be systematically studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project presents synergistic integration of
interdisciplinary research and education. The outcome will impact society by
implementing multidisciplinary education and outreach programs. It will provide
graduate and undergraduate students with substantial multidisciplinary trainings
which are essential for success in their future careers. The outreach to
7th-12th grade minority students will be accomplished through the PI?s
participation in Alabama Black Belt program, in which the PI develops scientific
modules on nanotechnology and solar energy and provides trainings for teachers
from secondary schools in Alabama.