* 1151708
* CAREER: Small Molecule-Mediated Axonal Regeneration
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Dionicio Siegel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

With this CAREER Award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program Professor
Dionicio Siegel of the University of Texas at Austin will examine new ways to
promote axonal regeneration through the use of small molecules. With a set of
natural products and analogs that the PI's laboratory has synthesized and
demonstrated to possess growth promoting and regenerative activities, both in
vitro and in vivo, the molecular events leading to regeneration will be
investigated. Due to the challenges of determining the modes of action of small
molecules the researchers will use a variety of different methods for target
identification including covalent adduct formation (photo-affinity and
electrophilic baits) and drug affinity responsive target stability.  These
studies will be conducted in combination with APEX mass spectroscopy-based
quantitative proteomic analyses. The determination of the mode(s) of action will
provide insight into how to control axonal growth and development using small
molecules. A second project focused on axonal regeneration will develop
laboratory preparations of the natural products xanthofulvin and vinaxanthone.
 Both compounds strongly inhibit the inhibitor of axonal regeneration,
semaphorin3A.  Xanthofulvin has been studied in vivo in adult rats and leads to
remarkable regeneration following complete spinal cord transection. The lack of
a laboratory preparation, however, has limited studies to advance the
understanding of xanthofulvin's biological effects. The group will test a
proposed non-enzymatic dimerization sequence that generates the compounds during
fermentation or isolation. The completion of the syntheses will provide a
platform for future studies focused on optimizing the biological performance of
the compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Siegel's freshman research class
"Bioprospecting: Isolation of Biologically Active Natural Products from
Endophytes" exposes students to a unique combination of botany, ethnobotany,
mycology, pharmacology, and organic chemistry providing broad exposure to
multiple scientific areas.  In addition, the research is in line with the
research group's focus in regeneration and the extracts prepared through this
class are screened in the Siegel lab's C. elegans-based neuronal outgrowth
assays.  The class utilizes the unique capabilities of the research group,
existing collaborations, and the nature conservatory facilities at the Lady Bird
Johnson Wildflower Center. Designed by Dr. Siegel to encourage pursuit of
careers in the chemical sciences "Texas Shamans" is a program that offers Title
I high school students the rare opportunity to participate in genuine research.
Seeking to include those currently underrepresented in the sciences, Texas
Shamans is aimed specifically at students from low-income families, large
concentrations of which are the criterion for Title I designation.  The program
studying natural products in native Texas plants has been successfully
implemented in ten pilot workshops over the past three years and is being
expanded to encompass more Austin area schools and provide a conduit for the
placement of students into the research labs of University of Texas at Austin.