* 1151385
* CAREER: Control of Self-Assembly and Electrostatics with Photolabile Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Samuel Thomas, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2018
* USD 500,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current limitations in the preparation
and utilization of photoresponsive moieties have inhibited the development of
enabling technologies that use the advantages of light-responsive polymers in
new ways. The research objective of this award is to develop polymeric materials
that have new photoresponsive properties because of the inclusion of photolabile
groups, such as the o-nitrobenzylester (NBE) moiety. The central hypothesis of
this research is that rational design of polymers with photolabile groups will
enable photochemical control over the non-covalent intermolecular forces
governed by hydrophobicity and charge-charge interactions. This research will
focus on three classes of new light-responsive polymeric systems: 1) new block
copolymers designed to switch from hydrophobic to hydrophilic, 2) layer-by-layer
(LbL) polyelectrolyte films that switch interlayer electrostatic forces from
attractive to repulsive, and 3) surface-bound polymeric coatings that switch the
sign of the zeta potential. The proposed work is significant because it combines
polymer synthesis and photochemistry to control intermolecular forces, resulting
in new approaches to control matter with light. Expected outcomes of this
research include polymers that photo-assemble into and disassemble from
micelles, LbL films that are photopatternable in three dimensions, and coatings
that enable photochemical control over electroosmotic fluid flow and static
charging. These outcomes have potential applications in: 1) photochemically-
labile carriers for targeted delivery, 2) all-aqueous photolithography, 3)
photo-controlled microfluidic devices, and 4) photochemical control over the
static charging of insulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials that respond to light have major
technological importance, with applications ranging from human health (e.g.
imaging agents and photochemical delivery of therapeutic agents) to
microprocessor fabrication (e.g. high-resolution patterning of polymers in
photolithography). The proposed interdisciplinary research will develop polymers
that respond to light in new ways with both fundamental and applied
implications. The proposed work also integrates this research with education
through two new programs: 1) encouraging STEM careers by involving a local
community college in scientific research; 2) a high school science fair
mentoring program.