* 1151458
* CAREER: Water Quality and Climate Change Adaptation to Extreme Precipitation Events
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2020
* Javier Arce, University of Puerto Rico Cayey
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2020
* USD 435,454.00

Given the likelihood that climate change will result in changes to the
hydrologic cycle, it is important to understand how extreme precipitation events
may affect water systems. This project will analyze how biophysical and
socioeconomic elements of the landscape affect water quality and the
adaptability of water systems to extreme precipitation events, to understand
water resource sustainability under stress. Climate change scenarios suggest
more frequent extreme precipitation events and extended droughts, increasing the
effect of contaminants on streams and underground aquifers. These events may
also affect the resilience of social institutions and built structures that are
necessary for water quality management and water distribution. This research
will specifically address two central questions about changes in precipitation:
first, how the spatial distribution and composition of land cover and land use
in a watershed affects water quality when a region is exposed to extreme
precipitation events, and second, which aspects of water governance promote
sustainable, reliable sources of clean water in the region. The research will be
carried out in the La Plata Watershed in Puerto Rico, which has been exposed to
large precipitation extremes from multiple hurricanes and displays a diversity
of water management systems. By reconstructing the history of land cover change,
stream water quality, water governance, and extreme precipitation events in the
La Plata Watershed, this project will produce models that explain the primary
factors that affect water quality and sustainability. The field site is close to
the University of Puerto Rico in Cayey, which will allow the field research
methods and the knowledge obtained from this project to be integrated into an
undergraduate science curriculum. Implementing and assessing new student-
centered education course components based on this field research will lead to
new strategies to integrate research into education and bolster student
engagement in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will give new insights
into how changes in land cover, precipitation events and water management affect
water quality and sustainability. Understanding these processes is needed to
address the complex human-environmental dynamics that are characteristic of
climate change problems. By demonstrating which social and environmental factors
enhance water quality and sustainable access to potable water, these results may
impact water policies and help define better water resource management
strategies that can adapt to climate change. Planned community interactions will
create awareness about the collection of scientific data, local water quality
issues, and the impact of geography on clean, sustainable water. Finally, the
project will enhance science education by integrating field research experience
and training in spatial thinking into undergraduate courses at a minority
serving institution.