* 1151525
* From Messenger to Signal:  Hormones and the Rise of the Signal Concept in Life Sciences Research
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Hannah Landecker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 207,000.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;The notion of a signal plays a very important role in
contemporary biology. From cell signaling to environmental signals as external
determinants of gene expression, signals are conceptual cornerstones to models
of life. In the lab, they are experimentally manipulated and pharmaceutically
targeted objects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the
gene, the signal has received little attention in the science and technology
studies literature. This research project examines how signals came into life
science, with a focus on metabolic hormone biology after 1950. The book that
will eventually result from this research will elaborate the history of the
discoveries of hormonal mechanisms; it will, at the same time, serve as an
unprecedented theoretical resource for understanding where the biological notion
of a signal comes from and what shapes its uses today in biology and society.
Much is known about the history of the idea of DNA as information. The history
of the signal however, is an underexplored story of cybernetics and engineering
practices of control and communication on biology, a history that unfolds in the
realms of steroid biochemistry, metabolic regulation, insect chemical
communication, and work not at the cell?s nucleus but at its membranes. Related
scholarship has focused on pre-1950 endocrinology and sex hormones; by contrast,
this work will provide a compelling narrative of how hormones went molecular,
explaining how the very category of hormone begins to fray as it is subsumed
under the signal along with neurotransmitters, cytokines, and growth
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;As life
science turns increasingly toward fathoming protein-protein interactions, gene
regulation, and the regulatory role of the cellular and external environment,
this history becomes increasingly timely. Signals are constitutive to biological
life and thought, and have profound impact on society in terms of models of the
body and health, understandings of gene-environment interaction, and the
consequent biotechnical outcomes of intervening in signaling cascades. An
accessible history and theory of the signal will benefit readers in life
sciences, history, philosophy and sociology of science, and a broader educated
audience.