* 1151662
* CAREER: Volcano Acoustics: From Vent to Receiver
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Jeffrey Johnson, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2017
* USD 600,016.00

This CAREER proposal, co-funded by two Divisions in the Directorate of
Geosciences (Earth Sciences and Atmospheric and Geospatial Sciences), is
constructed around a plan for improving our knowledge of the source physics and
atmospheric propagation effects that take place during volcanic eruptions while
training students and international participants in these novel techniques. When
volcanoes erupt they impinge upon the atmosphere and produce high-amplitude
acoustic radiation. These volcano sounds are comprised of both high frequency
(i.e., audible) and sub-sonic energy (i.e., low frequency, or infrasonic)
components, which are directly relatable to the style and intensity of an
eruption. Volcano acoustics is thus an important tool for both remotely tracking
an eruption, which is vital to volcano monitoring endeavors, and for quantifying
material fluxes, which is fundamentally important for studies of eruption
dynamics. Moreover, because low frequency volcano sounds are often exceptionally
intense they are generally detectable at distances ranging from tens to
thousands of kilometers from the volcano. This allows for implementation of
acoustic remote sensing networks for continuous surveillance of restless
volcanoes and to probe the intervening atmosphere to track changeable winds and
temperatures, which influence sound propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward the
improved understanding of eruption source physics and atmospheric propagation
effects, PI Jeffrey Johnson and colleagues, along with a team of graduate
students, will investigate volcano acoustic sources and the evolution of these
signals as they are transmitted through the atmosphere. During proposed field
work the research team will utilize dense networks of specialized broadband
microphones to record the intense (and often continuous) acoustic signals
produced by a spectrum of active volcanoes in Latin America. Together with
conjoint optical, multi-spectral, and meteorological observations they will
develop and test models of sound generation and atmospheric sound transmission.
Acoustic source physics and propagation modeling have vital impacts for the
burgeoning fields of atmospheric infrasound studies, which encompass disciplines
as varied as nuclear test ban monitoring, explosion physics, urban noise
pollution, microbarom climatology, atmospheric tomography, and geophysical
investigation of phenomena such as thunder, bolides, and earthquakes. Broader
impacts of the proposed volcano dynamical studies are also expected to lead to
development of improved surveillance techniques for monitoring hazardous
volcanoes, which can ultimately lead to better forecasting and mitigation of
volcanic hazards. The international nature of this work will foster
collaboration between scientists in the U.S., Mexico, Guatemala, Ecuador, and
Chile.