* 1151450
* CAREER:   Theory, Techniques and Simulations of RF Impedance Probes for Plasma Characterization
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2013,12/31/2020
* Edmund Spencer, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 12/31/2020
* USD 401,459.00

This research will be the first effort to use Radio Frequency Impedance Probes
to measure and characterize a wide range of ambient plasma environments. The
potential to use RF impedance probe techniques for measuring plasma parameters,
such as temperatures and collision frequencies, has not yet been demonstrated
due to lack of a sufficiently rigorous scientific model of the probe plasma
interaction. Nonlinear properties of the probe plasma interaction are poorly
understood and these properties have not been exploited. The first component of
this research is to develop novel RF Impedance Probe techniques to obtain the
probe-plasma frequency response in space plasmas. Graduate and undergraduate
students will use the Universal Software Radio (USRP) hardware architecture
together with open source software as a platform for the instrument related
research. The second component of the project is the development of a
theoretical and computational tool called RFPIC-PROBE that accurately simulates
the interaction of the RF Impedance Probe with the surrounding plasma
environment in order to analyze the frequency response data. The design of
electronic circuits for space based measurements of plasma properties requires
creative techniques to compensate for the quickly changing ambient plasma
environment and to mitigate the effects of plasma interaction with a spacecraft.
The research also develops mathematical and computational techniques to account
for the gradual transition from collisional to fully collisionless interactions
in ionospheric plasmas. The applications of this research range from space
plasma diagnostics to laboratory plasma measurements and control of industrial
plasma processes. The RF Impedance probe will provide a powerful means to
measuring the properties of these plasmas. The RFPIC-PROBE software will be made
available in the public domain under General Public License for use by
researchers in different areas of plasma diagnostics. Graduate and undergraduate
students will use readily available open source game engines to develop a real
time space exploration strategy game where players choose instruments for
missions to explore and probe the environments of different planets. As part of
outreach, a workshop session will be introduced through the Alabama Science in
Motion program to allow high school students and teachers to try out computer
experiments to measure the properties of a hypothetical plasma medium. All
results and data from this research project will be hosted on the world wide
web, and made freely available for public or industrial use and collaboration.