* 1151762
* CAREER: The Nature of SRB Measures for Nonequilibrium Hyperbolic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Hong-Kun Zhang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 400,001.00

The theory of equilibrium hyperbolic dynamical systems has been developed to the
point where it now provides powerful mathematical tools to address open problems
in physics. The principal investigator will focus on understanding the nature of
Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen (SRB) measures and the statistics of relevant observations
for nonequilibrium phenomena, using innovative approaches related to the study
of chaotic systems. While sophisticated techniques have been developed and
beautiful results obtained for equilibrium systems, the research topics of
random and chaotic behavior in nonequilibrium systems have remained wide open.
The reason for this is that chaotic phenomena in these settings have quite a
different flavor from those in the equilibrium context. Recently developed
mathematical tools in hyperbolic systems offer hope for significant progress.
This project seeks to obtain both a theoretical understanding of and new ways to
connect mathematical ideas to a variety of complex phenomena by addressing two
challenging issues through the use of spectral analysis, the coupling method,
and other innovative approaches. The first concerns statistical properties of
nonequilibrium hyperbolic systems (e.g.,to prove the existence of SRB measures
that characterize the steady states; to study the time correlation functions
that relate to the diffusion matrix in the transport processes; to verify other
limiting theorems for perturbed hyperbolic systems). Specific models include
Lorentz gases under general forces, an ideal gas with slow-moving scatterers,
and random systems with microstructure. The second issue has to do with
properties of SRB measures and related physical laws (e.g., to understand the
nature of SRB measures, including their entropy and Hausdorff dimensions; to
obtain Ohm's law, the Einstein relation, and other physical laws for certain
nonequilibrium hyperbolic systems that arise in physics).

This project will use mathematical tools to address applied problems in physics,
chemical engineering, and other sciences. The theory of hyperbolic systems has
provided excellent models or paradigms for understanding chaos and diffusion
processes in systems that are random or changing over time. The goal is to
capture the major complexity of these systems, from integrability to chaotic
behavior, without the difficulty of integrating the equations of motion. As the
study of physical invariant measures and their asymptotic statistical properties
provides new insight into the nature of steady states and transport phenomena,
the project will contribute to modern statistical physics and chemical
engineering. Thus, it will have a broad impact outside of mathematics in the
physical sciences and within the broader scientific community. The principal
investigator plans to motivate and excite students about research on chaotic
systems by directing graduate student research, by incorporating research-
related concepts and simulations of nonequilibrium systems into new
undergraduate courses, thereby enhancing research experiences for undergraduates
(REUs), and by carrying out K-12 outreach activities. The research will be
integrated into both graduate and undergraduate research projects, as well as
into curriculum development. The principal investigator will seek institutional
approval for a new topics course for graduate students on stochastic
differential equations and a new undergraduate course that will focus on topics
related to chaos and fractals. She will initiate a Guest Lecture Series at the
Amherst Regional High School on topics related to chaos and fractal geometry, in
order to engage local high school students in this interdisciplinary, cutting-
edge research. She will also organize annual workshops for high school girls
that will include hands-on scientific activities and career discussions with
individual pursuing careers in the mathematical sciences, academic or otherwise.
The project will broaden participation of women and underrepresented minorities
and help them to visualize the beauty of mathematics.