* 1151618
* CAREER: Nonlinear phenomena in evolution PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Svetlana Roudenko, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2019
* USD 472,875.00

Many descriptions of real-life processes lead to the formulation of equations
whose solutions change over time. For example, wave- or dispersive-type
equations display this kind of behavior. These evolution equations provide the
possibility of constructing solutions from prescribed initial conditions. In
some evolution processes, a prescribed restriction (or boundedness) over time is
given and the question is then whether the boundedness property persists forever
or whether some sort of "unboundedness" can arise (e.g., a freak wave suddenly
appearing in the ocean or a self-focusing burn in laser optics). These evolution
processes are fundamental in nature, yet we are still in the infancy of their
full analytical description. This project seeks to shed new light on the global
behavior of solutions to nonlinear evolution partial differential equations
(PDE), in particular, of dispersive PDE for which the nonlinearities cause a
significant difference in global behavior compared with linear evolution. A
special emphasis will be placed on the study of singularity formation, such as
collapse and blow-up. The principal investigator's research program starts from
advancing the theory of collapse for the simplest models in nonlinear wave
equations, proceeds by expanding this theory to more generalized models and
equations, and then goes on to explore the dynamics of solutions for simple
dispersive systems, which have hitherto been studied little but which describe
important models in the physical world. The ultimate goal of the research is to
develop singularity theory for dispersive systems like the Davey-Stewartson
system. These equations arise in physical contexts such as the description of
water waves or acoustic waves, and in various fields such as laser optics and
fluid and air dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the
frontiers in the theory of nonlinear evolution equations, in particular,
improving our understanding of collapse phenomena. It will produce a rigorous
analytical description of concentration and aggregation for physical
applications in real life. This work will be enhanced by collaborations at the
national and international levels and will help strengthen interinstitutional
ties, for example, between the George Washington University (GWU) and Howard
University. In addition, the project will provide mathematical training and
educational experiences at all mentoring levels, reinforcing future US
competitiveness. It will focus on attracting, training, and retaining in
mathematics and science outstanding female students and students from
underrepresented groups. Vertical integration of educational activities, from
middle school to the graduate level and beyond, will help to reinforce the
project's agenda and contribute to the recruitment and retention of skillful
workforce in the STEM fields. These activities will occur at the middle school
level through the DC Math Circle program; at the high school level through the
GWU summer precollege program (which annually recruits over two hundred students
nationally); at the undergraduate level by engaging the principal investigator
in the supervision of senior research theses and her serving as a mentor and
guest lecturer at the GWU "Summer Program for Women in Math" ; and, finally, at
the graduate level by organizing the DC Grad Camp, with the emphasis on
attracting female and underrepresented minority students.