* 1151305
* EAGER: A General Ethical Dilemma Analyzer
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,05/31/2015
* Michael Anderson, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2015
* USD 76,243.00

Systems that are capable of producing change in the environment require
particular attention to the ethical ramifications of their behavior. The
determination and mitigation of the ethical concerns of such systems has to date
been charged to their designers and has largely been accomplished by simply
preventing systems from engaging in ethically unacceptable behavior in a
predetermined, ad hoc manner, which can unnecessarily constrain the set of
possible behaviors. Although this may have been considered "best practice" in
the past, the coupling of computational intelligence to such systems is likely
to provide better options. This is especially true of autonomous systems, which
not only produce change in the environment but are capable of monitoring this
environment to determine the effect of their actions as well as what the next
action should be. Ethical questions concerning the behavior of such complex and
dynamic systems are likely to exceed the grasp of their designers and elude
simple static solutions. Autonomous systems will therefore need tools and
methodologies to help codify ethical principles pertinent to their behavior,
principles which form the basis for the autonomous selection and justification
of ethically preferable actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the PI
and his team will develop and implement a general methodology for the discovery
of ethical principles, abstracted from their previous work, which incrementally
constructs representations that characterize ethical dilemmas and discovers
decision principles necessary to resolve them. They will use this system to
codify representation schemes and principles of ethical decision-making in
domains that are of particular significance to autonomous systems in their
interaction with human beings. And they will evaluate the discovered
representations and principles through independent consultation. The PI expects
project outcomes will provide evidence that ethical principles and decision-
making can be computed and function effectively in domains where machines are
likely to interact with human beings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will lay the foundations for providing autonomous systems across
multiple domains with the principles required to choose the most ethically
correct actions and justify these choices. Thus, the work should alleviate
concerns with autonomous systems and bolster society's support for their
development in a wide range of domains. An important by-product of the research
is that breakthroughs in ethical theory are likely to result as representations
and principles for resolving ethical dilemmas are discovered.