* 1151805
* Body Movement and Action Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2020
* Ayse Saygin, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2020
* USD 587,350.00

Understanding the movements of others is critical for a wide range of functions
such as detecting prey and predators, inferring the goals and intentions of
others, and engendering emotional responses, such as feeling compassion and
empathy toward others. The investigators will use a range of complementary
methods to understand how the human brain detects and interprets the body
language of others. For example, body movements can be characterized by very
minimalist visual representations, consisting of a dozen points of light
attached to the joints on the body seen in darkness (a method used in many
motion capture systems). In addition, the investigators will use high-resolution
videos to link the work to the field of social cognition by determining how
processing is affected when the movements are produced by an artificial agent
like a robot, rather than by a human. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
perceptual and neural basis for body movement processing is essential to an
account of how humans negotiate objects and events in the world and can inform
fields as wide-ranging as cognitive science, neuroscience, robotics, brain-
computer interfaces, social cognition, technology design, visual arts, and
computer vision. In addition, social artificial agents such as humanoid robots
and virtual animated characters are becoming increasingly common in a range of
domains such as education, defense, healthcare and entertainment. This research
can help guide the design of these interactive technologies. The investigators
also aim to further science and education through recruitment and retention of
young people, especially minorities underrepresented in science. Since early
engagement is critical for this goal, the focus will be on the development of
hands-on research and computation skills for high school and undergraduate
students.