* 1151838
* CAREER: Internal Waves, Turbulence and Diapycnal Mixing in Oceanic Flows
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2019
* Subhas Venayagamoorthy, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 557,151.00

The oceanic internal wave field is widely accepted to be one of the most
dominant sources of energy for the sustenance of small-scale ocean turbulence.
The advancement of the current state of knowledge on internal waves, turbulence
and diapycnal (cross-isopycnal) mixing in oceanic flows is critical for the
accurate parameterization of the processes that control the dynamics of these
flows. A key example concerns the parameterization of mixing processes in ocean
general circulation models, where long term predictions are highly sensitive to
mixing parameterizations that can result in uncertain predictions of the ocean's
role in climate change. A key related question is how should the small-scale
mixing effects be incorporated into models of mixing and dispersion in stably
stratified turbulence? These are fundamental research questions that the
oceanographic community need to address in order to enhance the predictive
capability of large scale circulation models.

The subject of this CAREER project is on dissipation of internal waves linked
closely to turbulence and diapycnal mixing. The primary theme and vision of this
proposal is to improve understanding and modeling of geophysical flows that will
lead to new generalized formulations for turbulent fluxes of momentum and
scalars. A holistic approach that integrates basic and applied multi-
disciplinary research with a strong educational program is proposed. In
particular, the key research objectives of this CAREER project are to obtain new
fundamental insights into the details of the turbulent mixing processes in
geophysical stratified flows that will translate into simple effective
parameterizations for use in large scale numerical models and to bridge the gap
between parameterizations/models for turbulent mixing to be developed (and
already developed) by the PI from fundamental numerical simulations and
laboratory experiments to geophysical scale models by addressing up-scaling
issues via novel model-data comparisons. To this end, high-resolution direct
numerical simulations (DNS) and large-eddy simulations (LES) coupled with
particle tracking of forced stably stratified turbulence and internal wave
induced turbulence in Knight Inlet sill will be performed in order to gain
insight into small-scale processes and develop/extend models for mixing. Second,
model-data comparisons will be performed using relevant turbulence and wave
measurements in the ocean that will be available through collaborations forged
with field scale oceanographers. A third aspect of this research is to formulate
turbulence closure schemes for use in Reynold-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS)
models.

The intellectual merit of this proposal is based on the generation of new
knowledge and concepts for describing mixing and dispersion in stratified
geophysical flows. State of the art turbulence simulations coupled with particle
tracking will be used to build on the principal investigator's prior innovative
steps to identify new ways for elucidating mixing mechanisms using a combination
of Eulerian and Lagrangian analysis of fluid motion. In particular, new
turbulence diagnostic tools for the separation and quantification of
irreversible momentum and scalar fluxes associated with the energetics of these
flows will be developed. The proposed work will seek to formulate a seamless
approach to parameterize the intermingled dynamics resulting from the co-
existence of internal waves and turbulence in stratified geophysical flows. The
insights gained from this study will significantly improve our understanding of
the key dynamical features of stably stratified flows which are ubiquitous in
the ocean. The insights gained in concert with theoretical ideas will form the
basis to develop better parameterizations for mixing that will be tested in non-
homogeneous turbulent flows in large-scale water column models. Another novel
aspect of the research methodology proposed is the use of "real world" field-
scale case studies via model-data comparisons to test and provide feedback on
the efficacy of mixing models thus allowing for ongoing refinement of the
models.

The broader impacts of this research come from the broad applicability of
improved mixing parameterizations in oceanography, atmospheric science and
engineering, especially concerning climate change, environmental sustainability,
renewable energy and national security. Broader impact also comes from the
strong integrated educational and outreach program. The principal investigator
will establish an environmental fluid dynamics program at Colorado State
University (CSU) with an emphasis on empowering students with skill sets
required to solve complex geophysics and engineering related problems in multi-
disciplinary settings. Research and education are integrated through two new
graduate courses in environmental fluid mechanics. The principal investigator
will recruit and train underrepresented minority and female students in the
field of environmental fluid mechanics. This project will support the training
of two PhD students (at least one of whom will be a female student). Outreach
efforts include the principal investigator's involvement in summer
camps/programs coordinated by the Women and Minorities in Engineering Program
(WMEP) at CSU as well as through outreach to a local high school. The results of
this project will be widely disseminated through premier international journal
articles in physical oceanography and fluid mechanics as well as through
seminars and presentations at scientific conferences and a dedicated website.