* 1151079
* CAREER: Ultrafast Dynamics of Interfacial Water
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Poul Petersen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2017
* USD 712,080.00

In this CAREER project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Poul Petersen of Cornell
University will examine the ultrafast dynamics of interfacial water with new
advanced nonlinear optical spectroscopic methods. A wealth of phenomena
encompassing reactions in the atmosphere, biological processes, and proton
transfer in fuel cells take place on/at wet hydrated surfaces. While it is
increasingly recognized that water is not a passive solvent but plays an
integral role in such processes, we do not have a good understanding of either
the structure or the dynamics of interfacial water and how these are influenced
by the chemical nature of the surface. This research program aims to attain such
an understanding by directly measuring the ultrafast dynamics of interfacial
water. This goal will be reached by developing coherent surface-specific two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy. This technique is able to directly measure
the couplings and dynamics of the OH stretching vibration of interfacial water
molecules, which are a sensitive measure of the hydrogen-bonding dynamics. Using
a scaffold of self-assembled monolayers, the chemical nature of the interface
will be tuned to obtain the structure-function relationship between the surface
properties and the interfacial water dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result
of this research program will impact a diverse set of areas involving chemical
processes at wet surfaces. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in
the research will be trained in both highly technical optical instrumentation
and chemical functionalization of surfaces. Given the majority of female
students in the research group, this research program will, in addition,
contribute to train and retain female scientists. The hands-on outreach
component of this program will target middle and high school students and
teachers. Drawing on the optical expertise of the PI, a microscopy/optics module
will be developed to engage and excite students and teachers about using light
to examine the world around us.