* 1151905
* CAREER: Biological Mechanisms Underlying Individual Differences in Elevation and Altruism
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Sarina Saturn, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* kerry marsh
* 09/30/2015
* USD 190,192.00

This CAREER grant explores the basic biological phenomena that underlie displays
of the psychological states of elevation and altruism. Elevation refers to the
emotional response experienced after witnessing acts of great virtue or moral
beauty. When people witness these acts, they too can be uplifted and inspired to
improve their own character and perform altruistic acts. The research is
particularly novel in that it incorporates a multi-method and cross-sectional
approach by including measurements of elevation, altruistic behavior, oxytocin
secretion, autonomic regulation of the heart, and genetic and epigenetic
profiles of the oxytocin receptor. The investigator will investigate how
elevation and altruism are mediated by individual differences in the
neuropeptide system of oxytocin. The 5-year CAREER project focuses on
understanding how naturally-occurring variations in oxytocin influence the
experience and expression of elevation and altruism in young children, young
adults, and older adults. The series of experiments will reveal the biological
processes underlying the brain-body coordination of elevation and subsequent
altruism as well as how these profiles compare and contrast across the lifespan.

The research project enhances the investigator's educational goals including
teaching and encouraging scientific inquiry and prosocial behavior in community
groups ranging from children to the elderly. An integral component of this plan
involves the formation of a partnership with the College Assistance Migrant
Program (CAMP) and the Cross-Cultural Mentorship Program at the Oregon State
University (OSU) in order to introduce underrepresented and first-generation
college students to a variety of scientific research opportunities on campus.
Another educational endeavor includes the investigator's involvement in the NSF-
funded Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship (IGERT) program,
which is designed to facilitate and encourage diversity in students who wish to
pursue a career in health psychology research on the topic of healthy aging.