* 1151790
* Finite-amplitude Eddy-mean Flow Interaction in the Extratropical Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Noboru Nakamura, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2016
* USD 567,828.00

The mutual interaction between eddies (such as those associated with midlatitude
weather systems) and the mean flow (midlatitude jet streams, in particular) is a
longstanding topic in atmospheric general circulation. It is clear that jet
streams and eddies interact strongly, but traditional theories to account for
their interaction are limited because, for mathematical reasons, they assume
that the eddies are small-amplitude perturbations of the mean flow. The
Principal Investigator (PI) has developed a theory of eddy-mean flow interaction
which works for large-amplitude eddies, and work conducted under the award seeks
to explore the implications of this new theory. The new theory will be applied
to 1) evaluate nonconservative driving of the climate state (radiative forcing,
friction, mixing, etc.) by carefully documenting and analyzing the slowly
varying reference state; 2) quantify the stabilizing effects of baroclinic
eddies ("baroclinic adjustment") by comparing the linear stability of the
observed zonal-mean time-mean state and that of an eddy-free reference state
derived from the theory; 3) characterize annular mode variability as co-
variation of the zonal-mean zonal-wind and wave activity density, and in turn
associate it with the variation in the zonal phase speed and energy of the
eddies; 4) generalize the criterion for the onset of Rossby wave breaking and
testing this theoretical prediction with numerical simulation and meteorological
reanalysis; and 5) further generalize the wave breaking criterion for zonally
varying mean flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this activity
are that the eddy-mean flow theory and the diagonstic tools derived from it can
be applied to a wide class of flows, including the stratosphere, troposphere,
and the oceans. In addition, the project will support and train two graduate
students, thereby developing the scientific workforce in this area. Results of
the research will also be incorporated into demonstrations performed by the PI
in his fluid dynamics laboratory, for audiences at the graduate, undergraduate,
and high school levels.