* 1151035
* CAREER: Photoregulated Gene Expression for Spatiotemporal Control of Morphogenesis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Charles Gersbach, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2017
* USD 442,019.00

CBET 1151035/ Gersbach&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering program supports the
development of a new technology for controlling the expression of genes in
mammalian cells with light. Systems for controlling the expression of genes in
mammalian cells have diverse applications in medicine, biopharmaceutical
production, biotechnology, and basic science. However, current systems for gene
regulation are not able to effectively control the spatial organization of gene
expression within a population of cells or tissue. The positional control of
gene expression is critical to many processes such as the engineering of complex
tissues made of multiple cell types. Additionally, current systems only control
genes that have been artificially added to cells, rather than controlling genes
in their natural chromosomal context. To address these limitations, light-
sensitive proteins from plants will be reengineered so that they control
specific target genes in mammalian cells. The ability of these engineered
proteins to control gene expression and catalyze specific changes to the genome
sequence in response to light will be assessed in human cells. Patterns of light
exposure will be used to engineer architecturally complex tissues in which the
spatial organization of tissue development can be arbitrarily programmed. This
work will develop new tools for engineers and scientists to design and study
cellular systems with enhanced precision for applications in tissue engineering
and studies of tissue development and cell-cell interactions. The theme of this
research project will also be transformed into educational programs that foster
enthusiasm and creativity in engineering and science education and are
vertically integrated across elementary, middle and high school, undergraduate,
and graduate levels. The program will be implemented in collaboration with the
National Academy of Engineering Grand Challenges K12 Partners Program. This
program will also be complemented by research education experiences in the PI's
laboratory by high school and undergraduate students, curriculum development at
the undergraduate and graduate level, and the inclusion of underrepresented
groups across all levels of research and education.