* 1151991
* Fractal NanoArchitectures: Design, Assembly and Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,07/31/2016
* George Newkome, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2016
* USD 401,764.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division supports Prof. George R. Newkome of The University of Akron to
investigate fractal nano- and macroscale molecules (self-similar components at
differing size scales) based on multicomponent, supramolecular, directed and
self-assembly protocols that rely on terpyridine-metal-terpyridine building
block connectivity. The ability to incorporate site-specific, multiple metal
centers into a predesigned molecular array or network affords a method to fine-
tune the desired physical and chemical properties of the molecular fractals. The
potential to introduce and exchange differing metals within the fractal
framework, either during or after construction, will facilitate the study of
precisely designed multimetal ensembles that have ramifications in molecular
electronics, self-repairing frameworks, and antenna incorporation at the
nanoscopic level. Precise pattern-based molecular structures are also
envisioned. Use of these charged, polymetal lattices for composite fiber
formation, based on alternating charged species will be investigated with
increasingly higher generation fractal-based materials. Physical properties and
uses envisioned involve energy storage and release, molecular electronic
devices, data storage, solar cell nanocomponents, sensor and optical display
capabilities, molecular antennas, and metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
materials comprised of repeating similar shapes of differing sizes (termed
"fractal") held together by metal glue-like interactions will be assembled,
based on their components interactions, such as their potential to fit, pack,
and associate in an orderly manner. This will lead to new types of
macromolecules for use in electronic devices and components, such as with
batteries for energy storage, switches in electric circuits, and antennas in
miniature communication devices. Educational opportunities arise from the
training and development of students and scientists at all academic levels.
Educational outreach is promoted through regular presentations at regional,
national and international public and private schools, universities, and
conferences. Industrial and international collaborations continue to enhance
this research through personnel and information exchange.