* 1151294
* CAREER: Advancing the Mechanistic Understanding of Field-Scale Preferential Flow and Transport Processes in Soils using Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Stephen Moysey, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 04/30/2018
* USD 413,291.00

CAREER: ADVANCING THE MECHANISTIC UNDERSTANDING OF FIELD-SCALE PREFERENTIAL FLOW
AND TRANSPORT PROCESSES IN SOILS USING GEOPHYSICS Stephen Moysey Clemson
University

Preferential flow and transport processes cause water and contaminants to be
isolated within distinct flow paths that can by-pass a large portion of a soil.
Despite the universal occurrence of this phenomenon and its fundamental control
on water and solute movement in the subsurface, there are few tools available to
investigate the mechanisms leading to preferential flow at the field scale. As a
result, there is a gap in knowledge regarding how interactions between different
mechanisms causing preferential flow can alter observed flow behaviors,
particularly as soil and rainfall conditions undergo seasonal changes throughout
the year. This project will address the knowledge gap by testing the hypotheses
that: (1) mechanisms controlling preferential flow and transport shift
throughout the year due to seasonal dependence on antecedent water content and
hydrologic forcing, and (2) ground penetrating radar (GPR) and electrical
resistivity data can be used to detect preferential flow behaviors and
discriminate the mechanistic causes of these observations. This research will be
carried out by performing transient infiltration and steady-state tracer tests
in two large (>32m3 volume) hydrogeophysical grid lysimeters under different
water content and rainfall characteristics. The bottom face of each lysimeter is
designed to collect distributed discharge of water and solutes from a grid of 1m
x 1m outflow cells. One of the lysimeters will be constructed in the lab and
filled with synthetic soil heterogeneities representative of conditions causing
preferential flow. The design of this lysimeter will allow for evaluation of
active preferential flow mechanisms based on patterns of the outflows. The
second lysimeter will be located on a hillslope in the Clemson Experimental
Forest. This lysimeter will represent natural soil conditions and capture
seasonal effects of changing antecedent water content and variable rainfall
characteristics. In each experiment, the lysimeters will be continuously
monitored using time-lapse 3D GPR surveys and electrical resistivity
measurements. The hydrologic and geophysical data from the lysimeter experiments
will be analyzed using data reduction techniques that allow for quantitative
comparison of the results for each set of control variables. As a result, the
project will provide unique, quantitative insights into how the details of
transient preferential flow and transport processes evolve in response to
changing environmental conditions.

Understanding preferential flow processes is of fundamental importance to
society as it affects many critical issues in watersheds, including flooding,
contaminant fate and transport, agriculture, infrastructure stability, and
ecosystem health. For example, the contribution of preferential flow processes
to ecosystem services to be worth is estimated to be over US$304 billion per
year. The integration of novel geophysical imaging techniques with infiltration
and transport studies will provide unique insights into the dynamics of
preferential flow at the field scale ? including an improved understanding of
seasonal controls on these processes. There is an urgent need for understanding
these basic processes to enable prediction and informed adaptation to shifts in
watershed behavior as climate change causes perturbations in traditional soil
behaviors. The high-resolution data obtained in this study will allow for
testing and refinement of existing conceptual models for representing
preferential flow in soils under varying hydrologic conditions. The educational
aspects of this project will help to introduce and prepare a new generation of
hydrologists ? spanning middle school girls to working professionals ? to
extract information from an increasingly overwhelming mass of available data
that ranges from hydrologic repositories to high-resolution geophysical images.
Specific educational activities include the involvement of undergraduate
students in the project through the Creative Inquiry pedagogy at Clemson, a
hands-on educational module on water resources to be delivered to eighth grade
girls through Clemson?s Project WISE summer camp, and an annual continuing
education workshop for professionals to increase the awareness and understanding
of geophysical applications in hydrology. In all three of these activities,
there will be an emphasis on using a new generation of methods for sensing the
environment and mining of large data sets to advance our fundamental
understanding of hydrologic processes at real field sites.