* 1151028
* CAREER: Radiation Interaction with Nanostructured Ceramics - Integrating Materials Research Into Nuclear Education
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Jie Lian, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Radiation-tolerant materials can extend the lifetime
of components, and may be very valuable in the design and operation of safer,
more reliable nuclear systems - where controlling radiation is a top priority.
The atomic-level understanding of radiation interaction is critical for
developing advanced materials that can withstand intensive radiation for both
current and future nuclear technologies. This CAREER project targets the
fundamental understanding of the behavior of nanostructured ceramics under
extreme radiation environments. This fundamental knowledge may enable new
science for nanoscale materials design that extends the performance of materials
with excellent radiation tolerance. The research effort is complemented by an
integrated education component which will impact the scientific community by
bridging advanced materials and nanotechnology with nuclear education and
training of young scientists in the critical area of controlling radiation.
Special efforts will be made to involve underrepresented groups of high-school
students and teachers through collaborations with local communities (Half Hollow
Hills school district, NY) and academic outreach programs (including
Summer@Rensselaer). This approach will help promote the general public's
understanding of nuclear radiation (both the challenges and materials
solutions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This CAREER project aims to
elucidate atomistic mechanisms of radiation interaction and defect behaviors in
order to understand the damage mechanisms and structural evolution of
nanostructured ceramics and how different length scales affect materials
radiation performance. This research builds on a synergetic effort of
synthesizing nanostructured ceramics, energetic beam irradiation and the
combination of state-of-the-art approaches (including advanced transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) and ion beam techniques) in characterizing materials
structural evolution and defect behaviors. High-temperature oxide melt solution
calorimetry is being performed on nanostructured ceramics in order to correlate
the thermodynamic understanding with radiation stability. The atomistic
mechanisms of radiation interaction with nanostructured ceramics alongside
multi-scale computational simulations based on DFT, classical molecular dynamic
(MD) and kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) are being used to determine how nanostructure
evolves upon radiation. Based on an improved fundamental understanding, new
science is evolving to develop advanced materials with enhanced radiation
tolerance for effective radiation control through nanoscale materials design.