* 1151109
* CAREER:  Influence of Grain Boundary Character on the Crack Tip Kinetics of Nickel and Nickel Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Evans, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 05/31/2015
* USD 292,679.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The need for increased thermal efficiency, which provides a
reduction in energy consumption, is driving the use of materials with higher
temperature capabilities for a variety of applications such as land-based power
systems and aircraft engines. These materials are subjected to environmental and
thermomechanical extremes for sustained periods during normal operation. The
operating conditions are in a regime where several time-dependent damage
mechanisms, such as creep deformation, oxygen diffusion, and crack tip
oxidation, can operate during cyclic loading and during the dwell period.
Therefore, the fundamental mechanisms governing time-dependent damage and
degradation must be well understood. During elevated temperature creep-fatigue
loading, polycrystalline Ni-base superalloys have exhibited intergranular
failure due to oxygen embrittlement. Controlling the grain boundary character
distribution (GBCD) has been shown to influence the crack growth rate, but the
actual effect on the crack tip kinetics is not well understood. The primary goal
of this research endeavor is to assess the influence of the grain boundary
character distribution on the crack tip kinetics (i.e. the rates of creep
deformation, crack extension, and oxygen diffusion along grain boundaries) of
nickel and nickel alloys during elevated temperature creep-fatigue cycling. The
crack tip kinetics govern the crack growth rate, so if the kinetics can be
quantitatively described as a function of temperature, hold time, and GBCD, then
those aspects can be incorporated into a life prediction
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The objective of this project
is to determine the effect of different amounts of cold working on the elevated
temperature fatigue crack growth behavior of nickel and nickel-base superalloys
and provide an outreach program that will reach multiple schools and grade
levels through an interactive inquiry-based approach. Nickel is the major
alloying element in some of the most advanced alloys, which are used in
demanding applications, such as land-based power systems, aircraft engines, and
chemical processing equipment, and these components require long-term mechanical
property retention when exposed to elevated temperature and cyclic loads.
Understanding the fatigue behavior during elevated temperature operating
conditions is critical to predicting a component?s long-term performance. The
research proposed in this project will be integrated with educational activities
in a number of ways and for a large range of educational levels, from K-12 to
graduate student training. The central component of the K-12 educational
outreach will be a program the PI is developing called Metal Madness. The Metal
Madness program will be presented in middle school classrooms and will have age-
appropriate basic curriculum in what metals are and how they behave. The initial
target audience for this program will be the middle schools in the north Alabama
region whose student population is predominantly composed of underrepresented
groups. The outcomes of this project will increase the understanding of
elevated-temperature fatigue while educating graduate and undergraduate
students, teachers, high school and middle school students. The outcomes are
also expected to improve public safety and well-being through better predictive
capabilities for energy producing components, such as aircraft engines and land-
based power generation systems.