* 1151234
* SBIR Phase II:  Design And Production Of IgG Fc Carrier Scaffolds With Increased Payload Capacity
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,05/31/2016
* David Rabuka, Redwood Bioscience Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2016
* USD 961,368.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) II project outlines in vivo
testing of semi-synthetic therapeutic protein conjugates. Low molecular weight
peptide drugs have had limited therapeutic utility due to rapid clearance and,
consequently must be injected very frequently. These drugs could be conjugated
to a carrier protein. Attachment to large biomolecules, such as carrier
proteins, improves the half-life profile of these peptides. Historically, many
of these carrier proteins are recombinant genetic fusions with the peptide of
interest. With fusion, the carrier?s attachment to the peptide is limited to one
site, the end terminus, and that limited placement can impact drug function and
thus potency. As an alternative, chemical modification to carrier proteins with
small molecule drugs can also render the drug more potent and longer lasting.
The scientists at Redwood Bioscience have developed a technology platform that
can universally modify proteins in a controlled, site-specific manner. They have
generated carrier protein scaffolds, modified recombinant Fc domains that are
homogeneous and easy to chemically elaborate with therapeutic peptides.
Furthermore, optimized peptide conjugation to the Fc proteins improves conjugate
activity in vitro. This technology is to be further validated through an initial
in vivo analysis.

The broader impacts of this research are the development of best in class
therapeutics and the generation of a robust protein modification platform. This
work will change the utility of protein therapeutics by enabling optimization of
therapeutic peptides that otherwise would not be useful as treatment for
disease.