* 1151002
* EAGER: Lectin Nano-Stamping: Nano-Structured Surfaces from Multimeric Protein Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2011,02/28/2015
* Laura Kiessling, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 02/28/2015
* USD 216,231.00

In this EAGER project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Laura L. Kiessling of the
University of Wisconsin will study how to exploit the defined orientation of
oligomeric proteins by using them as stamps to pattern polymerizable lipid
bilayer surfaces. The approach is to assemble glycolipids within fluid lipid
bilayers through binding with a multimeric protein and then to trap the
positions of the glycolipids via photopolymerization. After disruption of the
protein interaction the patterned surface will be revealed and then the layer
will be assayed to determine the protein-binding selectivity and imaged using
AFM to determine the dimensions of the glycolipid domains. The broader impacts
involve training undergraduate and graduate students, mentoring undergraduate
students from minority groups underrepresented in the chemical sciences, and
disseminating research results broadly through presentations at conferences and
publications in journals.

This research could lead to new ways to imprint ultrasmall patterns on a surface
using large molecules found in biological systems. The work could impact many
areas of science and technology including nanofabrication, chemical biology and
many fields of medicine, and it could lead to new applications in
nanotechnology, environmental sensing, pharmaceutical science and biotechnology.