* 1151454
* CAREER: The Landscape of Differentiation: Understanding the Mesenchymal Stem Cell Response to the Topography and Geometry of their Environment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Ashok Prasad, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2018
* USD 423,205.00

The goal of this research project is to develop a causal mechanistic
understanding of the response of bone marrow stromal cells (MSCs) to the
topography of the surfaces that they are cultured on, utilizing mathematical
models and experiments. While the primary focus is on MSCs, many of the
questions being addressed are relevant to other mammalian cells. Theoretical
models will be developed of cell spreading, adhesion and cell shape on smooth
surfaces and on nano-patterned surfaces. Computational signaling models will be
built that uncovers the linkages between cell shape and the differentiation
decision of MSCs. Experiments in collaborating laboratories will facilitate
model development and model validation.The project will help understand how the
physical properties of the tissues themselves affect tissue maintenance (or
homeostasis) through modulation of the differentiation decision of multipotent
stem cells. This may be the process by means of which the extra-cellular matrix
helps shape tissues. An understanding of these processes is currently lacking,
and this research seeks to help fill this gap. The project will yield new
insights into tissue homeostasis and development via the development of
biophysical models of cells in different environments, which integrates the
interactions and the feedback between the environment, the cellular cytoskeleton
and signaling.

The research program offers support for training graduate students,
undergraduate students, school students and K-12 teachers. The main educational
goal of the PI is teaching and disseminating modeling methods for biology and
ecology to students at different levels, from school students to graduate
students. The PI will develop an undergraduate-level course on modeling methods
in biology, and incorporate research carried out in his laboratory, as well as
current research from the world over, in the syllabus. Apart from training
graduate students in his laboratory, the PI will offer undergraduate students
and incoming freshmen, especially students from underrepresented minorities, an
opportunity to participate in summer research. In collaboration with the
Education and Outreach Center of the College of Natural Sciences (EOC-CNS) at
CSU, the PI will develop course material and hold workshops to train K-12
teachers in the art and science of building computational models to understand
complex biological and ecological phenomena using free online tools such as
Netlogo. This will also be applied to ongoing K-12 projects that the EOC-CNS is
currently involved. The EOC-CNS will help design the workshops, recruit teachers
especially those who teach under-represented minorities, and will also help
evaluate the impact of the workshops by a professional evaluator. K-12 teachers
attending the workshop will be trained to incorporate computational models into
their teaching, as well as into school research activity. Workshops will also be
offered directly to school students, in collaboration with K12 teachers, during
summer STEM camps organized by schools in Fort Collins. The emphasis will be on
exploiting modeling tools such as Netlogo to make and visualize simple models
that give insight into complicated phenomena, involving nonlinearity,
stochasticity, feedback and synchronization. Examples will be taken from ecology
and biology, and especially on modeling phenomena that K-12 students will
encounter in their classes.