* 1152479
* CISE:CNS:EAGER:  Exploring Managed Soft Computing for Data Intensive Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

Inaccuracy in computation has usually been considered with a negative
connotation and, therefore,&lt;br/&gt;conventional computing systems have been
designed with a strict notion of correctness.&lt;br/&gt;However, inaccuracy or
approximation is not always bad since several application domains&lt;br/&gt;are
intrinsically tolerant to varying degrees of relaxation in
accuracy,&lt;br/&gt;and thus, such a property can be exploited for significant
gain in application performance or fault-tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;The motivation of
this EAGER project is to investigate the feasibility of utilizing such
approximation,&lt;br/&gt;also known as "soft computing", for data-intensive
applications for predicting the performance-power-accuracy&lt;br/&gt;trade-offs.
The research consists of three intertwined tasks. The first task would examine a
variety of&lt;br/&gt;high performance computing (HPC) and MapReduce style data
analytic applications, and determine&lt;br/&gt;which classes of applications are
suitable for soft computing.&lt;br/&gt;The second component of the research is
aimed at developing appropriate techniques for facilitating&lt;br/&gt;soft
computing, while the last task focuses on examining the possibility of
developing a control theoretic&lt;br/&gt;model for formalizing the various
tradeoff analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at demonstrating that
it is possible to achieve significant power and performance&lt;br/&gt;gain for a
wide variety of data intensive applications through soft computing.
&lt;br/&gt;The approach adopted in this research has the potential to influence
the programming paradigm for many&lt;br/&gt;classes of scientific and business
applications for optimizing the power-performance behavior.&lt;br/&gt;The cross-
cutting nature of this research has potential to foster new research directions
in several areas,&lt;br/&gt;spanning high performance computing, computer
architecture, compilers, and system/application
software.&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students involved in this
research will get versatile training in several areas.&lt;br/&gt;The software
tools developed in this research will be used in teaching&lt;br/&gt;existing and
new courses, and will be made publicly available.