* 1152820
* RUI: Continued Studies of Condensed-Phase Structural Effects in Complexes of  BCl3 and Group IV Lewis Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,01/31/2017
* James Phillips, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2017
* USD 227,530.00

The Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program of the Division of
Chemistry supports the research of Professor James A. Phillips and undergraduate
research students at the University of Wisconsin - Eau Claire (UWEC). Phillips
and his students will extend their previous experimental and theoretical
research on a novel class of Lewis acid-base complexes that undergo significant
structural changes between various chemical environments (i.e., when they move
from the gas-phase to a solution). Their primary experimental technique is low-
temperature infrared spectroscopy, which is applied to two types of sample
environments for these complexes: solid thin films comprised of the components,
and samples of solid neon or argon seeded with small quantities of them. These
measurements will be combined with theoretical calculations to determine gas-
phase structural and energetic properties, which provide insight into the extent
of the structural changes, as well as the mechanism by which condensed-phase
environments manifest them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond fundamental
motivations, this work may ultimately lead to a new class of molecular machines
or switches, because the complexes sought contain individual bonds that can be
affected by a macroscopic, external stimulus. This is the key design feature of
all systems that underlie nanotechnology applications. Moreover, this research
will take place at a low-cost, accessible, public university with a track record
of advancing the careers of low-income and first-generation students, of which a
high percentage matriculate to PhD programs. As such, continued funding for this
project will enhance opportunities for these students to gain experience with
specialized instruments and computational methods that would not occur in a
classroom setting, and also bolster their writing and presentation skills.