* 1152951
* Investigation of Structure and Electron Transport in Porphyrin and Phthalocyanine Nanostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Kerry Hipps, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah L. Stoll
* 08/31/2015
* USD 470,000.00

Professors Ursula Mazur and K. W. Hipps of Washington State University are
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
in the Division of Chemistry to conduct research that employs a combination of
experimental and synthetic methods for studying the molecular and submolecular
scale chemical, electronic, and material properties of porphyrin and
phthalocyanine nanostructured aggregates. The overall goal of the proposed
research is to attain an in depth understanding of: (1) the driving forces
behind molecular ordering, dimensions, and morphology in the nanostructures, (2)
the nature of electronic communication between the molecules comprising
different aggregate structures, and (3) the impact of (1) and (2) on the
conductivity (transverse and longitudinal) of aggregates in contact with a
metallic surface under different environmental conditions. The proposed research
provides new insights about the structural and electronic changes associated
with the formation of nanostructures from electroactive organic monomers. A
fundamental understanding of the morphology-structure-function relationships
enables rational design of nanostructures for a particular electronic, photonic,
or sensing application. The results from this research would impact several
important areas of modern technology, including chemical and light sensors,
photocells, catalysis, and molecular electronics. This project provides an
exceptional training environment for students (graduate, undergraduate, and high
school) by integrating cutting-edge nanoscale energy related research with
training in scientific integrity, teamwork, and leadership.