* 1152050
* Beyond the Art and Science of Medicine
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Miriam Solomon, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 71,346.00

Introduction This project is an historical and philosophical inquiry into four
methods that are used to produce medical knowledge: consensus conferences,
evidence-based medicine, translational medicine, and narrative medicine. The PI
argues that the familiar dichotomy between the "art" and the "science" of
medicine is not adequate for understanding this plurality of methods, which
developed since the 1970s. Recent work in Philosophy of Science and STS (Science
and Technology Studies) has changed the understanding of science presupposed in
the traditional dichotomy. In particular, there is acknowledgement of the non-
formal, historical, political, pragmatic, value-laden, contextual and contingent
aspects of science, making the traditional art/science dichotomy less
informative. The PI proposes a pluralistic account of methods in medicine, and
focuses on how the methods interact with each other, sometimes reinforcing one
another and sometimes producing conflict. Four contemporary case studies will be
the focus of her research during the award period: advances in the treatment of
cystic fibrosis, recommendations for routine mammography screening, evaluation
of the effectiveness of antidepressant drugs and treatment of medication
adaptation in migraine.

Intellectual Merit One eventual outcome of this research will be a book, Beyond
the Art and Science of Medicine, which will use historical and philosophical
methods to produce a systematic account of methodological pluralism in medicine.
It will yield normative results that are important for philosophy of medicine,
philosophy of science, philosophy of technology, STS as a whole, and methodology
in medical research. It will examine, critically and contextually, claims that
are often made about new methods, such as they will prove transformative to a
discipline. The book will show that scientific disagreement is expected and
epistemically beneficial, although it can have political costs.

Potential Broader Impacts The resulting book will be aimed at a wide and
interdisciplinary audience, including philosophers and historians of science,
science studies scholars, medical humanists, medical research and clinical
medicine communities. It is also intended that the book and related articles
will enrich curricula in philosophy of science (which currently focus on the
"pure" sciences of biology and physics) as well as curricula in the medical
humanities and in science studies. Its broadest intended impact is on scientific
controversies. Current case studies in medicine are selected so that the project
is immediately relevant for comprehending and dealing judiciously with
controversies in health care.