* 1152656
* IDBR:   Development of cathodoluminescent near-field energy transfer microscopy for high frame-rate, nanoscale, non-invasive observation of aqueous biodynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Naomi Ginsberg, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 07/31/2016
* USD 521,901.00

IDBR: Development of cathodoluminescent near-field energy transfer microscopy
for high frame-rate, nanoscale, non-invasive observation of aqueous
biodynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
high-brightness, rapidly scannable, nanoscale light source appropriate for
studying aqueous biological samples at the nanoscale under physiological
conditions. Anticipated applications will investigate the dynamics of complexing
soluble biomolecules and of heterogeneous lipid membranes. To realize these
efforts requires a way to combine the most redeeming elements of electron and
light optics: Inside a scanning electron microscope, a focused electron beam
will be used to make a nano-optical spot in a thin film scintillator (a material
that produces light when struck by electrons). This spot will in turn excite
adjacent fluorophores in an encapsulated aqueous sample via highly localized
near-field resonant energy transfer. By leveraging the nanoscale resolution and
fast scanning of electron microscopy while enabling spectrally selective bio-
compatible measurements of aqueous dynamics, this innovation will provide an
entirely new way to perform near-field scanning optical microscopy, uninhibited
by traditionally cited challenges such as low optical throughput, unwanted tip
interactions, and active mechanical
stabilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving tighter focal spots on the order
of 10 nm both laterally and axially will revolutionize a host of biophysical
fluorescence techniques. The ability to measure single-molecule fluorescence
fluctuations at physiological concentrations up to a million times greater than
traditional fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) will yield a much needed
way to study binding and enzyme catalysis in the regime where complexes are
stable. This has important implications in the understanding of diseases such as
Alzheimer's and in the formation of molecular machinery such as the ribosome.
The enabling of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) diffusion
measurements on membranes that are themselves smaller than the diffraction
limit, as is the case for example in the impressively crowded grana of plant
chloroplasts, will reveal organizational heterogeneity and local variations in
mobility that have yet to be uncovered, as other super-resolution microscopies
are not compatible with FRAP. These spectrally selective studies at the
nanoscale will literally provide a window into the inner workings of
biomolecular interactions and will connect the high-level function of complex
biomaterials with their nanoscopic origins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed
platform will comprise optical detection in a standard scanning electron
microscope (SEM), and a nanofabricated liquid cell that will both safely house
the aqueous sample in vacuum and include a thin film scintillating window to
convert an electron beam into a highly-localized optical field for sample
illumination. The work will be performed at two different SEMs, both residing in
shared facilities. In one case, the PI's group will train all new SEM users, and
will offer assistance in teaching them to use the developed nano-optical
capabilities. The PI's group will mentor the facility's volunteer undergraduates
in the development of different nano-scintillators for use in the microscopy.
The second SEM is in a national facility that has no associated user fees, and
is positioned to provide a broad user base with exposure to the developed
technology. Beyond these facilities, the technology will become easily
reproducible as an accessible extension that others institutions will wish to
incorporate into their pre-existing SEM facilities, broadening their user base
to include more users in the life sciences. In undergraduate course material,
the PI will use examples from this research project to highlight how physical
principles are incorporated into real world biological research. The PI also
promotes the participation of women and other minorities in science, as a
frequent guest speaker for women's students groups in the natural sciences, and
the PI's research group members participate in classroom visits to neighboring
elementary schools through the Community Resources for Science Community in the
Classroom program.