* 1152223
* IDBR:   Collaborative Research:  Real time secretion: single cell analyzer
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Dwayne Stupack, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2015
* USD 169,584.00

IDBR: Collaborative Research: Real time secretion: single cell
analyzer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The cells of every organ or
organism release (secrete) a wide variety of molecules into their surroundings.
Secretion changes over time as cells grow, change structure and function,
interact with other cells, and when they become damaged or diseased. Molecules
produced by cells play key roles in the growth of embryos, infection, immune
response and healing, and in regulating internal body functions despite
fluctuating environmental conditions, aging, injury and illness. A tool to
measure the types and numbers of molecules secreted by individual cells and
their changes in space and time would help researchers understand how cells and
organisms function and malfunction, in biomedical, biological and bio-industrial
contexts. The tool must be able to sort individual cells based on their
secretion behaviors and recover them undamaged for further use, e.g. for tissue
engineering or medical treatment. Currently, no technology is simultaneously: 1)
Sensitive enough to quantitatively measure many important molecules secreted by
single cells at the very low concentrations typical in living organisms, 2) Fast
enough to measure changes in extracellular molecular concentrations over periods
of minutes, 3) Able to sort and recover live cells for further use, 4) Able to
use cells as they occur naturally, without needing genetic modification or an
external supply of chemical labels, 5) Capable of quick extension to conduct
many different measurements simultaneously on each cell or the same measurement
on many cells (high-throughput), 6) Inexpensive enough for wide use in research
laboratories, clinics, and industry. The proposed Real Time Secretion-Single
Cell Analyzer (RTS-SCA) will be a significant breakthrough that will enable
researchers to directly measure secretion dynamics, investigate the degree of
variation in secretion behavior within populations of cells and the selection of
cells with desired properties. RTS-SCA will find applications in biological and
chemical engineering, developmental, immune and cell biology, computational
biology, pharmacology and medicine. The technology to be developed is a critical
first step towards developing micro- or nano-probes that could later be used as
diagnostic tools in living tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact:
Bioengineering, developmental and cell biology, biomedical research, and applied
bioagriculture and bioindustry all require a currently unavailable capability to
dynamically quantify secretion at the single cell or tissue level. This ability
will advance basic understanding of cell functions and interactions, and aid
tissue engineering, therapy development and drug discovery. The technology will
allow improved versions of common research techniques, such as flow cytometry,
polymerase chain reaction, gel electrophoresis, gene sequencing or microarray
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Immediate applications of the RTS-SCA include the analysis
of the key signaling molecules in embryonic development, immunology, wound
healing, tissue function regulation, and diseases like cancer, in which both
cancer and host-tissue cells send complex chemical messages to each other.
Bioengineering and pharmacology need to identify and select particular cells
that produce molecules of interest at high levels, and to determine optimal
stimulation and culture conditions for molecule production. The RTS-SCA could
help in optimizing cell-secretion behaviors, essential for the development of
tissue regeneration therapies. The RTS-SCA?s ability to quantify the complex
kinetics of insulin release, which involves disrupted pulsatile secretion from
pancreatic tissues, could accelerate research in treatments for type-2 diabetes,
a disease which accounts for 10% of the U.S. health-care expenditure. Since
periodic insulin secretion is an indicator of healthy pancreas function, RTS-SCA
would help in selecting tissue fragments for transplant therapy for type-1
diabetes. Dynamic analysis of molecules is especially important in immune system
responses and diseases, many of which are mediated by currently unmeasurable
time-varying secreted molecules, examples include atherosclerosis, allergies,
rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. The RTS-SCA will help understand
how immune system cells sense and respond to external challenges facilitating
design of more effective treatments and
vaccines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination Plan: The scientists from Indiana
University-Bloomington (IUB) and University of California San Diego (UCSD) have
established collaborations with two major research centers, The IUB Center for
Genomics and Bioinformatics and The Moores UCSD Cancer Center Microscopy Shared
Resource, covering research needs in the Midwest, West Coast, and across the
USA. To encourage the RTS-SCA's wide use, each center will receive an operating
RTS-SCA. These centers will train undergraduates, graduate students,
postdoctoral researchers, faculty and external partners to use the RTS-SCA for
their research, maintain the instrument, advertise the instrument to outside
collaborators, and provide appropriate outreach support through their networks.