* 1152441
* Preparation of Volatile Heterometallic Precursors for the Synthesis of Mixed-Metal Oxides, Oxyfluorides, Fluorides, and Silicates with Multiferroic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Evgeny Dikarev, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2017
* USD 407,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Dikarev of the Department of Chemistry at University at
Albany will broadly explore heterometallic alpha-diketonates as single-source
precursors for the synthesis of mixed-metal materials. Specific combinations of
heavy metals (Ba, Sn, Pb, Bi, RE) with 3d transition metals (Ti/Ni) that result
in materials with valuable multiferroic properties will be targeted. This work
will focus on volatile single-source precursors that can be used in MOCVD
preparation of thin films, deposition on solid support, growth of single
crystals, and formation of nanoparticles. It will be demonstrated that
heterometallic diketonates are universal precursors that can be explored for the
preparation of a wide array of multiferroic materials: oxides, oxyfluorides,
fluorides, and silicates. The broader impacts involve an enhancement of the
educational and research experiences of graduate and undergraduate students and
participation in university wide and community initiatives, such as continuing
development of forensic chemistry program. This work will lead to more efficient
preparation of new class of multifunctional materials called multiferroics.
Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on other areas of
materials chemistry in which the synthesis of mixed-metal compounds is needed,
such as high-temperature superconductors, rechargeable battery electrodes, and
chemical sensors. In addition, this project will provide excellent training of
students, from pre-undergraduate to graduate, including those from groups
historically underrepresented in the sciences.