* 1152409
* SBIR Phase II:  Exogen: Enhanced Anaerobic Digestion of Wastewater Using Bio-electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Matthew Silver, Cambrian Innovation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,008,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will optimize
and pilot test the patent-pending Exogen system for the generation of biogas
during wastewater treatment. Based on a newly discovered process called
electromethanogenesis, ExogenTM uses applied voltages and bio-electrodes to
increase wastewater treatment rates and methane fraction compared to competing
fixed-film anaerobic digestion processes. Phase I R&D demonstrated (1) 30% - 50%
increase in chemical oxygen demand removal rate, (2) 30%-60% increase in biogas
production, (3) 5 - 18% increase in methane concentrations with both artificial
and real-world wastewater, resulting in a payback period of 1.7 - 3.7 years.
Further benefits include reduction in start-up time and the potential for real-
time automation via direct electrical feedback. During Phase II R&D Cambrian
Innovation will optimize the technology and build a scaled demonstration plant
at a customer site

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to help alleviate the
conflicting demands for water and energy in the United States and across the
industrialized world by enhancing the process of generating energy from
wastewater treatment. Anaerobic digestion can generate energy from wastewater. A
recent AgSTAR report has highlighted the potential for this technology in the
U.S., identifying over 8,000 livestock facilities and numerous industrial sites
suitable for the technology. Cambrian's ExogenTM platform aims to decrease the
costs and increase the benefit associated with deploying anaerobic digestion in
key industry segments, resulting in faster diffusion. Eventually the technology
could open up new industries for anaerobic digestion processes. Exogen further
has the potential for carbon sequestration via the direct reduction of CO2 to
CH4. As such, ExogenTM technology offers a broad range of applications with
significant societal benefit.