* 1152217
* Workshop: Media Systems -- Connecting Computer Science and the Digital Humanities
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Noah Wardrip-Fruin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2013
* USD 49,999.00

Computer science is enabling new businesses, new educational approaches, and new
forms of cultural expression through enabling new forms of media. But computer
science itself, as a discipline, has not traditionally focused on media. In
order to continue and expand the remarkable progress of the last two decades of
computational media development, computer science must build interdisciplinary
bridges with other areas that have greater media expertise, from which new
research methods, guiding theories, and evaluation approaches can emerge.

The potential impacts of such connections are great. Combining computer
science's model of technical innovation with media knowledge could offer
cultural and economic benefits far beyond those that can be attained by the
simple borrowing of surface elements more common today. It could enable
interactive educational software that builds on structural insights gained from
thousands of years of drama. Presentation and discovery software for
understanding everything from scientific data to family history could embody
composition lessons from the work of great artists and designers. Meaningful new
forms of interactive storytelling could build on the experience gained from
interpreting literature and cinema. In short, the scientific process of breaking
new ground in media technology could have powerful new methods for evaluating
research directions and progress that are grounded in our shared cultural
heritage.

For enabling such a future, one important interdisciplinary connection is that
with arts and design communities, who have developed knowledge in these areas
and communities of practitioners already collaborating with computer scientists.
Another important connection, which is unfortunately less well established, is
that with the humanities. Despite the fact that the humanities have some of the
best-developed approaches for understanding media, and despite the emerging
digital humanities community with expertise in work with computational systems,
the connection between media-focused computer science and the humanities has not
yet fully catalyzed. This workshop will be an important step toward building a
robust connection, defining the first research questions and collaboration
models to be pursued. The potential long-term impacts of these new connections
are high, especially in areas where the U.S. has a leadership position and
important investments in research and development.