* 1152320
* GENI: EAGER: GENI Experiments to Explore Adoption of New Security Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* George Kesidis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Lyles
* 08/31/2014
* USD 100,000.00

This EAGER project will carry out three classes of experiments on GENI, all
related to security and privacy and all involving low-level network facilities.
Of particular interest is the issue of adoptability: will real users (system
administrators) accept novel security solutions and under what circumstances?
Three experiments are proposed to address these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first experiment focuses on a monitoring
system to detect infrastructure attacks: Currently, the protocol WATCHERS is
known to be able to detect almost all attacks on routers, but its behavior under
realistic network traffic is unknown. This experiment will ask questions like:
What is the effect of monitoring on the infrastructure itself? How do the
benefits of monitoring weighed against the cost of monitoring affect the
adoption of the service by autonomous network entities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
second experiment is focused on attack mitigation with modified infrastructure
services. Specifically, they will investigate how incremental adoption of a DNS
protocol modification might affect the global domain name service when both
standard and modified protocols operate simultaneously. Key questions are: Does
a new infrastructure attack mitigation scheme interfere with the vulnerable
service in widespread use? How do the new and old services compete with one
another during the adoption phase?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third experiment
focuses on distributed private online social networking. The PIs propose to
explore deployment of secure and privacy-flexible p2p-client platforms for
migrating from a centralized to a decentralized peer-to-peer social on-line
network. The PIs are proposing to develop a social caching/name-resolution
server, analogous to DNS for IP networks, to assist the p2p clients (or super
peers) connected through GENI as they manage their privacy settings for their
communities of interest. Key questions are: how can superpeers identify
communities of interest and other social groups? Can they interface with
centralized social networking frameworks, like facebook? Can they aid in the
protection of privacy of their constituent clients?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As for
the broader impacts, GENI will be used for experimentation in six security-
related university classes. The PIs also participate in the UC Davis COSMOS
(Computer Security, Privacy, and Cybervillainy) program, which provides high
achieving high school students the opportunity to explore advanced topics in
math and science in a university setting. Laboratory experimentation is 30% of
the COSMOS program curricula for which GENI will serve as an ideal platform.