* 1152778
* Novel Catalysts for Electrochemical Carbon Dioxide Conversion: from Bimetallic Surfaces to Gas Diffusion Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Giovanni Zangari, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 337,526.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at
the National Science Foundation, Professor Giovanni Zangari of the University of
Virginia will study new electrocatalyst materials and electrode configurations
aimed at electrochemically reducing carbon dioxide. Hydrogenation of carbon
dioxide is expected to provide a flexible, efficient route to the realization of
a carbon neutral cycle for fuel production, potentially of enormous importance
to effectively decrease carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. While
current catalysts suffer from poor selectivity and low conversion rates,
bimetallic surfaces and surface alloys with lateral compositional gradients and
tunable adsorption strength for the various reactants and intermediates have the
potential to widely enhance catalyst selectivity and accelerate formation of
selected fuels. These novel catalysts will be synthesized by electrochemical
methods, and their catalytic activity and selectivity will be tested via product
analysis and kinetic investigations of the reaction mechanism. In a successive
stage, porous nanoparticle catalysts reproducing the optimized compositions
identified previously will be synthesized and impregnated with ionic liquids
with the objective of increasing carbon dioxide concentration at the catalytic
surface to boost its conversion rate. Finally, gas diffusion electrodes will be
fabricated using these porous nanoparticle catalysts and suitable electrode
configurations will be developed with the aim of maximizing electrochemical fuel
production rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research targets the
decrease of carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere via its
electrochemical conversion to useful liquid fuels, potentially powered by
renewable energy. By developing materials capable of accelerating carbon dioxide
conversion, this research will develop a fundamental understanding of the
mechanism of fuel formation by electrochemical processes. This will enable
rational catalyst design and optimization as well as enhanced process
selectivity. Investigation of various electrode configurations will provide a
better insight on the transport of carbon dioxide through heterogeneous media,
which could be used to optimize the overall reactor performance. The knowledge
developed here will not only facilitate widespread implementation of new
technologies for recycling of carbon dioxide, but has the potential to be
transferred to a variety of electrochemical conversion processes. Additionally,
this research will provide training opportunities for students at the
intersection of electrochemistry and materials science, as well as an array of
educational activities focused on environmental issues, including a university-
wide seminar offering and unique laboratory experiences for undergraduates.