* 1152348
* Small angle x-ray scattering studies of biological macromolecules at cryogenic temperatures
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Robert Thorne, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 527,671.00

A protein's biological job is related to its shape, thus insight can be gained
into a protein's function by measuring its structure and how this structure
changes as the protein interacts with other molecules. This task is challenging
because many proteins are small, with diameters about ten thousand times less
than the width of a human hair. The field of structural biology relies on
exploiting experimental methods that provide accurate structural information on
such small length scales. In the last decade, thanks to the availability of high
intensity x-ray beams at national facilities (synchrotron sources) as well as
the development of sophisticated analysis programs that return structural
envelopes, small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) has become a reliable tool for
rapidly obtaining structures of proteins and other large biological molecules.
The greatest strength of SAXS is its ability to report structures of biological
macromolecules in&lt;br/&gt;solution, without the need for specialized sample
preparation. A protein's shape can now be determined in a simple and
straightforward way. However, the radiation used to measure the sample can also
damage it, changing its structure. This problem has been encountered in other
radiation-based methods, including x-ray crystallography and electron
microscopy. For these latter fields, the use of cryo-freezing has reduced damage
to tolerable levels: biological samples are protected from radiation at
temperatures of ~100 K. The goal of this project is to design and construct two
instruments that will prepare flash-frozen samples optimized for SAXS
experiments: cryo-SAXS. Because frozen samples can tolerate longer exposure to
radiation, without concern for radiation-induced structural changes, this method
will allow structures to be obtained from even small amounts of precious sample.
The successful demonstration of cryo-SAXS will garner tremendous interest within
the large structural biology community. All plans/designs generated as a result
of this project will be made public, through journal publication, presentations
at conferences, posting on existing public forums for crystallography and SAXS,
and webinars. Dissemination through use at synchrotron sources is also extremely
effective, as a large number of users pass through and are exposed to new
technologies through users' meetings, facility websites and workshops. A long-
term goal of this project is to develop a kit that makes this technology easily
available to the structural biology community.