* 1152148
* Collaborative Research: A syntactically annotated corpus of Appalachian English
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Christina Tortora, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2018
* USD 283,744.00

The goal of this project is to create an online corpus of one million words of
traditional Appalachian speech, which will be freely available to the scholarly
community and to the public. Though often socially stigmatized, Appalachian
English is historically central to the development of American English from its
British origins, and the project aims to provide a resource unprecedented in
scope and in public accessibility for cultural, historical, and linguistic
research on the English of Appalachia.

The project is based on an existing collection of recordings and transcripts by
Prof. Michael Montgomery, a recognized authority in the field, and its goals
include digitizing the recordings, aligning the digitized sound files with the
transcripts, and annotating the transcripts with detailed grammatical
information. Digitizing the recordings will preserve this valuable cultural
resource for future generations, and aligning the digitized recordings with the
transcripts will allow researchers to rapidly find recorded words and phrases by
searching the transcribed text. The grammatical annotation will allow in-depth
analyses of particular constructions that are specific to Appalachian English or
typical of vernacular American speech more generally, as well as comparisons of
Appalachian English with contemporary standard American English, with other
vernacular Englishes, and with earlier stages of the language.

Because the corpus will be large, publicly available, and searchable online with
standard computational tools, it will foster replicability, thereby contributing
to increased empirical rigor in linguistic research. These same properties will
also make it possible to use the corpus as a teaching tool at the high school
and college levels. It will also serve as a model for the creation of similar
corpora of other varieties of English. In sum, the annotated corpus of
Appalachian English will deepen our understanding of America's linguistic
heritage and promote a scientifically informed appreciation of regional language
and culture.