* 1152342
* Beyond harmonic transition state theory for accelerating molecular dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Graeme Henkelman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2016
* USD 491,829.00

Graeme Henkelman from the University of Texas at Austin is supported by the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program and the Office
of Cyber Infrastructure (OCI) in developing algorithms for accelerating
molecular dynamics simulations. For rare event systems, such as diffusion in
solids and reactions at surfaces, transition state theory (TST) allows for a
separation of time scales between that of molecular vibrations and the reactive
events of interest. When reactive mechanisms are not known, an adaptive version
of the kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) method is used to find saddle points and rates
are evaluated with harmonic TST. To reduce the computational cost, a database is
employed to store kinetic events and to make them available for later use in
separate calculations with similar chemistry. When the reaction mechanisms for a
class of system are known, the computational cost is low because all events are
drawn from the database. To further accelerate the simulations, groups of states
connected by fast rates are escaped using an analytic solution to the master
equation. Storing the local connectivity of these states is essential for
efficiency. Accuracy will be improved with a set of methods ranging from
harmonic TST to the (classically) exact full TST plus dynamical corrections. The
challenge of TST is finding a dividing surface that separates reactants from any
product state. A support vector machine is being developed to provide an
analytic classification function based upon learned data. Sampled points around
the decision surface will be used to train the machine so that it can provide an
accurate transition state without prior knowledge of reaction
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is directed at alleviating the
ultralong computational times needed for simulation of realistic chemical or
material processes, e.g., catalysis, protein folding, molecular diffusion and so
on. The characteristic times for basic molecular motion are many, many times
faster than the time scales we measure in the laboratory, and so acceleration
algorithms must be developed. EON2 is being developed as a distributed open-
source program developed by the PI and collaborators to calculate long-timescale
molecular dynamics in systems, for example, undergoing catalys and clustering on
metal substrates. It will use advanced database techniques and machine learning,
and will be usable in conjunction with other software through customized
interfaces. A discussion forum is hosted by the PI for anyone with questions
about the algorithms, software or science. The project has been opened up so
that computers on campus, supercomputers with idle time, and anyone from the
public can contribute computational resources to accelerate dynamics simulations
at the atomic scale. This aspect of the outreach program gives the public direct
access to the research being done as part of this project.