* 1152845
* Development of computational methods: from Quantum Dynamics and Statistical Mechanics calculations to NMR data processing
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Vladimir Mandelshtam, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 12/31/2015
* USD 435,000.00

Vladimir Mandelshtam of the University of California Irvine is supported by the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
division for research to apply the methods of Quantum Statistical Mechanics and
Dynamics, namely, the variational Gaussian wavepacket (VGW) method and the
Thermal Gaussian Molecular Dynamics (TGMD), to study the equilibrium properties
and dynamics of polyatomic systems (molecules and clusters), as well as quantum
liquids and electronic plasmas. The research includes a second component in
which Mandelstam will collaborate with NMR experimentalists to develop and
extend his Filter Diagonalization Method (FDM) for 3-, 4- and 5-D NMR
experiments, and, in particular, develop FDM for multidimensional Diffusion
Ordered Spectroscopy (DOSY).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mandelshtam's filter
diagonalization approach has great utility in multi-dimensional NMR signal
processing, and the spectral analysis code resulting from this project will be
distributed free to NMR researchers worldwide. It is expected to reduce NMR
experimental times and possibly make certain multidimensional NMR experiments
newly feasible. Software previously supplied by Dr. Mandelshtam is used by
hundreds of researchers. The extension of this technique should have a large
impact on the accurate rapid processing of any multidimensional spectroscopic
signals. Large-scale simulations of complex quantum systems contributes to our
understanding quantum effects in a way not previously possible. The development
of new numerical techniques and distribution of software allow a broader
research community to conduct these studies.