* 1152819
* Language Processing as Boundedly Optimal Control of Memory, Perception, and Action
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Richard Lewis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* catherine arrington
* 04/30/2016
* USD 401,267.00

Language comprehension, whether listening or reading, is a rapid skill that
requires the coordination of perception (e.g., recognizing printed words on a
page), action (e.g., controlling the movement of the eyes), memory (e.g.
remembering what came in earlier parts of a sentence to relate them to later
parts), and linguistic knowledge (e.g., using the order of words to constrain
possible relations among them). Understanding how these processes are combined
on a moment-to-moment basis has been a major challenge for cognitive science.
This project will develop and test a new theory of language comprehension from
an adaptive perspective. The hypothesis is that language processing may be
understood as the coordinated, adaptive control of both internal (and limited)
cognitive processes and external perceptual-motor actions so as to maximize
specific task goals. To apply this idea to language, the investigators will
formalize and implement optimal control models of limited Bayesian perception
and memory for different reading tasks. These Bounded Optimal Control models
will generate predictions that will be tested by monitoring the eye-movements
and responses of humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bounded Optimal Control is a new
approach to language, thought, and action, with possibly major long-term
implications for how we understand and address individual differences and
deficits in reading ability. It represents a shift in scientific focus from
seeking to describe the perceptual and cognitive strategies that the mind and
brain employ during reading, to specifying clearly the problems for which these
strategies are the solutions. There is no canonical strategy because there is no
canonical problem. Thus, the best cognitive and perceptual strategies are
determined by specific task goals and individual constraints. This has the
potential to change our approach to reading deficits: rather than asking how an
individual's reading strategies deviate from normal, it is possible to ask
instead whether those strategies are the best possible strategies, taking into
account both task goals and idiosyncratic cognitive constraints. Revealing the
true nature of the gaps between actual behavior and "bounded optimal" behavior
is an important step in understanding how to go about closing them.