* 1152786
* Highly multidimensional thermodynamic property prediction for chemical design using atomistic simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Michael Shirts, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2016
* USD 413,961.00

Michael Shirts of the University of Virginia is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop methods to
efficiently predict the thermodynamic properties of large numbers of chemical
species and alternative models to describe these species using advanced
statistical and simulation techniques. Predicting thermodynamic properties for a
given chemical system via physical modeling is fundamentally a statistical
estimation problem, but many potentially useful statistical techniques are not
currently used in molecular simulation. This project applies several existing
statistical techniques to the problem of thermodynamic property estimation for
the first time and explores several novel simulation techniques. Most
significantly, the project expands the ability of existing techniques for
sampling from and computing thermodynamic properties of a few states to the
exponentially large multidimensional spaces required for large-scale chemical
property prediction and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved capabilities to
optimize thermodynamic properties over chemical space would have impact in drug
and materials design. Such capabilities would make exploring the properties of
new proteins, structured heteropolymers, and other chemically complex
heterogeneous systems much easier, potentially revealing new structural and
functional frameworks that could not otherwise be discovered. For example, the
proposed techniques would make it possible to optimize small molecules to have
the tightest possible binding affinity across all single-point mutations of a
given viral protein. It would also allow researchers to rapidly identify which
proposed molecular models best describe natural chemical systems. The methods in
this proposal will be implemented in GROMACS, a widely-used open source package
of molecular dynamics software tools, making them accessible to large numbers of
researchers. The findings and tools will be incorporated into Alchemistry.org, a
web portal for sharing techniques, examples, and methods for free energy
computations in classical molecular systems.