* 1152106
* Infrared Laser Ambient Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kermit Murray, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 435,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Murray and his group at Louisiana State University and
Agricultural and Mechanical College in Baton Rouge will develop new
instrumentation for rapid chemical and biochemical analysis under ambient
conditions. The instruments developed under this project will have applications
in forensics, transportation security, medicine, and other diverse areas. Dr.
Murray's group will use pulsed infrared lasers to ablate material directly from
samples in the environment. The ablated material is captured in a small solvent
droplet or on a sample target for mass spectrometry analysis. Unlike
conventional mass spectrometry, the bulk sample does not need to be processed
and loaded into the instrument; the laser removes only a small portion for
analysis. The dual goals of the research are a fundamental understanding of the
infrared laser ablation process and the application of this knowledge to the
design and implementation of novel chemical analysis instrumentation. The
fundamental issues of laser ablation are the size and quantity of the ablated
material and the dependence on the laser wavelength, pulse energy, and sample
composition. High-speed photography, broad-spectrum particle sizing, and finite
element modeling will be used to probe and optimize the material removal
process. Ambient laser ablation sampling will be used for biochemical imaging
and remote robotic sampling. Laser ablation sampling allows component separation
between sampling and analysis for expanded dynamic range. The remote robotic
sampling stage will sample large three-dimensional objects for diverse
applications such as real-time mass spectrometry during a surgical procedure or
checkpoint baggage analysis for explosive residue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
educational component of this project continues the focus on expanding
educational opportunities for underrepresented groups that is the highlight of
the LSU chemistry program. A hands-on mass spectrometry demonstration will also
be developed that will show students the power and utility of mass spectrometry
while linking to the fundamental chemistry and physics behind the technique.