* 1152676
* SBIR Phase II:  Waste Water Phosphorus Removal Using Nano Enhanced Reactive Iron Media
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Suvankar Sengupta, MetaMateria Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2015
* USD 599,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will continue
development and commercialization of a nano-engineered high capacity sorption
media for removal and recovery of phosphorous from water. This media addresses
issues caused by nutrient-related pollution, which significantly affects
drinking water supplies, aquatic life and recreational water quality. Phosphorus
comes primarily from agriculture and waste treatment sources, including on-site
generated wastewater and is the limiting nutrient that usually controls
eutrophication in temperate climates. Better, low maintenance/ lower cost
approaches are needed to reduce discharge levels. In Phase I, the feasibility of
a high performance phosphorous removal media was demonstrated, showing a
sorption capacity that is significantly greater than other media reported in the
literature. The feasibility of phosphorous recovery and media regeneration was
also shown. In Phase II, the sorption of the media will be improved further and
will be tested in both the laboratory and as add-on tertiary systems that will
be designed, fabricated and operated in the field with the help of
commercialization partners. Scale up of manufacturing and regeneration processes
will be examined. Successful completion will lead to a superior phosphorous
removal media and data required for commercial introduction of products that are
needed for wide scale commercialization into the market.

The broader impacts of this research are that phosphorus originating from
smaller on-site wastewater systems and water runoff from agricultural and other
locations is becoming recognized as a major cause of impairment to streams and
lakes and degradation of the water bodies like the Florida everglades.
Efficient, low maintenance technologies are needed to reduce discharge levels
and a lack of effective solutions exists today. Removing phosphorus is common at
municipal wastewater treatment plants where chemical flocculation is available,
but such approaches are impractical for dispersed sources of generated
wastewater. Lower cost approaches are also desirable for these municipal
treatment plants. This new media will have a much higher capacity and longer
life. This will provide an economic alternative to mitigate the negative effects
that phosphorous has on the environment and will offer ways for recovering the
economic value of the phosphorous, a non-renewable resource that is necessary
for food production and which is becoming limited in supply. Further development
and optimization is warranted to move toward verification in field trials that
will accelerate the commercial use of this new phosphorous removal technology.