* 1152931
* Evaluating Beneficial Bacteria Function Following Engineered Nanoparticle Exposure
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Christy Haynes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2016
* USD 420,119.00

The Environmental Chemical Sciences (ECS) program of the Division of Chemistry
will support the research program of Prof. Christy Haynes of the University of
Minnesota. Prof. Haynes and her students will study the interaction of
beneficial bacteria with engineered nanoparticles and assess the role that
simulated natural water has on nanoparticle characteristics and bacterial
impact. Initial efforts will focus on characterizing nanoparticle behavior in
simulated natural water by studying nanoparticle dispersity and stability in the
presence of natural organic matter (NOM) while also working to understand
transformations the NOM experiences after nanoparticle introduction. Furthering
mechanistic understanding of bacteria-nanoparticle interactions, the next stage
of the study will address how nanoparticle presence influences S. oneidensis
function, namely biofilm formation and flavin secretion. These functions have
numerous constructive impacts on the ecosystem, and disruption by nanoparticles
would be significant. The study addresses the critical gap in ecological
toxicity knowledge surrounding the interaction of commonly used engineered
nanoparticles and the beneficial bacteria, S. oneidensis. The nanoparticles
chosen for investigation, TiO2 and Ag, are likely candidates for unintentional
release into the aquatic ecosystem because of their common use in consumer
products. Within the food web, the interaction of engineered nanoparticles with
beneficial bacteria is important based on the constructive function of bacteria
itself as well as their interaction with other organisms. It is critical,
therefore, to consider how ecologically important organisms are impacted by
these nanomaterials. S. oneidensis is an ideal model beneficial bacteria because
they are widely distributed, geographically and throughout the aquatic
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part of the project, Prof. Haynes and her
students will develop a high school laboratory activity titled, "Nanoparticle
Toxicity in Brine Shrimp" where students will get a hands-on experience
examining the effects of noble metal nanoparticles on an aquatic invertebrate.
They will learn concepts from chemistry, microbiology, and statistics, while
exploring this cutting edge topic. The research project will provide excellent
educational opportunities for students, including some from underrepresented
groups, desiring to work at the forefront of environmental science.