* 1152494
* Effect of polarization and charge on biological halogen bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Anthony Rappe, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Drs. Pui S. Ho and Anthony K. Rappe, from Colorado State University,
will characterize the geometry-energy relationships of, and derive from these
relationships methods to model halogen bonds (X-bonds) accurately in biological
systems. X-bonds are important non-covalent interactions in defining the
specificity of many inhibitors to their protein targets. The hypothesis is that
X-bonds are underutilized in inhibitor design, because of our incomplete
understanding for how their geometries define their energies. The long-term goal
of the research is to develop a set of potential energy functions to describe
X-bonds, starting with extensive characterization of the geometry-energy
relationships for the interactions in biological molecules. To accomplish these
goals, the researchers will compare the effects of polarization of the halogen
X-bond donor and the charge of the X-bond acceptor on the structure and energies
of X-bonds in DNA junctions in T4 lysozyme. They will also study how these
physicochemical effects contribute to ligand binding using a set of lysozyme
constructs with artificial pockets engineered at various sites in the protein.
Finally, they will develop quantum chemical methods to model the experimental
structure-energy relationships. The experimental and quantum mechanical results
will eventually be integrated to develop new potential energy functions for
biological X-bonds that can be incorporated into molecular mechanics force
fields that are used in biomolecular modeling.

The outcomes of this research project are likely to impact the computer-aided
design of new classes of drugs. Efforts will also be made to integrate research
with science education, by using scientific problems derived from the research
component to guide class projects related to the basic principles taught in a
Physical Biochemistry course. Finally, this project, which integrates
experimental and theoretical methods to characterize unique molecular
interactions, is expected to continue to provide a diverse group of postdoctoral
trainees, graduate and undergraduate students (including women and students of
diverse backgrounds) with broad training in the areas of structural biology and
biological chemistry.