* 1152229
* Model Nanocluster Catalysts: The Role of Size, Shape and Composition on the Catalytic Activity of Small Metal Oxide and Bimetallic Clusters on Oxide Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Michael Bowers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 03/31/2017
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program supports Professors Steven Buratto, Michael
Bowers, and Horia Metiu from the University of California at Santa Barbara
(UCSB) to prepare, characterize, and test two new types of nanostructured
catalysts, having the common feature of being very small, isolated, well-defined
catalytically-active sites. The investigators have designed and constructed a
unique, highly versatile apparatus which allows production of model catalysts
(both metals and metal oxides) by deposition of mass-selected nanoclusters from
the gas phase onto single crystal oxide supports. These well-defined nanocluster
catalysts are characterized using a normal array of surface science methods and,
in addition, utilization of ultrahigh vacuum combined with scanning-tip
microscopy (UHV-STM) methods to probe the size and shape of the nanoclusters
before and after reaction. The chemistry of such model catalysts is monitored in
UHV using temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) and temperature-programmed
reaction (TPR) and at elevated pressures using a high pressure batch reactor
attached to the surface science chamber. Specifically, the investigators will
prepare and study the catalytic activity of very small VxOy mass-selected
clusters supported on single crystal titanium dioxide (110) surfaces in the
oxidative dehydrogenation of methanol to formaldehyde. They will probe the
catalytic activity as a function of both x and y to develop a model for the
reaction mechanism. They will also prepare and study the catalytic activity of
very small mass-selected, binary clusters such as palladium/gold and
platinum/tin alloys of various compositions supported on single crystal titanium
dioxide (110) surfaces in the synthesis of vinyl acetate and the selective
hydrogenation of alkenes as a function of composition as well as develop a model
for the reaction mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large number of industrial
processes use nanometer-size clusters (both metal and metal oxide) supported on
oxide surfaces to perform reactions that would not take place, or would be
commercially unsuccessful if performed on the bulk material. In research
supported by this grant the investigators will utilize state-of-the-art
experimental and theoretical methods to probe the catalytic activity of well-
defined nanocluster catalysts in great detail and develop a fundamental
understanding of the catalytic chemistry at the atomic level. The concepts
developed through this research will help optimize important industrial
processes using these nanoscale catalysts and provide valuable insight into the
discovery of new nanoscale catalytic materials. Researchers supported by this
grant will also be active in outreach to K-12 schools in the Santa Barbara area.
They plan to develop a tutorial presentation on an atomistic view of
heterogeneous catalysis that will be included in the currently active outreach
program in the department at UCSB. In addition, researchers working on this
project will visit high schools in the Santa Barbara and Ventura Counties three
times per year to discuss their research and its impact as well as to promote
science education.