* 1152001
* EAGER: One-off/Continuous Convergecast and Broadcast Scheduling in Probabilistic Wireless Mesh Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Zhipeng Cai, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2014
* USD 199,410.00

Packet transmission is one of the primary operations conducted by Wireless Mesh
Networks (WMNs). All the existing work for packet transmission in WMNs is based
on the Deterministic Network Model (DNM), where a pair of nodes is assumed to be
either connected or disconnected. However, this assumption is not always
practical and reasonable. Mesh clients are usually connected wirelessly to mesh
routers resulting in unstable links. This project seeks a new exploratory study
on one-off/continuous convergecast and broadcast scheduling under a more
realistic Probabilistic Network Model (PNM), where a certain communication
success probability is assigned to each link. Factors, such as different MAC
protocols, pipeline technologies, and multi-radio multi-channel, are also taken
into account for a comprehensive design and theoretical capacity analysis. For
convergecast, the following four aspects are investigated: network model
definition, network partition methods to identify non-inference zones,
scheduling techniques for concurrent transmissions, and capacity analysis. For
broadcast, Connected Dominating Set based schemes are developed. The efficiency
of the proposed algorithms and the pipeline techniques are evaluated
theoretically and through simulations and experiments. The success of this
project provides a general framework for packet transmission in probabilistic
WMNs with unstable links. Furthermore, this project also has great impacts on
other kinds of wireless networks which similarly demonstrate the probabilistic
characteristic. The research results will be integrated into education, and
widely disseminated through conference/journal publications.