* 1152147
* Masculinity and Environmental Engagement
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Theresa Vescio, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,194.00

The sustainability of the earth and its living systems are being challenged by
the impacts of human consumption. Past research indicates that women report
being more concerned than men about environmental problems. Upon closer
examination, however, the gender differences are nuanced and complex. For
instance, behaviors that minimize the impact of human consumption on the
environment tend to be stereotypically associated with either men (e.g.,
installing low-flow aerators in faucets) or women (e.g., decorating rooms with
light colors that reflect daylight). In addition, messages designed to inspire
pro-environmental actions do so via the arousal of emotions that may be
stereotypically associated with either men (e.g., anger) or women (e.g., worry).
The lab experiments and representative survey studies contained in this proposal
examine whether the gendered nature of environmentally relevant behaviors and
emotions affect men and women's environmental attitudes and behaviors. More
specifically, the PIs propose that gender matching, or the tendency for people
to prefer behaviors and emotions that match their respective gender roles, can
help explain gender differences in environmental engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to femininity, however, masculinity is more
restrictive, must be continual asserted, and is readily susceptible to threats
when engaging in gender mismatched behaviors. These characteristics of
masculinity could make gender matching more important for men than women,
especially among men for whom being masculine is more important. This could
often result in men's greater resistance to pro-environmental behaviors and
emotions. Finally, when masculinity is threatened, men respond with efforts to
restore their masculinity which could include competitive behaviors and risk
taking that could harm the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on this
analysis, the PIs propose to test three novel theoretical propositions that
specify linkages between masculinity and environmental engagement. First,
because masculinity is a cherished social identity for men, the tendency to
support pro-environmental behaviors that are gender consistent (e.g., organic
solutions for women, technological solutions for men) is stronger for men than
women. Second, men who have internalized cultural ideals of masculinity will be
particularly likely to resist gender mismatched environmental engagement. Third,
when masculinity is threatened, men will be more willing to engage in
environmentally damaging and risky behaviors because these behaviors are
consistent with masculine role norms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
provides a needed theoretical framework to explain cultural influences on
individual environmentally relevant behaviors. At an applied level, the proposed
studies address an inherently important social problem (sustainability). This
research will also involve women and minority students as undergraduate and
graduate student research assistants. Students will be trained in research
methods, critical thinking and data analyses and will be mentored in making
their presentation of scientific findings from this research. Our findings will
be published in scientific journals and be useful for businesses and government
agencies who are attempting to engage the public in environmentally responsible
behavior.