* 1152691
* STTR Phase II:  High Throughput Aligned Nanofiber Multiwell Plates for Glioblastoma Research
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mariano Viapiano, Nanofiber Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2016
* USD 735,983.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project seeks to address the
unmet need for high-throughput, cost effective tools to model the metastasis of
brain cancer cells. The proposed Phase II work will achieve three key objectives
necessary for broad adoption: 1) eliminating the use of adhesive during
multiwell plate production, 2) implement FDA-approved sterilization procedures
utilizing the Sterigenics gamma radiation facility, and 3) additional biological
data providing both a head-to-head comparison of our products to those already
on the market while also creating a market "pull" for the pharmaceutical
application of this technology in clinical treatments of brain cancer. A supply
of high-throughput cell culture migration assays will allow researchers to
understand and treat cancer metastasis in ways never before possible. It is
anticipated that a result of this project will be faster and more effective drug
developments to treat brain cancer and other metastasizing cancers. Extension of
this technology to other types of cancer and areas of tissue engineering is
anticipated once production conditions are fully established.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it will provide
improved, more accurate models of glioma migration having better predictive
power and higher translational potential. Current surgical procedures for
malignant brain tumors cannot remove all of the cells associated with the
primary tumor and these cancer cells migrate into the surrounding tissue where
they evade both detection and current chemotherapies, leading to secondary tumor
formation and nearly 100% patient mortality. A multi-well plate in vitro
migration assays will enable pharmaceutical research identifying key factors
regulating glioma cell migration, potentially helping devise a broad range of
effective therapies and drugs against these devastating tumors. If this initial
form of high-throughput motility assay is successful, it will provide an
innovative tool appropriate for researchers from a large variety of backgrounds
beyond both glioma treatments and cancer. Additionally, strong commercial
potential exists as the cell/tissue culture supplies market is expected to reach
$4.97 billion globally by 2012; this market includes the proposed consumable
research tool.