* 1152467
* SBIR Phase II:  New Technology for Coupling Sound to the Ear in Communications Devices
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Stephen Ambrose, Asius Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2015
* USD 613,965.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on
coupling sound to the human ear for communications devices (MP3, Bluetooth,
hearing aids, headsets, earbuds) with unprecedented comfort, safety and audio
quality. A chip-like device, the diaphonic valve, for harvesting energy from
audio communications for the purpose of inflating a coupling device (balloon) in
the user's ear has been demonstrated. This inflatable ear coupling mitigates
excessive sound pressure levels that often occur within-ear listening devices,
such as ear-buds and hearing aids, and which are a cause of audio fatigue and
potential hearing damage. Diaphonic valve design has been dramatically improved
making it smaller and more effective at pumping air. In this project, production
of the critical diaphonic valve-chip component will be increased to a small
scale manufacturing level. Additionally, the pressure and power utilization
management hardware and algorithms to integrate the diaphonic valve and
inflatable ear coupling (bubble) into commercial headsets, and hearing aids will
be developed. Finally, work will be done on a non-inflatable ear couple
technology, discovered during Phase I of this project, which also improves audio
quality and hearing safety. The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project centers on revolutionary new person-to-audio couplings, based on an
inflatable ear-piece, with applications in consumer audio, Bluetooth headsets,
hearing aids, ear-buds, and headsets for professional communications (pilots,
law enforcement, military, etc.). This technology has the potential to improve
peoples lives by reducing listener fatigue and hearing damage in the population
using in-ear devices, as well as making hearing aids more comfortable and better
sounding for people who already have hearing loss. Published results from Phase
I have shown how existing ear coupling approaches can produce dangerous sound
pressures in the ear canal and how the technologies of this project allow ear
couplings that alleviate this problem. The first embodiment of this new
technology to the market will be a basic version applied to consumer headsets
(ear-buds). From there, more complex applications, such as hearing aids, will be
addressed. The success of this project will create engineering and business
sector jobs as well as manufacturing jobs. The project also includes funding for
a high school student or college undergraduate to participate in the research
and development activities.