* 1152716
* SBIR Phase II:  Acoustoelastic Tissue Property Evaluation of Selected Tissue Region in Dynamic Ultrasound Images
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Jeffrey Dalsin, Echometrix, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2015
* USD 592,631.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a real-time ultrasound system for evaluating musculoskeletal soft tissue
conditions by implementing the novel ultrasound post-processing software
developed in Phase I into a programmable platform ultrasound system. Today,
radiologists diagnose most musculoskeletal diseases by observing static MRI or
conventional ultrasound images and considering key factors that support only
qualitative, subjective assessments. Developing an efficient, real-time,
quantitative method for diagnosing soft tissue (e.g., tendons and ligaments)
injuries and monitoring healing can lead to more accurate diagnoses and reduce
re-injury of incompletely healed tissues. The project will enhance the novel
software technology's clinical utility and workflow efficiency. The original
software will be enhanced by improving the software to automatically detect a
region of interest with the ultrasound image. The registered regions of interest
can be matched precisely from one patient visit to the next. Developing data
mining software will further increase efficiency and accuracy by leveraging
machine learning to assist with diagnostic decisions. These software
improvements will be integrated with the platform ultrasound system to improve
clinical workflow. The integrated product will both match the work flow
efficiency of standard ultrasound and dramatically advance the utility of
ultrasound within the musculoskeletal arena.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, will
dramatically improve clinicians' ability to care for soft tissue injuries and
will position the company to capitalize on (1) pressure to reduce medical
imaging costs, (2) musculoskeletal specialists' growing interest in ultrasound,
especially portable instruments, (3) a major ultrasound manufacturer's focus on
the large and relatively untapped musculoskeletal ultrasound market, and (4) the
recent emergence of quantitative ultrasound for non-musculoskeletal
applications. This Phase II project will produce an efficient, real-time,
quantitative method for diagnosing soft tissue injuries and monitoring healing.
In the US alone, overuse injuries (strains, sprains) are the most frequently
reported musculoskeletal injuries. Annually, 18.4 million such injuries cost
approximately $92 B. Patients suffering from musculoskeletal injuries currently
face three challenges at diagnosis, care, and outcome. First, current diagnostic
methods, including MRI, ultrasound, or physical manipulation, rely on highly
subjective and observer-dependent interpretation, so accuracy varies. Second,
MRI is still the standard of care, but is far more costly than ultrasound.
Substituting ultrasound for MRI, where appropriate for initially diagnosing
musculoskeletal conditions, could save Medicare $736 M/year. Third, the lack of
an objective monitoring method to determine when a patient can safely return to
activity means patients risk missing unnecessary work time or re-injury.