* 1152379
* Tuning the Reactivity of ortho-, meta- and para- Benzyne Analogs and Releated Polyradicals in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Hilkka Kenttamaa, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2015
* USD 550,000.00

Experimental reactivity studies on organic bi- and polyradicals are hindered by
the difficulty of generating them cleanly in solution, in addition to their high
reactivity and short lifetime. Information on the factors that control the
chemical properties of carbon-centered sigma-type biradicals, such as the
benzynes and their analogs, is highly desirable since it may allow one to "tune"
their reactivity by varying structural details, and hence design bi- and
polyradicals with tailored properties. This research program uses the "distonic
ion approach" to study the reactivity of gaseous, carbon-centered, sigma-type
mono-, bi- and triradicals via their charged analogs by using Fourier-transform
ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometers, a flowing afterglow quadrupole-
octapole-quadrupole apparatus, and most recently, a linear quadrupole ion trap.
These studies have demonstrated that the electron affinity and singlet-triplet
gap of biradicals, as well as dehydrocarbon atom separation for meta-benzyne
analogs, are among the reactivity controlling factors that can be used to "tune"
the reactivity of some of these species. However, only few different ortho- and
meta-benzyne analogs, and most remarkably, no para-benzyne analogs, have been
studied thus far. Hence, this research will now be extended to several different
and differently substituted ortho- and meta-benzyne analogs. With the means to
generate para-benzyne analogs in the gas phase, an examination of their
reactions is planned. Finally, the factors that control the reactivity of
related tri- and tetraradicals will also be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to predict, control and rationalize the outcomes of chemical reactions
frequently requires knowledge of key reaction intermediates. Aromatic compounds
that carry one (monoradicals) or more unpaired electrons (polyradicals) play an
important role, for example, in organic synthesis and the biological activity of
organic compounds. This research focuses on improving fundamental understanding
of the chemical properties of these reactive intermediates. Ultimately, this
research will lead to improved methods to synthesize new organic compounds,
including drugs and new materials, as well as more rational design of new drugs.
The new experimental methodologies developed here for the characterization of
reaction intermediates will have an impact on experimental physical and physical
organic chemistry. The broader societal impacts and enhancement of
infrastructure include a large number of ethnically diverse, highly qualified
science Ph.D. candidates, improved methodology for chemical analysis of organic
compounds (including petroleum), and a more solid knowledge base for the design
and synthesis of new organic materials and drugs.