* 1152916
* Collaborative Research: Sensory Integration and Sensorimotor Transformations for Dexterous Manipulation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Andrew Gordon, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/29/2016
* USD 327,061.00

The ability to grasp and manipulate objects is an extremely complex motor
behavior. When grasping an object such as a cup, people often vary their finger
placements and the forces exerted by the fingers in order to ensure that the
goal is attained (in this case, lifting the cup without spilling its contents).
How humans do this so efficiently is not known, in part because previous
research constrained subjects to place their fingers at pre-specified locations
on the objects. This has led to a major gap in our understanding of how these
complex motor behaviors are learned, planned, and executed. To address this gap,
the proposed studies will investigate how subjects grasp and manipulate objects
in tasks that allow them to choose their finger placements and applied forces
and, importantly, to adjust the interaction between the two. Another function of
grasping is to develop a representation of an object's weight and the
distribution of weight within the object. How subjects develop this
representation and refine their actions will be examined by studying the
interaction between information extracted by grasping and memories of past
manipulations of the object. The hypothesis that fingertip placement and forces
are learned independently from each other will be tested by manipulating visual
feedback of fingertip placement, varying visual shape and density cues, and
through object rotation tasks that create a discrepancy between visual cues and
memories of the same object from prior manipulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed studies represent a major paradigm shift in the research on grasping by
opening new and fundamental questions about how the brain learns to control the
hand. Thus, the results of this work may inform the design of more dexterous
robotic manipulators, brain-machine interfaces, and neuroprosthetic hands.