* 1152694
* SBIR Phase II:  Implementing an Infrastructure Intelligence System for Water and Wastewater Utilities Using the Software as a Service (SaaS) Delivery Model
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Prasad Chittaluru, EPIC Engineering & Consulting Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 08/31/2016
* USD 1,150,436.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will build upon
the successes of the Phase I research that showed the market need for an
intuitive, location-based Infrastructure Intelligence System (Neptune), and
demonstrated the technical feasibility to deliver a SaaS solution for water and
wastewater utilities and public works agencies. Neptune represents a significant
technological innovation in infrastructure information management; it will be a
domain trend setter by delivering critical infrastructure information through
one intuitive, powerful, comprehensive and affordable product. Current utilities
software systems are complex standalone systems, typically used by technical
experts. Information retrieval from these systems requires significant resources
and technical expertise that are not available for most utilities. This project
will design, develop, test and deploy production-ready Neptune&lt;br/&gt;product
that will provide instantaneous access to infrastructure information through
Google Maps-like interface to a broad range of users from field staff to
executive management. Neptune will remove the technology barriers of entry,
enhance the capture and retrieval of enterprise knowledgebase, and help extend
the useful life of our infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the urgent need for
utilities and public works agencies that protect public health and safety to
efficiently manage their aging infrastructure with budget shortages. Our
nation?s infrastructure deficiencies threaten public safety and welfare as well
as our economic growth and competitiveness. The EPA estimates over 240,000 water
main breaks and 170,000 sewer main breaks annually in the United States.
Estimates for fixing our infrastructure run into hundreds of billions of
dollars. To prioritize infrastructure maintenance, utilities must analyze
diverse datasets including hydraulic models, GIS, SCADA, maintenance, emergency
response and project documents. Available software are complex and expensive and
presents a huge barrier to entry for most small and medium utilities. This is
putting their residents and environment at increased risk. Through its simple
interface and SaaS delivery model, Neptune will be accessible and affordable to
all infrastructure agencies. It will communicate the importance of
infrastructure investment to elected officials and public. Neptune has the
potential to provide significant societal benefit by reducing infrastructure
failures and guiding utilities towards proactive infrastructure maintenance
practices. &lt;br/&gt;