* 1152488
* Changing the Paradigm: Chelation Control with Silyloxy and Halo Carbonyl Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Patrick Walsh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 455,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Patrick J. Walsh of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Pennsylvania will examine general methods for the chelation-
controlled addition of organometallic reagents to alpha or beta silyloxy and
alpha or beta halo aldehydes, ketones, and aldimimes. These substrates typically
do not chelate. The central hypothesis of this project is that Cram-chelation
can be achieved with substrates that strongly resist chelation by employing mild
nucleophiles in combination with zinc Lewis acids. There are three specific
objectives: 1. Developing chelation-controlled additions to chiral alpha and
beta silyloxy aldehydes and ketones; 2. Assessing the ability of zinc reagents
to chelate alpha or beta halo aldehydes and ketones; 3. Assessing the ability of
zinc reagents to chelate alpha or beta halo imines and to promote Cram chelation
additions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project could lead to general methods for
highly diastereoselective additions to alpha or beta substituted aldehydes,
ketones, and aldimines. These methods are highly useful for the preparation of a
large number of substructures commonly seen in biologically important molecules,
including syn-1,2- and anti-1,3-diols, syn-1,2-halo hydrins, cis-epoxides and
allylic epoxides, and anti-1,2-amino alcohols. The successful results of this
work could positively impact the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and specialty
chemical industries. In addition, this project will provide excellent training
of students, including those from groups historically underrepresented in the
sciences.