* 1152965
* RUI: Developing Organic Photoconductive Materials through Modular Design of Self-Assembling Components
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Joseph Reczek, Denison University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in the Division of
Chemistry supports Joseph J. Reczek of Denison University in this project to
design, synthesize and characterize new donor-acceptor columnar liquid crystals
as organic electronic materials. The approach involves development of synthetic
methodologies for the generation of highly substituted aromatic compounds with
the ability to self-assemble into a variety of ordered, functional materials.
The optical and electrical properties of these fundamentally new materials will
be investigated towards novel components for photovoltaics and other
optoelectronic applications.

This project will engage a cohort of undergraduate students in interdisciplinary
research at Denison University, a primarily undergraduate institution. These
students will be trained in cutting-edge techniques and instrumentation related
to several branches of chemistry, including organic synthesis, molecular self-
assembly, materials chemistry, and device fabrication. Students will gain
experience in teamwork, leadership, and project management, as well as giving
scientific presentations in the local community and at national conferences. New
instrumentation supported will broadly affect research and teaching at Denison.
The proposed work could significantly impact the fields of self-assembly,
organic electronic materials, and photovoltaics, while training undergraduate
students for success in scientific careers and post-graduate education as well
as raising awareness of alternative energy research in the community.