* 1152221
* IDBR:   Development of a streak microscope for measurement of fast multineuronal signals
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Katsushi Arisaka, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 06/30/2014
* USD 349,999.00

IDBR: Development of a streak microscope for measurement of fast multineuronal
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest challenges in neuroscience is
to understand how patterns of electrical activity in networks of neurons
underlie brain function. Although the fundamental electrical signals (action
potentials) and the basic hardware elements that generate these signals
(neurons) are well known, the temporal (~ 1 kHz) and spatial (~10 micrometer)
scales in which this signaling occurs prohibit parallel measurements from more
than a small number of neurons. In recent years, new optical methods for
tracking neural activity have been developed and offer great promise for
overcoming some of these technical barriers. However, available microscopy
methods and instrumentation are incapable of recording ensemble neural activity
with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution. This proposal aims to address
this issue directly by constructing a novel microscope optimized to record
ensemble neuronal activity with temporal precision (&gt; 8KHz) appropriate to
resolve action potential activity in single neurons. The microscope¡¦s design is
inspired by star trails observed in long exposure images of the night sky and is
thus termed a fluorescent trails microscope (FTM). The FTM will be optimized to
perform prolonged optical measurements of spatially distributed signals with
submillisecond resolution. Rather than scanning a laser beam, the microscope
will utilize a computer addressable diffractive element (a spatial light
modulator or SLM) to generate continuous, patterned illumination of user-
selected regions of interest. Images will be swept across a CCD or CMOS sensor
in synch with the frame rate, allowing for the increased temporal resolution.
This flexible design should be adaptable for use in a variety of experimental
preparations including in vivo brain imaging and other biomedical applications
involving time resolved fluorescence photometry. The proposed activity will
foster specific cross-disciplinary, interactions and pre-college educational
activities. Once fully developed, this technology will be used by a wide range
of scientists at UCLA and beyond who are interested in measuring neuronal
network activity as well as studying other biological phenomenon with collective
properties. Construction of the instrument will involve recruitment of students
in Physics from a nascent "Neurophysics Program" at UCLA who will be engaged in
the interpretation of the resulting large quantity of experimental data
requiring expertise in systems neurobiology and statistical physics. The project
will provide a platform for students in multiple graduate disciplines (i.e.,
Physics, Neurobiology, Mathematics) to expand their knowledge base beyond the
traditional boundaries of their respective fields as well as motivate campus
wide interaction and collaboration. Lastly, there will be an opportunity for
high school and undergraduate students to tour the laboratory and learn about
the science behind the project, as well directly engage in the research, with a
particular emphasis on recruiting those from underserved communities.