* 1152804
* New enzyme-catalyzed reactions from catalytically promiscuous ancestral enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Antony Dean, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 329,755.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Biotechnology, Biochemical, and Biomass Engineering Program in
the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division,
Drs. Romas Kazlauskas and Antony Dean, from the University of Minnesota, Twin
Cities, will resurrect ancestral generalist enzymes using gene synthesis. The
targets are ancestors of hydroxynitrile lyases, which catalyze a carbon-carbon
bond formation: addition of cyanide to aldehydes. The research will test the
ability of these ancestral enzymes to catalyze other carbon-carbon bond forming
reactions and optimize them for different reactions. A current challenge in
chemical synthesis is to assemble complex molecules catalytically, and
stereoselectively while using environmentally friendly conditions and reagents.
Biocatalysis is a potential solution, but the reaction range of current
biocatalysts is limited. This work constitutes a new approach to discover
biocatalysts that catalyze unnatural reactions, which uses carbon-carbon bond
forming reactions as a test case. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of resurrected
ancestral enzymes seek to answer basic questions of how new enzymes and
metabolic pathways evolve. In addition, resurrected ancestral enzymes may be
starting points for engineering new enzymes because ancestral enzymes can
catalyze additional chemical reactions, including potentially useful unnatural
reactions. The proposed work will train under-graduate, graduate and
postdoctoral students in a chemical approach to solving interdisciplinary
problems, actively recruit and include students from groups underrepresented in
chemical sci-ences, and support outreach to elementary school students.