* 1152055
* Mechanism of alkane formation by cyanobacterial aldehyde decarbonylase
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* E. Neil Marsh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division,
Dr. E. Neil Marsh, from the University of Michigan, will elucidate the mechanism
of a newly-discovered hydrocarbon-forming enzyme from cyanobacteria, aldehyde
decarbonylase (cAD). Biosynthetic pathways that generate hydrocarbons have
become the subject of intense interest recently as their potential to generate
new biofuels has been recognized. Aldehyde decarbonylase is a member of a well-
studied class of enzymes, the non-heme di-iron dioxygenases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary studies have shown that cAD catalyzes a most
unusual reaction involving the conversion of long-chain fatty aldehydes to the
corresponding alkanes and formate. To investigate the mechanism, alternative
substrates that may act as mechanism-based inhibitors will be synthesized to
gain evidence for proposed radical intermediates in the reaction. The role of
the reducing system in the reaction will be investigated and the components of
the native reducing system in the host cyanobacterium P. marinus, will be
identified. Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to investigate the role of
active site residues in determining substrate specificity and controlling the
mechanism of the reaction. Lastly, kinetic isotope effects will be measured to
provide insight into the rate determining step in cAD and the nature of the
transition state leading to carbon-carbon bond
cleavage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need to develop new pathways
to produce biofuels based on hydrocarbons as sustainable alternatives to fossil
fuels. The cyanobacterial enzyme aldehyde decarbonylase produces hydrocarbons
and has attracted particular interest for biofuels applications; yet its
extremely low activity presents a major stumbling block to its use.
Understanding how the enzyme works is the first step to designing better
enzymes, or synthetic catalysts, that accomplish the synthesis of hydrocarbons
more efficiently. This, in turn, may allow the development of new routes to
biofuels that can substitute for current fossil fuels including gasoline, diesel
and jet fuels.