* 1152564
* SBIR Phase II:  Computer-Aided Mosaic Design and Construction
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Edward Acworth, Artaic LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,524,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
computer-aided mosaic&lt;br/&gt;design and robotic assembly system for
automation of a centuries-old manual process. Despite their&lt;br/&gt;prominence
in art and architecture, mosaics are arduous to design and assemble. Labor-
intensive&lt;br/&gt;methods have stubbornly resisted automation, adding
considerable cost and delay to projects. Artaic's&lt;br/&gt;Phase I research
proved feasibility of computer-aided design software to create renderings and
digital&lt;br/&gt;blueprints of artisanal mosaics by introducing a streamlined,
procedural workflow for tile layout that&lt;br/&gt;closely mimicked the workflow
of mosaic artists, and did so over 10x faster than manual methods.
The&lt;br/&gt;goal of the Phase II research is to demonstrate the speed,
effectiveness, utility, and artistic quality of this mosaic design and robotic
assembly system. The key Phase II objectives are to: (1) demonstrate
a&lt;br/&gt;prototype artisanal mosaic design system and; (2) demonstrate a
robotic mosaic production system, that&lt;br/&gt;will be: (3) validated for
accuracy, speed, and quality through user assessment, and; (4) evaluated
for&lt;br/&gt;economic and commercial potential. Anticipated technical results
will enable a revolutionary&lt;br/&gt;advancement from manual to automated
processes in mosaic design and production, comparable to
the&lt;br/&gt;displacement of film by digital camera
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project lies in art, design, construction, and&lt;br/&gt;architecture. Software
and robotic automation will lower the cost of mosaics and increase its
traditional&lt;br/&gt;societal impact of adorning public, commercial, and
residential spaces. Artists, designers, and builders&lt;br/&gt;will have a
significantly faster method to produce artisanal mosaics without the high cost
and&lt;br/&gt;time associated with manual design and production. The
efficiencies made possible by this proposed&lt;br/&gt;computer-aided mosaic
design and manufacturing system will enable Artaic to expand into the
global&lt;br/&gt;multi-billion dollar tile market and develop a domestic
workforce to compete against global&lt;br/&gt;manufacturers of handcrafted
mosaic artwork. Additionally, the computational demands of the
rendering&lt;br/&gt;algorithms developed during Phase II will give impetus to
further development of advanced GPUs and&lt;br/&gt;CPUs -- with companies such
as Intel, Nvidia, and AMD providing solutions for increasingly
more&lt;br/&gt;advanced rendering algorithms. Perhaps the most significant
societal benefit from the development of&lt;br/&gt;this technology is its
potential to make artisanal mosaic design and production accessible and
affordable&lt;br/&gt;to the general public, and because this research enables
any Photoshop artist to become a mosaic artist, it&lt;br/&gt;also hold
significant promise as an educational tool in our nation's schools.