* 1152249
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Microarray Platforms For Detection Of Rare Molecules In Complex Mixtures
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Michael Harvey, Maine Manufacturing LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2014
* USD 515,980.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will provide an
optimized composite polymer protein binding surface for proteomics applications.
The new surface will be specifically designed for reverse phase protein
microarrays to enable detection of rare molecules in complex biological
mixtures. Discovery and quantification of rare molecules in complex mixtures is
essential to improve the understanding of disease mechanism and progression, and
responses to treatment regimes. Current surfaces used in these applications have
properties that exhibit limited sensitivity of detection due to optical
interferences, low protein binding and accumulation of nonspecific interactions.
This project will optimize and introduce the application of a new track etched ,
nitrocellulose composite membrane for protein array applications. Manufacturing
processes for the new composite will be developed to generate multiple forms of
the composite to allow it to be incorporated into a variety of binding assay
formats. This effort will also shed light on important properties for generating
ultrasensitive binding surfaces. The result of this project will be an optimized
composite membrane with characteristics and manufacturability suited for the
most sensitive binding applications, such as reverse phase protein arrays. The
platform initially will be optimized for fluorescent detection of rare molecules
in complex cell lysates.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to provide a
family of discovery and diagnostic tools that will expand the understanding,
detection and treatment of human disease. The current focus in translational
medicine for therapies in clinical trials is to identify expression patterns of
proteins (biomarkers) in individual patients. These measurements allow the
monitoring and understanding of individualized disease progression and responses
to treatment. They will provide the data necessary to create targeted,
personalized treatment regimens. Protein arrays have found utility over the past
decade as research tools that provide multiplexed detection and quantification
of protein expression. However, the full potential of these tools as diagnostic
platforms that provide patient-specific information and guide drug treatment has
not been realized due to insufficient binding capacity, limited dynamic range
and poor sensitivity. This project defines a new composite surface that has a
significant increase in both binding capacity and sensitivity when incorporated
into multiplexed immunoassay systems. The composite can be included in a variety
of platforms to enhance discovery and quantification of important markers on an
individual scale as well as high throughput systems for broad diagnostic
application.