* 1152491
* Hyperconjugative assistance in alkyne cyclizations and cycloadditions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Igor Alabugin, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 382,970.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Igor Alabugin and his research
group will extend studies of alkyne reactivity into three new directions. It
will use computations to discover stereoelectronic effects capable of
controlling anionic cyclizations of alkynes and non-catalyzed alkyne
cycloadditions and utilize this knowledge to develop efficient chemical
processes. In the first part of this project, the research team will search for
the two virtually unexplored alkyne cyclization patterns: 3-exo-dig and 4-exo-
dig closures. Proposed experiments will test computational predictions regarding
the relative efficiency of different cyclization patterns and utilize
cooperative hyperconjugative interactions for the control of reactivity. In the
second part, the researchers will use negative hyperconjugation to enable
selective endo closures in the delicately poised pairs of competing endo and exo
cyclizations. The final part of the project will test hyperconjugative
assistance as the new transition state stabilization approach in non-catalyzed
alkyne-azide cycloadditions. The intellectual merit of this research is in
unraveling the contribution of electronic and structural factors controlling
efficiency and selectivity of alkyne cyclizations and cycloaddtions through a
combination of experimental and theoretical studies. The underlying focus on
orbital interactions will increase the general importance of these findings,
broaden our understanding of these fundamental factors and lead to the
development of new paradigms of radical and anionic
reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact will be the laying of
mechanistic, structural, and kinetic foundations for successful applications of
reactions of alkynes in synthesis and materials science. The proposed research
will enhance our understanding of the reactivity of the alkyne moiety as well as
radical species. The combination of computations with kinetic studies will be
used to validate computational approaches for studies of organic reactions. The
theoretical and experimental components of this work will allow training of
specialists in each area and will provide researchers at the undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral levels with an opportunity to integrate learning and
discovery. The results will be disseminated in publications and through outreach
activities, including participation in symposia and lecturing at undergraduate
and graduate institutions.