* 1152598
* RUI: Investigation of the Chemical Diversity of Pennsylvania Hypericum Species
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Geneive Henry, Susquehanna University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2015
* USD 150,000.00

In this Research at Undergraduate Institutions project funded by the Chemistry
of Life Processes program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Geneive Henry, from
Susquehanna University, will investigate the chemical diversity of Hypericum
species growing in the state of Pennsylvania. The Hypericum genus (Clusiaceae
plant family) consists of over 450 species distributed worldwide. The genus is
known as a prolific source of structurally diverse natural products, possessing
a wide range of biological properties including anti-HIV, anticancer, anti-
inflammatory, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities. The complex molecular
frameworks and biological activities associated with some Hypericum natural
products have made the genus an attractive source of scaffolds for the
development of new synthetic methodologies, and lead structures for the
development of combinatorial libraries. Approximately forty percent of the known
Hypericum species have been investigated, leaving a rich source of chemical and
biological diversity largely untapped. There are sixteen native and previously
uninvestigated species of the Hypericum genus growing in the state of
Pennsylvania. The objective of the research project will be two-fold: (1) to
isolate and chemically characterize prenylated acylphloroglucinol derivatives,
xanthones, benzophenone glucosides and flavonoids present in Pennsylvania
Hypericum plants, and (2) to establish whether any chemotaxonomic relationships
exist among these species.

The project will have fundamental impact on the chemical sciences, and could
potentially impact the pharmaceutical sector, as it would provide complex
bioactive natural products of interest to the synthetic chemistry community. The
research activities will impact undergraduate student training and education in
the following ways. Students will: (1) gain expertise in experimental design
through hands-on research activities that will develop independence and
confidence; (2) analyze data to determine the structures of complex organic
molecules, thus developing problem-solving skills; (3) present data at
scientific meetings and help with manuscript preparation, enhancing written and
oral presentation skills. The acquisition of these skills will prepare students
for careers in the chemical discipline. The research activities will also impact
a wider audience through workshops designed to enrich the educational experience
of high school students, and enhance the professional development of grades 6-12
teachers in the Central Susquehanna Valley.