* 1152551
* SBIR Phase II:  Manufacturing of Bio-Inspired Polymer Micro/Nano-Fiber Arrays as New Gripping Materials
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Paul Glass, nanoGriptech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2016
* USD 669,310.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a pilot-scale production system and process to enable the large-scale
fabrication of continuous arrays of elastomeric micro/nano-scale fibers with
complex geometry. Inspired by hairs that occur naturally on gecko feet, these
micro/nano-scale elastomeric fibers demonstrate strong adhesive, shear, and peel
strengths over a wide range of test substrates. Unlike other classes of
adhesives such as pressure-sensitive tapes, these biologically-inspired
adhesives can be repeatedly used over thousands of test cycles with very little
contamination and performance degradation over the material lifespan. However,
this class of material has only been able to be fabricated through expensive
micro/nano fabrication processes including photolithography, chemical etching,
or time-consuming batch micro/nano molding processes. In this project, a pilot-
scale manufacturing system will be constructed, optimized and evaluated. A
roller-based molding and peeling process for high-speed, continuous, and large-
area manufacturing of high aspect-ratio and three-dimensional micro/nano-scale
fibers with a compliant backing layer will be developed using elastomer
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader/commercial impacts of this project
will be the potential to provide a low-cost, high-volume process to mass produce
continuous arrays of elastomeric micro/nano-scale fibers with complex geometry
for applications in apparel, sporting equipment, healthcare, defense, industrial
clamping, and consumer goods. These fibers will provide strong reversible
adhesive or enhanced shear interfaces that are resistant to contamination and
maintain their adhesive ability over the product lifespan.