* 1152892
* Instrument Development: Ultra-Sensitive, Single-Pass Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Pingshan Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2017
* USD 384,218.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Pingshan Wang of Clemson University and his
graduate students will be supported to develop an ultra-sensitive, single-pass
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer for the study of paramagnetic
samples in the liquid phase. The instrument will utilize single-pass EPR sensors
that exploit interference processes within the devices. The proposed instrument
will be sensitive and fast - an order of magnitude better than current X-band
spectrometers.

EPR spectrometers are essential and powerful analytical tools for chemical
studies. They may be used to detect the presence of electron spin in sample
materials. Besides revealing the presence of unpaired electron spin (as in the
case of reactive chemical species) the EPR spectra reveal unique details about
the chemical environment, which help in understanding the molecular milieu
around "spin labels". A key component of this research program is its
educational objectives, which involve a number of students (from graduate school
down to high school) who are engaged in scientific research. The instrument
design that is developed through this research will be disseminated broadly
through a website at Clemson University, as well as through The National
Biomedical Research Center for AdvanCed ESR Technology (ACERT) at Cornell
University.