* 1152997
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disposability, Sanitation, and the Environment of Waste Management in Urban Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Jacob Doherty, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 19,980.00

Stanford University doctoral candidate Jacob Doherty, supervised by Dr. James
Ferguson, will investigate the environmental and economic implications of
sanitation in the urban setting of Kampala, Uganda. Doherty will conduct 13
months of field research in the city of Kampala, Uganda, focusing on the
challenges of managing a safe and hygienic urban environment. This issue
occupies a contentious position in contemporary Kampala and many other urban
areas around the world because of the need for economic development and urban
renewal projects to incorporate effective waste management strategies into their
planning processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a study involving multiple
social science methods such as participant-observation, informal and semi-
structured interviews, a photo elicitation project, and archival research,
Doherty will gather information that will shed light on how residents and
government officials of Kampala handle sanitation challenges, and how
environmental and economic practices intersect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings
from this study will contribute to social science understandings of sanitation
and pollution in everyday practices. This research takes an innovative look at
this important area of anthropological study in a way that brings together
different bodies of theoretical literature, promising to contribute to
environmental anthropology and studies of global sustainability more generally,
as well as to economic and urban anthropology and the anthropology of Africa.
This research is also important because it will deepen understandings of the
relationship between poverty, health, and environmental degradation in urban
settings. Funding for this research also supports the training of a social
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;