* 1152218
* Elucidating the Problematic Steps in beta-Sheet Protein Folding Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Niels Andersen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division,
Dr. Niels Andersen, from the University of Washington, will study the folding
rates and intrinsic stabilities of local structure elements, the "foldons"
(including turns, short beta-hairpins and hydrophobically capped loops), that
can influence both protein-folding path selection and folding kinetics. Protein
folding and design continue to be extremely active areas of research.
Determining the time constants for the formation of different classes of foldons
will indicate whether each type of structure could form as a pre-equilibrium
event, relative to collapse in "diffusion-collision" folding scenarios, versus
forming near or at the protein folding transition state. In the case of beta-
sheet proteins, sequential beta-strand association can be severely rate limiting
and the early formation of non-native foldons can result in kinetic folding
traps. Designed peptide models of beta sheets and capped loops will be used to
explore the relationship between turn formation as well as loop length and
stiffness on the dynamics of beta-strand association. Folding rates will be
measured by NMR relaxation methods (and confirmed by T-jump studies). In the
case of the NMR relaxation methods, multiple probes will be used to increase the
information content and resolution of these experiments. Multiple probes will
also allow for a clearer distinction between strictly 2-state and downhill
folding pathways. An additional aim is measuring intrinsic configurational
propensities to allow for the parameterization of an algorithm for predicting
(from proton sequence alone) the location of nascent hairpins that serve to
increase protein folding efficiency or act as kinetic traps. The results from
this effort will be incorporated in a publicly available on-line program for
protein folding pathway prediction and analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beta-
strand association is also a feature of amyloid misfolding diseases. The
formation of toxic beta-sheet oligomers from unfolded peptides or partially
unfolded proteins may be a unifying theme (and molecular basis for disease
progression) in many of these syndromes. The insights that are gained concerning
beta-strand association and factors involved in incomplete beta sheet formation
should transfer to this more biological arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows passing through the Andersen group receive
valuable training that prepares them for academic careers and research jobs in
the Pharmaceutical or Biotech industries. As such, these efforts contribute to
our nation's scientific competence, economic productivity, and global
competitiveness. Recent graduates are now employed as NMR facility managers and
faculty at research universities, as teachers at four-year colleges, as tech-
transfer/invention-managers at major universities, and as research scientists
at, for example, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and a number of leading
biotech companies and start-ups. Dr. Andersen is dedicated to the recruitment
and inclusion of women and minorities into the chemical sciences through his
participation in graduate student recruitment and selection. With regard to
outreach, Dr. Andersen developed and maintains web-accessible algorithms for
predicting and quantitating peptide secondary structure preferences.