* 1152784
* Extending the Usefulness of Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory: Dynamics, Excitations, and Coupling to Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Neepa Maitra, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 01/31/2016
* USD 411,981.00

The PI will develop new approaches to several of the most challenging problems
in time-dependent density functional methods today. The projects involve three
areas: electron dynamics in strong fields, excitations, and coupled electron-ion
dynamics. A novel semiclassical approach to electron correlation in dynamics
will be developed and applied to strong-field processes, specifically electronic
quantum control and ionization. This is an area in which traditional
wavefunction methods are too computationally expensive yet density-functional
approximations suffer from lack of memory, need for additional observable
functionals, and the inability to change occupation numbers. The proposed method
addresses all of these problems. New non-empirical functionals will be derived
and tested to study long-range charge-transfer excitations and double-
excitations, which conventional density functional approximations fail to
capture, leading to globally accurate potential energy surfaces. Methods
involving semiclassical propagation of nuclei coupled to electrons, starting
from first-principles, will be derived, analyzed and tested, to treat correlated
electron nuclear dynamics. This work will impact wide-ranging phenomena in
chemical physics, atomic and molecular physics, biomolecules, and materials
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance our fundamental
understanding of the roles played by electron interactions, dynamics and
excitations in a variety of areas such as chemical physics, atomic and molecular
physics, and materials science, including solar cell research. New tools for
computations in these fields will be developed. The research brings together
density functional methods, today's workhorse for computations involving many
electrons, and semiclassical methods, usually used to simplify and interpret
quantum dynamics. These advances to time-dependent density functional theory
will overcome earlier barriers to its use in calculation of accurate global
molecular dynamics and spectroscopy. The students will be exposed to cutting-
edge fundamental theoretical research in chemistry and physics. The existing
minority-serving programs at Hunter will be leveraged to promote the development
of underrepresented minority scientists. Mentoring, both within the group and
via a Physics Club activity, will help guide and project postdoctoral fellows,
graduate students and undergraduate students towards scientifically-oriented
futures. They will be exposed to innovative teaching methods the PI uses for
undergraduate teaching.