* 1152824
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH EAGER:  Sum-frequency generation (SFG) vibration study of structure and enzymatic hydrolysis activities of crystalline cellulose in biomass
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 05/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

1152824&lt;br/&gt;Kim &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to efficiently convert
biomass to other useful chemicals, it is necessary to understand and overcome
its recalcitrance to enzymatic deconstruction processes. One key question
involved in a biomass study is the correlation between the enzymatic activity
and the cellulose structure. Although many experimental studies have been
attempted previously to answer this fundamental question, the answer still
remains elusive. The difficulty is that it requires molecular analysis of
crystalline carbohydrate polymers (cellulose) in an amorphous matrix containing
the same organic functional groups. Current analytical methods cannot provide
sufficient details about crystalline cellulose in lignocellulosic biomass. In
this &lt;br/&gt;EAGER project, the PIs Sunkyu Park from North Carolina State
University and Seong H. Kim from Pennsylvania State University will explore the
application of sum-frequency generation (SFG) vibration spectroscopy to find the
influence of cellulose crystal structure on the enzymatic deconstruction
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique crystal structure of cellulose allows
it to demonstrate non-linear optical properties such as SFG which are absent in
other biomass components. SFG is a second-order nonlinear optical response of a
system without optical centrosymmetry when it is irradiated with high-intensity
laser pulses. Based on this unique non-linear optical selection rule, amorphous
components such as hemicellulose and lignin in biomass cannot generate SFG
signals. Thus, SFG can detect the structure of crystalline cellulose in biomass
without any chemical isolation and modification of the cellulose. Furthermore,
the question of the relation between structure and enzymatic activity can be
monitored by following changes in the cellulose SFG response.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of Broader technical impacts that
result from this study. The molecular insights that will be obtained through
this research will be valuable information to understand the biomass
recalcitrance and develop more efficient biomass conversion processes.
Specifically the expected outcomes include: (1) a significant step toward
understanding of the crystalline structure of celluloses, (2) new tool
development for cellulose characterization without separation, which is
sensitive only to crystalline cellulose in lignocellulose biomass, (3) a
molecular insight into the relationship between cellulose crystalline structure
and enzymatic hydrolysis, and (4) student education in cross-disciplinary areas.
This tool, SFG spectroscopy, is expected to be useful for other biomass
applications such as cellulose dissolution, biomass thermal conversion,
cellulose biosynthesis, etc.