* 1152308
* SBIR Phase II:  Nanoscale Ultrafast Dynamic Mechanical Analysis (nu-DMA)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Craig Prater, Anasys Instruments Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,199,955.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
technologies to enable commercialization of nanoscale Dynamic Mechanical
Analysis (DMA). Conventional DMA works by applying an oscillating stress to a
sample and measuring the time-dependent strain. Analysis of DMA data gives
information about material stiffness, viscosity, thermal transitions and
activation energies, for example. DMA is a critical and widely used tool to
measure the viscoelastic properties of bulk materials, but it suffers from three
key limitations: slow speed, limited frequency range, and the lack of spatially-
resolved information. Large and growing material classes employ nanoscale
composite structures to achieve desired material properties. No current tool can
rapidly examine the temperature-dependent viscoelastic response of these
materials on the scales they are being engineered. To address this unmet need,
we will extend successful Phase I research to develop instrumentation based on
atomic force microscopy (AFM) using rapidly heatable AFM cantilever probes.
Specifically, the nanoscale DMA platform will provide: (1) variable temperature
DMA in seconds; (2) measurement frequencies three orders of magnitude higher
than conventional DMA; (3) spatial resolution down to < 100 nm; and (4)
sensitive and spatially-resolved measurements of glass transitions on wide range
of commercially important polymers not previously measurable.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will stretch across
multiple industries and academic research areas. Metrology and characterization
are foundations of successful materials science and materials manufacturing. The
lack of materials characterization tools at the nanoscale has been identified by
the chemical industry as a key bottleneck for the rapid development of new
materials. This proposal aims to fill a major gap in required instrumentation.
With the ability to measure temperature-dependent viscoelastic properties at the
nanoscale, materials scientists and engineers will be able for the first time to
directly investigate local material stiffness, energy absorption, and damping in
heterogeneous materials over a wide range of operating temperatures and
frequencies. In addition to spatially resolved measurements, the dramatic
measurement speed improvements (a thousand-fold improvement over conventional
DMA) will enable higher measurement throughput, lower cost per measurement, more
frequent sampling and better measurement statistics. Based on interactions with
customers in diverse industries, we have already has already identified strong
market pull in areas including epoxies, polymer blends, multilayer films,
medical devices, semiconductor packaging, and aerospace markets.