* 1152811
* BCCC ET Scholars
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Donald Smith, Baltimore City Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Carson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,995.00

This project is to provide 126 scholarships over a 5-year period for
academically-talented, financially-needy students in Engineering, Computer
Information Systems, Computer Aided Design and Drafting, and Robotics Technology
at Baltimore City Community College (BCCC). The project builds on strong
existing student support services at BCCC and develops new interventions such as
invited speakers, field trips, peer tutoring, innovative mathematics workshops,
engineering/technology competition and family involvement. The project includes
a strong evaluation process with feedback loops to ensure continuous
improvement. The mathematics-centered advising and workshops should improve
mathematics skills and overall program success. Professional development
opportunities will also enhance the educational benefit to the students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has strong collaboration and support from
local universities and industry, a commitment from industry for internships, and
support from political leaders. Project partners include Morgan State
University, Capitol College, Carnegie Mellon University, Lockheed Martin,
Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric, Amtek Company, and Juxtopia LLC. The demographic
data support the project's objective of increasing African American enrollment
in the engineering technology related programs. The project's strong advising
and mentoring programs and family involvement should contribute to retention and
success. The project will contribute to broadening participation of
underrepresented groups and producing a highly-qualified workforce in STEM
fields.