* 1152463
* RUI:  Understanding the Biosynthesis and Function of Headgroup Acylated Glycerophospholipids in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Teresa Garrett, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 05/31/2016
* USD 214,031.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Lipids form the semi-permeable bi-layer membrane
that surrounds all cells and organelles, compartmentalizing important cellular
reactions and metabolites. There is a large diversity of lipids required to form
a functional membrane. Glycerophospholipids (GPLs), which contain a glycerol
phosphate backbone with two fatty acyl chains esterified to the glycerol and an
alcohol added to the phosphate, compromise a significant portion of the membrane
lipids. In addition to the major GPLs, E. coli also contains a variety of low
abundance lipids whose function is not well understood. One such class of low
abundance lipids contains an additional acyl chain added to the headgroup.
Headgroup-acylated lipids have been previously shown to impact essential cell
functions such as cell division. This research program will characterize two
enzymes that impact headgroup-acylated GPL levels in E. coli in order to further
shed light on the biological function of headgroup-acylated GPLs. The E. coli
enzyme PldB catalyzes the formation of the headgroup-acylated GPL, acyl
phosphatidylglycerol (acyl PG) by transferring an acyl chain from a monoacylated
GPL (lyso GPL) to the headgroup of PG. The Arabidopsis thaliana enzyme
At1g78690p, which acylates lyso GPLs to form di-acylated GPLs in vitro,
interestingly, leads to the accumulation of the headgroup-acylated GPL, acyl PG,
when over-expressed in E. coli. This A. thaliana protein is a useful tool for
probing the interaction between lyso GPL and headgroup-acylated GPL metabolism.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to illuminate how lyso GPL and headgroup-acylated
GPL metabolism interact the substrate specificity of PldB and At1g78690p will be
determined. A variety of acyl donors and acyl acceptors will be tested to
determine the substrate preference for each enzyme. The enzymatic properties of
PldB and At1g78690p will also be investigated. Amino acids critical for
catalysis and substrate preference will be identified by testing the activity of
mutated PldB and At1g78690p with different acyl donors and acceptors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biological role of headgroup-acylated GPLs will also
be investigated by genetically manipulating E. coli lipid biochemical pathways.
Enzymes that alter the levels of headgroup-acylated GPLs will be introduced into
wild-type and mutant E. coli strains. For each strain, alterations to the
cellular lipid composition will be assessed using liquid chromatography
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. In addition, the growth rate,
antibiotic sensitivity and temperature sensitivity of the strains will be tested
to determine the phenotypic impacts of alterations of headgroup-acylated GPL
levels on cells in a variety of genetic backgrounds. This work will provide the
basis to understand the function of these lipids and help, in future work,
explain the complexity of lipids found in all
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This research program will
impact the field of lipid biochemistry by helping to explain the interaction
between lyso GPL and headgroup-acylated GPL metabolism. In addition,
undergraduates at Vassar College will have opportunities to engage in
substantial research in lipid biochemistry. Every aspect of this research will
directly involve undergraduate student researchers. Students will prepare lipid
substrates and protein extracts, perform the in vitro enzyme assays, purify the
enzymes to homogeneity, and construct the E. coli. They will present their work
at scientific conferences as poster and oral presentations and publish in peer-
reviewed journals. Particular attention will be given to involve of students at
all levels, including freshman and students from under-represented groups, in
research leading to increased retention of these students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life Processes program
in the Chemistry Division.