* 1152453
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated Circuit Yield and Quality Improvement thru Test Data Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Pranab Nag, TestWorks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2014
* USD 616,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project develops an
automated, software-based analysis methodology that enables yield and quality
improvement of integrated circuits (ICs) through information extraction from
test measurement data. Deriving actionable information from test data is a
challenging task due to lack of software that automatically correlates test
measurement data obtained from failing ICs and their physical IC-design
description (i.e., the layout). Maximizing knowledge extraction is accomplished
by a new software-based diagnosis technique that uses in conjunction the logical
and layout descriptions, in addition to the measured test data, to identify at
the nanometer scale, the precise location and type of defects within non-working
ICs. The project also develops software-based statistical methods that find
commonalities among the defects characterized within failing ICs. The
combination of improved diagnosis and commonality analyses means that the root-
causes for failure can be quickly found and passed on to designers, process
engineers, and test engineers to guide remedy selection and
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project centers on continuing the advancement of the US semiconductor industry
which is vital to both Homeland Security and the general advancement of society
as a whole. There is significant commercial opportunity in supplying test data
analysis on a per-design basis to Integrated Circuit (IC) producers that enables
rapid improvement in yield and quality through feedback from manufacturing
testing. The potential impact is tremendous since specific, pertinent
information is fed back to both designers and manufacturers about how and why
ICs fail. Chip designers will use this information to improve design rules for
producing high-yielding and ultra-reliable ICs. Chip manufacturers will use this
information to fine-tune their fabrication processes to maximize yield and
performance, and optimize their test methodologies to ensure quality meets
customer demands. It is also anticipated that this technology will also spur
further research and broaden the scope of research in universities.