* 1152382
* Enzymes Required for the Biosynthesis of Deoxysugars Decorating Aglycone Scaffolds
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Hazel Holden, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2015
* USD 712,577.00

Intellectual Merit: The biochemical importance of carbohydrates cannot be
overstated, for they are essential elements in nearly every physiological
process and represent the most abundant biomolecules in living systems. Apart
from their role in providing metabolic energy, carbohydrates are involved in a
wide range of biological processes including the immune response, cell-cell
interactions, fertilization and cell adhesion among others. The focus of this
research is on three unusual sugars. The first two, D-tetronitrose and
D-forosamine, are found attached to antibacterial agents. The third, D-anthrose,
is found on the outer layer of Bacillus anthracis. These three sugars were
chosen for study because they contain novel functional groups and display
strikingly different overall structures. Specifically, this project is aimed at
understanding the structures and functions of the enzymes involved in the
biosynthesis of these three sugars. The proposed pathways for their production
contain some very unusual enzymes that are not well understood. Techniques to be
utilized in the research include X-ray crystallography, site-directed
mutagenesis, enzymatic synthesis of appropriate nucleotide-linked sugar ligands,
and kinetic analyses. Upon completion, the investigations will reveal
unprecedented chemistries and provide important and fundamental contributions to
mechanistic enzymology.

Broader Impact: Equally important, these projects were selected for study
because they are ideally suited for instilling in middle school students the
excitement of chemistry through biochemistry, which is absolutely critical for
the continuation of high quality science in the USA. With prior NSF funding, a
unique outreach program referred to as Project CRYSTAL was established.
Currently, Project CRYSTAL has two major missions: (1) to instill a love for
chemistry in middle school students by studying the inner workings of nutrition,
thereby leading to healthy life choices and (2) to provide a hands-on laboratory
experience in an active, state-of-the-art research laboratory, thus fostering
interest in a scientific career. To achieve the first mission, teaching modules
based upon the chemistry of sugars, fats, and proteins are being developed and a
biochemistry textbook for middle school students is being written. To achieve
the second goal, four selected middle school students will come to the
laboratory once a week during the school year to participate in the academic
research outlined in this project. These students will learn fundamental
techniques such as molecular cloning, protein purification, crystallization,
X-ray data collection, and protein model building. The program has been highly
successful with two of the students already serving as co-authors on a paper
published in the journal Biochemistry. It is anticipated that the four students
participating in the 2011-2012 program will be co-authors on a second
publication.