* 1152449
* New Tools for Absolute Molecular Structure Assignment
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* James Nowick, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2016
* USD 405,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Scott Rychnovsky of the Department of Chemistry at
University of California Irvine will develop a new strategy to assign the
configuration of optically pure amines and alcohols. The strategy uses kinetic
resolution catalysts and reagents, which are reactive compounds that are known
to react faster with one mirror image of a molecule than the other. Reactions
will be investigated with amines and alcohols to identify structural features
that correlate with rate differences between mirror-image (enantiomeric)
molecules. Understanding of the relationship between structure and rate could
lead to a general tool to predict the absolute configuration of molecules based
on the rates of reaction with benchmark reagents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amines
and alcohols are very common structural elements in biologically active natural
products and in new pharmaceutical agents. Assigning the complete three-
dimensional structure to these molecules is the first step in understanding
their activity. This project will facilitate research in many fields related to
chemistry including pharmaceutical development, agricultural chemistry,
medicinal chemistry and natural product isolation and structure assignment. The
project will be developed with the participation of a wide variety of
undergraduate and graduate students, including those from groups historically
underrepresented in the sciences.