* 1152009
* Switch Angle Sample Spinning Probes and High Resolution Dipolar Recoupling with Quadrupolar Nuclei
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Terry Gullion, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 450,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Terry Gullion of West Virginia University and
his undergraduate and graduate student researchers will be supported to develop
new solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods for measuring dipolar
coupling between nuclei with spin = 1/2 and quadrupolar nuclei. Careful
measurement of the coupling between nuclei can yield accurate information on the
distance between atoms in chemical materials. Professor Gullion will do this
through development of novel sample spinning methods in conjunction with the
design and construction of new kinds of probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy is an important physicochemical method that
gives precise chemical and structural information. The methods that Prof.
Gullion and his student researchers will develop will enable scientists to
measure inter-nuclear distances between nuclei that are difficult to deal with,
experimentally. The work has the potential to open up new vistas in biological
and materials science where the kind of information that can be obtained from
these types of experiments is critical in order to relate structure with
function. The undergraduate and graduate students working on this project will
gain useful experience in building hardware for NMR experiments. As part of this
work, Prof. Gullion will also conduct workshops on NMR hardware (transmission
line probe) construction for members of the scientific community.