* 1152360
* Chemically-functionalized nanoparticles for generating novel nanoparticle-polymer hybrid assemblies and robust structures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Todd Emrick, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 473,966.00

Todd Emrick at the University of Massachusetts Amherst is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry in research on polymer-nanoparticle assembly. Key challenges in
macromolecular and nanoscale chemistry include a pressing need to uncover robust
routes towards hybrid nanoscale structures that effectively, and precisely,
combine synthetic organic polymers with inorganic nanoparticulates. This project
seeks to develop the surface chemical functionalization of semiconductor
tetrapods, nanorods, and spherical nanoparticles, as well as carbon-based
particles like fullerenes and graphene sheets, in facile routes to self-
assembled systems and hybrid materials. This requires implementing three primary
aspects of polymer/nanoscale chemistry, including: 1) effective nanoparticle
grafting chemistry, whereby conventional syntheses of metal and semiconductor
nanomaterials are enhanced through the development of novel ligand chemistry,
giving functional particles with tailored solubility, reactivity, and
processibility; 2) solution assembly of functionalized nanoparticles with
polymers, such that well-organized hybrid materials can be realized through
simple processing methods; and 3) characterization of the impact of the
resultant hybrid materials towards understanding the relationship between
nanocomposite morphology and electronic/photophysical properties. The project
will lead to numerous advances in the chemistry of nanoparticle
functionalization, such as long strings of nanoparticles/nanorods that self-
assemble in solution and phase separate on surfaces using easily accessible
microscopic techniques. Moreover, the platform materials emanating from this
project will lead to a realization of novel self-assembled hybrid systems that
are relevant for the next generation of devices that utilize charge carrying
materials and nanoscale printing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to improve the performance of polymers (i.e., plastics) and tiny metal
objects (nanoparticles) for critically important societal needs, including solar
cells, memory devices, and printing of complex patterns. Synthetic chemistry is
critically important to making advances in these areas. This project especially
targets the fabrication of 'well-ordered' materials, whereby polymeric chain-
ends are 'tagged' such that they become attracted to (have binding ends for)
nanoparticles. The organization of polymers and nanoparticles using these
methods will allow solar cell devices to function more efficiently, and complex
patterns (of the types used to make microchips) to be developed more
economically. The project will be carried out with a strong educational
component, involving graduate (Ph.D. level) and undergraduate researchers, while
engaging young students (grade school level) with demonstrations and easily
comprehensible tutorials that convey the excitement of the science, and enable
the students to grasp the concepts, importance, and impact of nanoscale
chemistry.