* 1152356
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  IDBR:  Enhancing and disseminating miniaturized tracking technology for widespread use on small migratory songbirds
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Jeffrey Kelly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 07/31/2017
* USD 302,603.00

Until recently, knowledge of the migratory movements of small birds was based
only on idiosyncratic band returns and inferences from biomarkers and population
demographics. Although researchers have been able to track large birds for
decades using various electronic devices, traditional long-distance tracking
methods, such as satellite telemetry, employ tags that are far too large for the
majority of bird species (those weighting 20 grams or less). However, a new tool
has emerged that can revolutionize our understanding of bird migration. Solar-
geolocation data loggers, or geologgers, are extremely small and simple tracking
devices that store light-intensity readings at regular intervals for determining
both day length, which indicates latitude, and the time of solar noon, which
indicates longitude. Geologgers have recently been deployed on several small
bird species and the success of these early studies has sparked considerable
interest in these devices among scientists and bird enthusiasts. &lt;br/&gt;
Although geologgers are already yielding exciting results, there is a need to
improve the instrumentation (both hardware and software), establish guidelines
for the use of geologgers, and increase their accessibility to the scientific
community. A major goal of this project is to improve upon an existing geologger
design to create a device that can be deployed in large numbers on a wide range
of species by virtually any research group or institution. A second goal is to
generate sophisticated yet accessible analysis tools that incorporate multiple
sources of information into a Bayesian framework for generating the best
possible estimates of migration tracks. Specifically this project seeks to: 1)
reduce the size of geologger hardware; 2) repackage an underused but powerful
analysis package (tripEstimation) for processing geologger data; 3) increase the
availability of geologgers by offering assembled units, electronic kits, and do-
it-yourself instructions; 4) carry out extensive field testing and analyses to
evaluate the accuracy of the devices and their effects on bird behavior; and 5)
reduce the cost of geologgers by an order of magnitude. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Making geologgers available to large-scale banding operations and
researchers with limited funds will promote a tremendous scientific advance that
will reverberate across numerous disciplines. As information from multiple
tracking efforts is synthesized, researchers will be able to establish
connectivity maps linking breeding and wintering areas used by different
populations of migratory birds. These activities will enable comprehensive
conservation strategies that can identify critical habitats for migratory birds
and protect vulnerable species throughout their annual cycles. To help ensure
that this sort of data synthesis is possible, the geologger software resulting
from this project will be implemented through Movebank.org, an online repository
for storing and distributing animal tracking data. Scientists who use
Movebank.org will contribute to a resource used by students and researchers
worldwide ranging from professional wildlife biologists seeking to advance
evolutionary theory to grade-school children working on science fair
projects.&lt;br/&gt;Tracking animals with geologgers requires a synthesis of
biology, earth science, electrical engineering, and mathematics. As such,
geologger studies are excellent material for addressing STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math) learning objectives. Working through The
University of Oklahoma K20, a collaborative group of project personnel and
schoolteachers will generate lesson plans for K-12 students based on the concept
of solar geolocation and the construction of microprocessor-based data loggers.
These lesson plans will reach teachers across the US and abroad through the
K20alt website, maintained by the K20 Center.&lt;br/&gt;