* 1152279
* IDBR:   A workstation for optogenetics in embryogenesis and regeneration
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Michael Levin, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 01/31/2016
* USD 690,000.00

The orchestration of cell behavior into multicellular pattern formation is a
central issue for developmental, regenerative, cancer, evolutionary, and
synthetic biology. Molecular and cell biology has made remarkable strides
because tools were developed for the experimental control of biochemical
signals. However, Bioelectric signals - a fascinating and important physical
layer of pattern control - remain poorly understood. Functional experiments
using targeted, quantitative, molecular-level changes in ion fluxes in a variety
of vertebrate and invertebrate model systems implicated specific bioelectric
events in development (left-right asymmetry, craniofacial patterning, eye
induction), regeneration (tail and limb regeneration in vertebrates, and
anterior-posterior polarity in planaria), and is now being applied to detection
and suppression of cancer in situ. By developing 1) tools that allow molecular-
level changes in physiological properties in vivo, 2) building quantitative
computer models synthesizing physiological and molecular data, 3) fleshing out
pathways that show in detail how biophysical signals are produced, propagated,
and transduced into downstream canonical biochemical/transcriptional responses,
and 4) disseminating protocols and reagents to many labs in related fields,
bioelectricity has been brought into a new age. Crucially, the field is held
back by a lack of tools: transformative impact requires the ability for many
labs to be able to exert tight spatio-temporal control over ion flux and
transmembrane voltage in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Optogenetics (expression of
light-sensitive ion channels) is an exciting advance, but has never been applied
outside of excitable cells (nerve and muscle) because available devices do not
allow flexible control of sufficiently-bright light delivered over large areas -
a necessity when working with developing or regenerating systems (organs, whole
animals, or bioengineered constructs). This project will develop an automated,
highly versatile, optogenetics research station that extends past existing
technology to enable experimental control of voltage gradients in model systems.
Built around a computer controlled microscope that is suitable for working with
anything from small animals to individual cells, this platform will allow any
lab that has access to molecular biology and microscopy to perform screens and
targeted experiments on the role of physiology and bioelectricity in any
context. This will significantly impact several basic fields by transforming the
state of the art in how functional in vivo physiology experiments are planned,
executed, and analyzed. Aim 1 capitalizes on commercial partnerships and local
collaborators in engineering and optics to build a platform for light-based
control of resting potential in any desired cell groups. Aim 2 validates the
system by proof-of-principle applications in the control of stem cell
derivatives in vivo and regulation of organ patterning in the Xenopus laevis
system.&lt;br/&gt;Crucially, protein/mRNA profile does not fully determine cell
behavior; this IDBR platform will transform the field of functional
electrophysiology, and help to crack the bioelectrical code, by, for the first
time, allowing many labs to easily collect functional physiomic data. Direct
control of voltage in any cell/tissue of interest will enable quantitative
understanding of how biophysical (post-translational) parameters interact with
gene regulatory networks in determining pattern formation and tissue/organ
function. Bringing a whole new aspect of regulation to several communities will
allow the field to truly understand the role and information content of
biophysical gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity will involve
the training of a minority PhD student and talented young post-doctoral fellow
in highly interdisciplinary techniques at the forefront of developmental
biology, at the collaborative edge between basic science and engineering
industry. Natural bioelectric fields form a kind of subtle "scaffold" that
determines the growth and form of biological structures, and guides the activity
of gene networks. The ability for any lab to control the natural bioelectric
fields inside living tissues will transform our ability to understand and
control the shape of tissues and organs. This will have important implications
for understanding evolution of complex body parts, as well as ultimately driving
novel the synthetic biology and bioengineering applications. The direct
beneficiaries of this technology will be not only the undergraduates and other
students who will use such devices in state-of-the-art learning modules, but
society as a whole, which will ultimately benefit from applications of this
technology to biomedicine (bioengineering of organs in vitro, regenerative
sleeves, and development of robust computational devices made of living
tissues).