* 1152557
* SBIR Phase II:  In vivo Fluorescence Imaging Kit for Cell Proliferation.
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Maryana Breitman, MBMR Biolabs Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2014
* USD 499,824.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop an in vivo fluorescent imaging kit for cell proliferation that addresses
the need to study cell growth processes in real time. Proof-of-concept has been
demonstrated for a novel method of imaging DNA replication in vivo that is non-
toxic and does not interfere with cellular metabolic processes. The method
utilizes the unique specificity and high rate of reaction of bio-orthogonal
ligation chemistry, and it has shown that in vivo labeling of DNA molecules with
this novel bio-orthogonal mechanism yields fast, precise labeling of cell
proliferation of cells in their natural environments. Most importantly, the
method is minimally invasive, results in reliable incorporation of both the
nucleotides and the label, and does not require cell lysis, DNA strand
separations, or any of the abrasive treatments characteristic of cell
proliferation assays currently on the market. The company plans to develop new
methods for the usage of its technology with Fluorescently Activated Cell
Sorting (FACS) protocols and testing different formats, such as tissues and
different cell lines, for the applicability of this method.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, is a
Fluorescent Imaging Kit that can be routinely used with such advanced techniques
as high content screening, high throughput screening for drug-discovery, and
ADME-TOX assays, as well as with more traditional cell biology and molecular
biology settings. The unique advantage of the proposed product is that it allows
cell monitoring over prolonged time periods, up to several days. The product
will have applications in multiple scientific disciplines, from cancer biology
to stem cell biology, and streamline experimental protocols. The proposed assays
are especially tailored to be fully compatible with high content screening, one
of the major technologies at the forefront of personalized medicine, most
notably in the field of oncology, and as such it will directly contribute to the
advancement of new therapies, better diagnostics, and more efficient treatment
plans. The method also will allow cutting costs of reagents by eliminating the
need to repeat experiments multiple times to monitor different markers, and by
streamlining research aspects of early stage drug discovery.