* 1152578
* A History of the Impact of Euro-American Linguistic Technologies on Chinese Information Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Thomas Mullaney, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 197,942.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;During the height of European imperialism in the
nineteenth century, China was caught up in a new development in global
information technology that was not of its own design. It was predicated on a
set of linguistic technologies and symbolic systems (such as the telegraph and
its attendant encoding systems) that depended upon something the Chinese
language does not possess, an alphabetic script. What ensued was over a century
of critical experimentation with the technological limits and potentials of
Chinese script. Involving a vast, transnational cast of characters, a culture of
innovation emerged around the Chinese Problem, and culminated in the development
of a new character-based information infrastructure that would come to govern an
immense Chinese character-based information environment, including indexes,
lists, catalogs, dictionaries, Braille, telegraph codes, stenograph codes,
typesetting machines, typewriters, computers, text messaging, and so forth.
Based upon archival and oral historical work conducted in 55 archives, special
collections, museums, private collections, and sites in more than ten countries,
this project charts the global history of this novel Chinese information
infrastructure, employing its most important and illustrative domain, the
Chinese typewriter, as a lens through which to understand this broader
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;This project is in
direct conversation with scholarship in at least ten distinct fields beyond the
history of science and technology. As a study of an unexamined aspect of modern
East Asian history, this project is of critical interest to specialists in
Chinese, Japanese, and Korean history. As a history involving a wide array of
major corporations including IBM, the RAND Corporation, Mergenthaler, Olivetti,
and Wang Laboratories (among many others), the project builds on scholarship in
Business History, Economics, and Political Science. Closely connected to the
history of the Chinese language itself, this project also draws upon and
contributes to Linguistics and Cultural Studies. At the same time, the
fascinating and unexamined history of the Chinese Typewriter Girl is likely to
be of interest to researchers in Women's Studies, both inside and outside of
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Beyond
academia, this project will be of substantial interest to a broad audience
within professional and public circles. It will provide easy entry to
practitioners and theorists in design, human-computer interaction, natural
language processing, and other branches of computer science into the still
poorly understood world of Chinese information technology. Within the public
media, this project will foster a deeper, empirical understanding of Chinese
information technology as well; given China's emergence as a global IT
powerhouse, acquiring that understanding has become more critical than ever.
Results of the research will be disseminated through a wide variety of media,
including single-author articles, collaborative articles, an interactive
research website, public lectures, and a book monograph. This project will also
continue to inform the development of new undergraduate and graduate coursework
pertaining to the history of technology, particularly in non-Western contexts.