* 1152386
* IDBR: Nanodroplet reactor arrays and imaging system for biomolecular structure and kinetics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Lori Goldner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 08/31/2016
* USD 508,927.00

IDBR: Nanodroplet reactor arrays and imaging system for biomolecular structure
and kinetics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description. This objective of this
project is to develop an instrument capable of high-throughput single-molecule
sensitive fluorescence measurement in arrays of aqueous nanodroplets in oil.
This instrument will make the observation of single-molecule trajectories more
accurate, higher-throughput, and more convenient. It will also facilitate new
types of measurements to address some of the most basic but still unanswered
questions in molecular biology and biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
following activities are planned: (1) Construction of a microscope with
integrated fluidics; (2) The design, prototyping and development of an
inexpensive, passive microfluidic device, compatible with single-molecule
sensitive imaging, for making nanodroplet arrays; (3) Demonstration and
validation of the integrated instrument through a study of nucleic acid
structure and structural kinetics; (4) Widespread dissemination through
publication, collaboration, and education; (5) Training of students at all
levels on the instrument and in microfluidics and single-molecule sensitive
techniques; and (6) Outreach and recruitment through the Northeast Alliance for
Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(NEAGEP)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance. Single-fluorophore and single-
particle sensitive measurements are now commonly used to better understand
structural transformations of, and interactions between, biological molecules.
The unprecedented detail revealed by these measurements is facilitating new
understandings of the biomolecular mechanisms that drive living systems. One
requirement of single-molecule observations is that a molecule under study must
be made to stay in the detection region of a microscope. For in-vitro
measurements, this is most often accomplished by chemically tethering the
molecules to a heterogeneous glass surface, or confining them in the pores of a
gel. In either case, the presence of heterogeneous surfaces frequently perturbs
or inactivates biomolecules and modifies the optical properties of the dyes that
are used to study them. These problems, which constitute a significant
limitation to in-vitro single-molecule-sensitive measurement, are widely
acknowledged but rarely addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Droplet arrays provide
a compelling alternative to surface attachment or gel confinement for single-
molecule measurement and imaging. Nanoscopic aqueous droplets in oil provide a
homogeneous environment for the confined molecules. Most biomolecules function
well inside these droplets. The droplets function as nanoscopic ?test-tubes,?
with each droplet in an array providing a unique environment, so that molecules
can be observed under many different conditions simultaneously. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work is therefore threefold. (1) A new
approach for single-molecule sensitive observations in vitro will be developed
that will simplify and improve measurements. (2) Use of this instrument in
studies of the flexibility and structural transformations of nucleic acids will
result in an improved physical understanding of how these molecules function.
(3) Many additional studies will be engendered by a simpler, faster platform for
single-molecule measurement; the outcome of these studies will impact fields as
diverse as materials science and drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact. In addition to the broad intellectual impact noted in (3) above,
educational and societal impacts will result from education and outreach
activities. As part of this work, students at all levels and with many
backgrounds will be introduced to interdisciplinary research and single-molecule
sensitive techniques. Training opportunities through new laboratory units are
planned for students at the undergraduate and graduate level. The instrument
will be used directly in graduate-level training. To help break societal
barriers associated with the participation of women and minority members in the
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) disciplines, recruitment
and retention of the best students from the broadest possible pool of applicants
will be facilitated by outreach activities through NEAGEP.