* 1152481
* EAGER: INSPIRE: Institutional Support for Personal/Institutional Repository Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2014
* Allison Powell, Corporation for National Research Initiatives (NRI)
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2014
* USD 360,000.00

Large-scale science and engineering campaigns have typically considered data
management from the inception of the project and funds for data management have
been included in the projects' budgets. This proposal is aimed at data
acquisition and curation strategies in support of single PI or small group
research projects at academic institutions, data in the so-called "long tail".
Long-term data management in these projects is much more problematic and
particularly acute. Smaller research projects are often strapped for funds to
conduct the research that generates the data; management of the data was in the
past often an afterthought. With data management plans now being required by
funding agencies, the issues must be considered as part of a proposal, but the
funding available for date management is still frequently small and economical
resources available to researchers still need to be cultivated. At academic
institutions, the institutional repository (IR) has emerged as the means of
harnessing technology to improve scholarly communication and it is the IR that
offers the potential to address the data curation problems of smaller projects.
Although institutional repositories have a broad intuitive appeal to all the
stakeholders involved with science and engineering data management, they have
met with very limited acceptance in practice. This proposal seeks to increase
faculty contribution of their data to the IR by appealing to their needs
directly and providing them with tools and support for developing personal
repositories that can subsequently be federated into the IR. The strategy is to
lower the barrier of entry to archiving facilities and to provide incentives for
researchers to participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts will be
realized in two key areas. First, archive and preservation of datasets will be
enhanced by increasing the participation of faculty and researchers generating
data at the nation's research institutions. Second, open source software well be
available for deployment by other institutions beyond the project's partners
thereby increasing the effectiveness of dataset archiving and sharing across a
growing set of participating institutions. The project will also offer research
and training opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students involved as
software developers and data consultants who interact with faculty and other
researchers as part of the project.