* 1152668
* SBIR Phase II:  Rapid Self-Decontaminating Textiles
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Charles Howland, Warwick Mills Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2014
* USD 499,480.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
develop a stretchy, disposable, textile glove intended to prevent cross-
contamination with 3-log reduction against bio-pathogens in under 90 seconds.
Its chlorine coating lasts for three days and unlike nitrile, latex, and vinyl
gloves, is breathable, reducing dermatitis associated with continual barrier
glove use. Currently antiseptic test standards for textiles, hand wash and hand
rubs, AATCC TM-100, BS EN 1499 and EN 1500 are inadequate to accurately evaluate
project's goal of 3-log reduction in 30-90 seconds. We developed a new protocol
appropriate to these faster times and that specifically measures contact
transfer - the Contact Transfer Test Protocol - that measures cross-
contaminating efficacy in seconds. This new protocol can be used in the
evaluation of other biocidal systems aiming for short pathogen kill speeds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this project,
if successful, is an innovation in the field of cross-contamination control.
While other attempts to make a self-decontaminating fabric have been made, their
3-log kill times are much longer than the 30-90 second goal of the BioTecT
Glove. The new BioTecT Glove represents a significant contribution to the field
of pathogen control, such as Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (VRSA)
and Methicillin-resistant staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) that persist even where
strong hand antiseptic and barrier glove programs are in place. While the
largest demand for the introduction of an innovative solution intended to
decrease the number of facility acquired infections (FAIs) may be in the
healthcare field, many other markets such as hospitality facilities, the
janitorial field, and correctional institutions can also benefit greatly from
this technology. From a financial perspective, the cost of an infectious
outbreak to a healthcare facility can be catastrophic. Moreover, the socio-
political consequences and the impact on a facility's reputation can create
long-term negative impressions that may remain in the public's conscience for
extended periods of time. As a rapid, self-decontaminating garment, the BioTecT
Glove provides an active, innovative solution to this common and serious problem
in an affordable, easy-to-use, and effective manner.