* 1152497
* SBIR Phase II:  Magnetic technologies for improved microalgal biofuels production
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Mark Abad, Phycal LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2014
* USD 495,763.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project develops novel
technologies for separation and concentration of intrinsically magnetically
susceptible algae for production of biofuels and biochemicals. Phase II builds
on the feasibility demonstrated in Phase I using a model alga. During Phase II,
an algal strain used for production of renewable biofuel feedstock will be
utilized. Novel transformation vectors and tools developed for a production
strain, Auxenochlorella protothecoides, will be used to make the algae
magnetically susceptible. These traits provided an advantage vs. wild-type
strains in growth in low iron medium for the model alga. Phase II will test
modified algal strains at lab- and subpilot-scale to determine their performance
in growth, and competition with wild-type and weedy algal strains. Additionally,
strains will be tested for their ability to be separated or harvested
magnetically. This separation will be modeled to determine cost efficacy for
primary or secondary dewatering. The specificity of this separation will also be
evaluated in relation to downstream use in a heterotrophic bioreactor. The OSU
collaboration allows use of these strains in novel rare earth magnetic
separators. The endpoint will be novel technologies to improve the overall cost
structure for the production of algae-derived biofuels and biochemicals.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase 2 research project will be
to provide improvements in the economics of producing renewable biofuels using
algae as the production system. It directly addresses one of the major issues
with algal biofuels, cost effective dewatering. It also provides a potential
selective advantage of the modified strains by improving its ability to compete
for iron in an open environment (such as open raceways or photobioreactors). The
nation has a critical need to improve its energy security and reduce its
dependence on fossil fuels. This research will help address both of these needs.
The overall purpose of this research project is business related and focused on
commercialization of this technology through integration in a biofuel production
process. This research project focuses on a high cost portion of the production
process, dewatering, as well as a critical unit process, the heterotrophic
bioreactor. The collaboration with OSU and the Cleveland Clinic will result in
training of students in this area. The company plans to publish the results of
this project once proper control of the intellectual property generated is
accomplished.