* 1152688
* SBIR Phase II:  Time-Resolved Fluorescence (TRF) Microscopy of Live Cells with Cell-Penetrating Peptides and Other Targeting Agents
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Darren Magda, Lumiphore, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 598,885.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses
challenges found with the current methods of microscopic imaging of protein-
protein interactions in living cells. These methods rely extensively on Förster
Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) between cyan (CFP) and yellow fluorescent
proteins (YFP). These methods are problematic, due to the interference from
background noise and the intrinsic photophysical properties of these
fluorophores. We have developed a system that uses a lanthanide complex donor in
combination with time resolved fluorescent microscopy, which overcomes these
limitations. The research objectives of this project are to expand the
capability of these luminescent probes, as well as scale-up in order to provide
enough material to meet manufacturing needs for initial product sales. By the
end of the project, we will have reagents for performing site directed time-
resolved measurements in live cells and an operational prototype time-resolved
imaging module.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project, if successful, is the potential to develop a new class of cell
imaging reagents and techniques. This innovation will improve the ability of
researchers to follow protein-protein interaction pathways with quantitative
accuracy that has not been available before. This will impact not only
fundamental and applied research but also primary healthcare through the
discovery of novel pharmaceutical targets and mechanisms to diagnose and treat
disease. The design and use of novel probes to study structure and function at
the molecular and subcellular level in living cells is a topic of great
importance, with a growing need for new approaches and tools to visualize not
only the distribution of molecular species in cells, but the manner in which
they interact. Protein-protein interactions and other dynamic events within
cells have been largely invisible, but will be increasingly observable with new
imaging modalities. In particular, lanthanide probes, with the dramatic lowering
of background achieved through time-gating can enable new microscopic imaging,
if successfully coupled with cell penetration and molecular targeting and
recognition. This new scientific capability is certain to have significant
commercial appeal and adoption in the basic science and medical research
markets.