* 1152722
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficient Manufacturing of Nanostructured Flexible Transparent Conducting Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Michael Young, Innova Dynamics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,115,170.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
high-performance transparent conductors as a replacement to Indium Tin Oxide
(ITO) in touchscreens. ITO suffers from a number of disadvantages, including
being one of the most expensive components of a touchscreen device, complex
manufacture, and inflexibility. In this project, a transparent conductor will be
developed using solution-based conventional coating equipment. Two key features
of this novel transparent conductor are: (1) ease of processing, which
eliminates many conventional processing steps involved in coatings; and (2)
extreme durability, which enables the creation of next-generation touch devices
that are otherwise impossible to realize with ITO or other ITO-alternative
materials. The tradeoff between photonic transmission and electronic conduction
will be theoretically and experimentally studied by extracting effective optical
parameters of transparent conductor films. The printed touchscreen sensors will
be integrated into functional multi-touch projected-capacitive devices, which
are expected to show mechanical flexibility, higher signal to noise ratios, and
faster response times.

The broader/commercial impacts of this project will be the potential to enable
enhanced performance of touchscreens at disruptively lower costs. The total
addressable market of patterned transparent conductor materials for touchscreen
industry is about $1.3 billion today. Currently, material and processing costs
of ITO represent a growing portion of the bill of materials for touchscreen
devices. Transparent conductors to be developed through this project offer low-
cost, high-performance, and high production throughput benefits, which will
address the ITO-related challenges in touchscreen industry. Other applications
of this technology includes liquid crystal displays, organic light emitting
diodes, e-paper, flexible displays, thin film photovoltaics, electromagnetic
shielding, defrosting windshields, low-emissivity architectural glass, and smart
windows.