* 1152304
* IDBR:   Instrument development for three-dimensional fluid flow measurements of freely-flying animals
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Pavlos Vlachos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2017
* USD 599,968.00

IDBR: Instrument development for three-dimensional fluid flow measurements of
freely-flying animals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flying and gliding animals, including
insects, birds, bats, and even lizards and snakes, have remarkable abilities for
executing rapid maneuvers and for maintaining flight stability when perturbed by
environmental factors. These capabilities form the basis of a wide variety of
ecologically important flight behaviors, including escaping from predators,
gathering food, and competing for mates. A comprehensive understanding of animal
flight stability and control requires integrated experiments on freely flying
animals responding to in-flight perturbations or generating self-motivated
maneuvers, and demands quantification of the resulting three-dimensional flow
around the free-flying animal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overcoming limitations of
existing technologies, this project will develop a novel tomographic velocimetry
technique for measuring three-dimensional fluid flow around freely flying
animals. The aims for this new method are to provide more than five-orders-of-
magnitude improvement in computational efficiency, improved flow field
measurement accuracy, and an increased ease of use. Once developed, the
technique and associated methodology and analysis tools will be freely
distributed to the biological and engineering sciences
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a transformative
leap in the experimentation and instrumentation technology required to
comprehensively investigate animal aerial locomotion. The new tools will enable
the investigation of flight dynamics and fascinating aerial behaviors that so
far have been elusive or poorly understood, and could ultimately help to answer
ecological and evolutionary questions. The advancements in three-dimensional
flow imaging developed here will also contribute to other areas of biology and
beyond, impacting numerous research areas that touch upon fluid mechanics. The
broader dissemination of the developed tools as an open-source software will
provide wide accessibility to researchers and offer a platform for sustainable
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work includes educational and
outreach efforts at multiple levels. At the university level, the material
developed here will serve as a basis for new courses on animal locomotion and
will support the development of a university-wide research program at the
interface of the biological and engineering sciences. Moreover, this project
will support primary and secondary level education by working with public school
teachers in under-resourced classrooms to develop novel lessons that integrate
biology and engineering in a way that captures student imaginations. The results
of this effort will be disseminated nationally and internationally via
entertaining, freely accessible videos.