* 1152531
* Fundamental and Mechanistic Studies of Negative Ion Electron Capture Dissociation (niECD)
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Kristina Hakansson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 03/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program supports work
by Professor Kristina HÃ¥kansson at the University of Michigan to explore the
mechanism and improve the analytical utility of negative ion electron capture
dissociation (niECD), a novel tandem mass spectrometry technique recently
discovered in the PI's laboratory. The goal of this research is to further
examine the counter-intuitive process of niECD, which results in charge-
increased rather than the typical charge-decreased species in other ion-electron
reactions. Further development of niECD will allow access to novel means for
detailed structural characterization of important low-level acidic
biomacromolecules such as phospho- and sulfopeptides, intact acidic proteins,
and RNA-small molecule complexes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational goals of
this work include training of graduate students in an interdisciplinary
environment as well as participation in a K-12 Summer Program "Girls in Science
and Engineering" offered by the University of Michigan's Women in Science and
Engineering Program. The latter activities are aimed at boosting an interest in
the scientific method at a young age through the discovery that the contents of
a box can be elucidated without opening it. The broader impact of the research
includes introduction of novel technology for biomolecular structural
characterization with important implications for drug discovery and an enhanced
understanding of the molecular basis of living organisms.