* 1152261
* SBIR Phase II:  Cloud-Enabled Analysis Of Facial Affect
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Rana elKaliouby, Affectiva, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,099,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will
commercialize the&lt;br/&gt;world?s first cloud-based emotion measurement
platform. Today, the majority of market&lt;br/&gt;research is expensive and
slow, relying either on subjective self-reports or costly,&lt;br/&gt;obtrusive
lab-based technologies. The proposed emotion measurement platform aims
to&lt;br/&gt;democratize market research by translating nonverbal facial
expressions into intuitive&lt;br/&gt;emotional insights. It also drives down
research costs and improves market reach&lt;br/&gt;through the use of widely
available webcams as the means to record faces. This&lt;br/&gt;platform enables
businesses of any size to capture consumer?s emotional reactions
as&lt;br/&gt;they engage with their brands, particularly in the areas of
advertising, product design&lt;br/&gt;and packaging. For example, brand
managers, marketers and agencies can optimize ad&lt;br/&gt;effectiveness by
evaluating viewers' tacit, moment-by-moment emotional response,
in&lt;br/&gt;real-time over the web, and through the platform?s emotion norms
database. The&lt;br/&gt;technical objectives of this project focus on
implementing automated facial analysis as a&lt;br/&gt;scalable cloud-based
software-as-a-service platform, building the emotion norms&lt;br/&gt;database,
and deploying the platform with leading market research
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is to disrupt longstanding&lt;br/&gt;methods in market research by
objectively measuring people?s emotional experiences&lt;br/&gt;a) unobtrusively
b) in real-time, c) at scale, and d) cost-effectively. While
this&lt;br/&gt;differentiated emotion measurement technology can be leveraged in
several target&lt;br/&gt;markets, the company?s initial focus is on measuring
advertising effectiveness and&lt;br/&gt;media research to deliver actionable
insights to leading media and market research&lt;br/&gt;companies. In addition,
the proposed cloud-based emotion measurement platform has&lt;br/&gt;the
potential to significantly accelerate research in behavioral sciences by
enabling the&lt;br/&gt;crowd sourcing of huge corpuses of naturalistic and
spontaneous responses to a wide&lt;br/&gt;range of interactions and experiences
from online learning to social gaming. It also&lt;br/&gt;allows entirely new
research questions to be asked, and tackled with ecologically
valid&lt;br/&gt;data, such as whether individuals on the autism spectrum respond
differently to content.&lt;br/&gt;Thus, in line with the origins of this
technology, our product accelerates psychological&lt;br/&gt;and clinical
research on social-emotional intelligence. The long-term vision for
this&lt;br/&gt;software as a service platform is to ?emotion-enable? the
Internet, giving consumers and&lt;br/&gt;organizations the ability to add
emotion context to all online interactions.