* 1152562
* SBIR Phase II:  A Resilient and Underactuated Robotic Hand Capable of Both Power and Precision Grasping
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2016
* David Wilkinson, Barrett Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 757,244.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project proposes a robotic hand
based on a novel&lt;br/&gt;torque-switching mechanism and patented miniature
motor controllers. The mechanism actively channels&lt;br/&gt;motor torque along
different transmission paths and enables dependant and independent (time-
discreet)&lt;br/&gt;control of both finger joints in a robotic hand to perform
both power and pinch grasps. There is a growing&lt;br/&gt;need in industry for
adaptable and flexible manufacturing capabilities in a dynamic environment.
Industry&lt;br/&gt;generally uses single-axis grippers and end-effectors that
are modified to pick up specific items in a&lt;br/&gt;highly-controlled
environment. This requires exchanging multiple customized and expensive grippers
via&lt;br/&gt;tool-changers. This project?s goal is to produce a paradigm shift
in the materials-handling industry by&lt;br/&gt;introducing a highly flexible,
affordable, and lightweight robotic gripper that can grasp and
manipulate&lt;br/&gt;objects of varying size, shape, and stiffness. The Phase-II
project objectives are to design and develop a&lt;br/&gt;prototype 3-fingered
gripper using a novel torque-switching mechanism, optimized motors,
multiple&lt;br/&gt;feedback sensors, and miniature control electronics, and to
test and evaluate the prototype gripper in an&lt;br/&gt;industrial setting. This
program will result in a compact, lightweight, and affordable robotic hand
capable&lt;br/&gt;of grasping and manipulating a large range of
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project addresses the shortcomings of gripper devices&lt;br/&gt;available today
which discourage the use of robotic systems, thereby undermining
manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;productivity. The proposed solution improves
manufacturing competitiveness by enabling easier adoption&lt;br/&gt;of robotic
work cells in conventional markets such as light manufacturing and emerging
markets such as&lt;br/&gt;the food and beverage industry. The societal impact
will be felt in the field of education where robotics is&lt;br/&gt;recognized as
a strategic motivator for children and young adults to enter into technical
fields. Most&lt;br/&gt;robots are too large and dangerous to bring into a
classroom. The proposed robotic hand will be very&lt;br/&gt;portable, safe, and
exciting for both educators and students. A significant increase in gripper
dexterity will make it an even more attractive motivator in the classroom and
other secondary educational programs and&lt;br/&gt;workshops. A potential
secondary application for this innovation is a more dexterous and
lightweight&lt;br/&gt;hand prosthesis which could have a major societal impact.
Finally, the ability to transmit torque through&lt;br/&gt;different paths in a
miniature package and allow control of different functions with a single small
actuator&lt;br/&gt;enables lightweight yet versatile machines and could have
impacts beyond the field of robotics.