* 1152872
* Postdoctoral Fellowship -- Knowledge Systems Analysis for Environmental Decision Making: Energy Development in the Four Corners Region of the American Southwest, 1960-2010
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Clark Miller, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

Over the past three decades, policymakers and researchers in varied social
scientific fields have developed both a thorough understanding and a critique of
conventional approaches to the use of scientific knowledge in environmental
policy and decisionmaking. However, the collective insights of this work have
had, at best, only marginal impacts on the production, review, and application
of scientific knowledge in environmental policy in the United States. Moreover,
existing tools do not provide systematic ways of identifying the consequences of
environmental policy decisions. This research project addresses that gap by
developing a conceptual framework and set of policy tools, called Knowledge
Systems Analysis, that can be used by researchers and policymakers to guide the
systematic review of environmental decisions and their outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of KSA will take place through theoretical
research, and through empirical analyse of a network of coal mines and coal-
fired power plants in the Four Corners region of the American Southwest. The
empirical component entails a quantitative postaudit of the predictions in
environmental and hydrologic impact statements, and a qualitative social and
institutional analysis of the normative practices through which environmental
knowledge is produced, validated, and used in policy decisionmaking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to producing an innovative policy tool and
theoretical framework, this award will fund the development of a KSA pedagogical
tool for students in professional public policy degree programs at Arizona State
University. The project will also contribute important insights to the practice
of environmental impact assessment and deterministic modeling, present a case
study on the management and resilience of complex socio-ecological systems, and
contribute to the environmental history of energy development on the tribal
lands in the American Southwest. Finally, the research supports the training of
a postdoctoral researcher.