* 1152963
* Systematic Studies of the Dynamics, Energetics, and Surface Interactions of Plasma Species during Materials Processing
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Ellen Ellen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2016
* USD 554,868.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Fisher from Colorado State University
will investigate the effect of plasma modification processes on surfaces. Plasma
processing has become indispensable in a wide range of applications where high
performance materials with tailored surface properties are employed. Moreover,
development of new plasma surface modification processes and deposition
chemistries is a burgeoning area with impact on biomaterials, coatings, and
sensor applications. A more complete understanding of the underlying chemistry
in these systems could lead to manufacturing improvements with economic impact
across many industries. Thus, the goal of the proposed work is to improve
understanding of the fundamental chemical processes that occur at surfaces
during plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition and surface modification of
polymers. Professor Fisher and her students will achieve this goal through an
integrated, comprehensive approach to understanding the molecular-level
chemistry in these systems. The primary experimental tools to be employed are in
situ sum frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy and the laser-based imaging of
radicals interacting with surfaces (IRIS) technique, which provides steady-state
surface interaction data for plasma species. The SFG experiments are designed to
examine the evolution of plasma modified films upon exposure to atmospheric
gases to study labile intermediates formed in plasma modification, thereby
elucidating mechanisms involved in aging and hydrophobic recovery processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma processing is used to prepare high performance
materials with tailored surface properties. These materials are used in many
fields and industries including computational science, information processing,
data management, sensor fabrication and communications. In this project, Prof.
Fisher and her students will use a combination of experimental tools to study
plasma processing. The results will enable the development of new materials and
the improvement of existing ones. The intrinsic interdisciplinary nature of this
research will afford students a broad exposure to and education in chemistry,
engineering, and materials science, beyond the traditional boundaries in
chemistry. Professor Fisher will continue her efforts in broadening
participation of underrepresented groups and use the proposed experiments to
develop demonstrations of plasmas and lasers for visitors, high school groups
and K-12 teachers.