* 1152040
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Synthesis Method for Ionic Liquids
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Jerry Martin, Boulder Ionics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2015
* USD 1,089,972.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is targeted at the
development of a novel, low-cost continuous method for the production of ionic
liquids. Ionic liquids are a class of industrial chemicals with broad
applications in energy, pharmaceutical, biomass and solar fields. Ionic liquids
are leading candidates for electrolytes in advanced batteries and capacitors
where they enable non-flammable, longer-lived batteries that store more energy
than current models. While the potential of ionic liquids is significant, the
current cost is prohibitive. Boulder Ionics Corporation proposes to develop a
novel, cost-effective method for producing ionic liquids in industrial volumes.
The highly flexible technique enables continuous production of ionic liquids
with low capital cost. It eliminates the use of solvents in the synthesis
process, and produces a very high purity product. In Phase II the company will
develop the novel synthesis process, demonstrate low-cost ways of making key
precursors, and develop techniques for purifying and measuring the purity of the
products. Successful completion of the program will result in low-cost, high-
performance electrolytes for advanced energy storage.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to make ionic liquids
cost-effective in a wide range of industries. Ionic liquids can replace volatile
organic solvents in a vast range of industrial processes, are leading candidates
for biomass processing, and have broad applications in electrochemistry,
advanced batteries, supercapacitors/ultracapacitors and as heat transfer fluids
in advanced concentrating solar plants. In addition, our innovative synthesis
technique has broad application across the chemical industry. Cost-effective
ionic liquids are critical elements of the new energy economy, with applications
in biomass, solar power, and grid-scale energy storage. Techniques developed in
this research will enhance scientific understanding of novel chemical reactors,
leading to a new generation of more efficient and less-polluting chemical
plants. Knowledge gained in this program will enable technologies that will
enhance U.S. energy security, and strengthen the emerging U.S. battery industry.