* 1152256
* Outreach and Scaling-up Activities for the ALIGNED Project
* GEO,GEO
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Patricia Solis, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 08/31/2012
* USD 31,579.00

This RAPID award is being used to augment capabilities of a new geospatial
undergraduate student recruitment toolkit under development at the American
Association of Geographers that is helping geoscience and geography departments
identify and reach students both within their common source regions and from
among their undecided major population. AAG's innovative department toolkit
combines a spatial decision support system prototype and an online clearinghouse
of materials for increasing the participation of members of underrepresented
groups in geography/geosciences. This grant is being used to incorporate new
outreach and scaling-up activities that will address two objectives that remain
central to the ALIGNED project's original goals. Additional key features are
being incorporated into the toolkit and the departmental data holdings are being
expanded, in preparation for broader use as a national level toolkit.
Undergraduate profile data of approximately 50 additional departments are being
added to the system. In addition, a map layer that locates institutions with
active NSF awards from the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
Program (LSAMP), Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP),
Centers for Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST), Historically
Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), Increasing the
Participation and Advancement of Women in Academic Science and Engineering
Careers (ADVANCE), and/or Opportunities for Enhancing Diversity in the
Geosciences (OEDG) programs is being developed. AAG is also producing seven new
outreach videos that address common issues and considerations about the
geosciences that often inform decisions made by under-reprented students
regarding education and career pathways. The themes being featured in these
videos have been developed through consultation with representatives from
minority-serving institutions and professional societies supporting these
communities, including the American Geophysical Union (AGU), American Geological
Institute (AGI), Hispanic Association of Colleges &amp; Universities (HACU),
and, the American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHEC). These activities
are being conducted in conjunction with events being organized in at the AAG's
Annual Meeting in New York, February 2012, where more than 8,500 attendees are
expected and special coordinated activities among the major geography and
geoscience associations are being planned.