* 1152403
* International Travel: AIChE-SCEJ Co-sponsored Symposium on Biorecognition and Transport Phenomena in Bioseparation and Bio-nanotechnology in Tokyo, Japan, on March 14-17, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Giorgio Carta, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 02/28/2013
* USD 5,000.00

Carta, Giorgio &lt;br/&gt;1152403&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is requested from the NSF to help support
travel expenses for participants from U.S. academic and nonprofit research
institutions who are members of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers
(AIChE) to attend the Annual Meeting of the Society of Chemical Engineers of
Japan (SCEJ) to be held in Tokyo, Japan, on March 14-17, 2012 on the occasion of
the 75th Anniversary of the foundation of SCEJ. A special session entitled
"Biorecognition and Transport Phenomena in Bioseparation and Bio-nanotechnology"
cosponsored by SCEJ and AIChE is planned for this meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following the lead of a successful similarly co-sponsored
session held at the 2010 Annual AIChE Meeting, the primary goals and, hence, the
intellectual merit of this session is to allow scientists and engineers from the
U.S. and Japan to share their most recent research efforts in a critically
important area where these two countries lead, to strengthen their scientific
relationships, and to establish a basis for future collaborations. Engineers and
Scientists from Europe and other parts of Asia and Oceania are also expected to
participate, providing a truly international forum for a broad dissemination of
knowledge at the forefront. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed activity are
associated with the potential technological advances in biotechnology,
biopharmaceuticals, biomaterials, and biosensing made possible by sharing new
scientific information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further broader impacts will be
associated with the participation of U.S. faculty in a Japanese conference and
their exposure to the Japanese scientific community, a strengthened relationship
between the leading chemical engineering professional societies in U.S. and
Japan, and further improved scientific ties between the two countries. As is
well known, Japan was recently impacted by a devastating earthquake, which has
caused widespread damage and loss of life. The Japanese scientific community has
also been negatively impacted in a serious way. Thus, participation of U.S.
scientists and engineers in this jointly sponsored session will also serve to
show solidarity to our Japanese colleagues during a time of severe hardship.