* 1152899
* Theoretical Studies of Intermolecular Forces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Krzysztof Szalewicz, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2016
* USD 444,000.00

Krzysztof Szalewicz of the University of Delaware is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to perform
theoretical investigations of molecular clusters, condensed phases, and
biochemical aggregates. The goal of this work is to increase understanding of
physical, chemical, and biochemical phenomena that depend on inter-molecular
forces. These properties can be predicted theoretically if high-accuracy
potential energy surfaces, or force fields, are known. Such surfaces are
computed ab initio using symmetry-adapted perturbation theory (SAPT) co-
developed by the PI. SAPT provides a unique ability to interpret properties
dependent on intermolecular forces in terms of the four fundamental physical
mechanisms that lead to the electrostatic, exchange, induction, and dispersion
contributions to the interaction energies. Such interpretation also provides a
connection between the cluster properties and the properties of the constituent
monomers. A version of SAPT based on monomers described by density-functional
theory is currently the only method which can be applied to compute interactions
between molecules containing about 100 atoms with uncertainties of only a few
percent. SAPT is undergoing further developments, in particular applying
localization techniques that should further increase the range of tractable
systems. Several applications intended to assist interpretation of experimental
data for systems ranging from diatoms to molecular crystals are underway. Such
applications include developments of system-specific force fields which are then
used in nuclear dynamics calculations and molecular simulations. Also, system-
universal force fields are developed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
activity will result in a better understanding of intermolecular interactions
which govern properties of condensed phases and biological aggregates. Novel
ideas aimed at improvement of theoretical tools for investigations of these
interactions are investigated. The development of first-principle-based
universal force fields has the promise of transforming the field of biomolecular
simulation. This activity will also result in new pressure and temperature
standards, help in developments of "green chemistry", aid explorations of energy
resources, provide data for constructing models of the atmosphere, help to
understand processes in interstellar molecular clouds, guide development of
nanomaterials, make simulations of biological phenomena more reliable, and
assist pharmaceutical industry in predictions of polymorphic forms of medical
drugs. The SAPT software available free to all interested researchers and used
by about 500 groups worldwide is continuously improved in efficiency and user
friendliness.