* 1152159
* Complexity Control in Enyne Photocycloadditions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Scott Sieburth, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division is
funding Professor Scott Sieburth of the Department of Chemistry at Temple
University to study a photochemical cycloaddition reaction between aromatic
rings and enynes (a.k.a. vinyl acetylenes) and application of the products.
Cycloaddition reactions are among the most powerful ways of building molecules.
This new cycloaddition assembles an eight-membered ring, a medium ring that is
not easily accessible, by bringing together two four-atom components. The [4+4]
class of cycloadditions is itself unusual and use of enynes for this reaction is
unprecedented. The product contains a strained and highly reactive allene that
undergoes subsequent chemistry, including rearrangements and additional
cycloaddition reactions. Overall, this photoreaction takes simple components and
builds complex products in a single step that are rich in functional groups and
stereochemistry. With a goal of building useful new chemical structures rapidly,
trapping of the reactive allene functional group will be studied, both inter-
and intramolecularly. The broader impacts involve training undergraduate
students, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.

This work could lead to new chemical structures with useful properties,
structures that are not accessible using standard synthetic transformations.
Moreover, the use of light to induce reactions, instead of chemical reagents, is
an intrinsically "green" process. Successful development of this chemistry will
have a broad impact on research that relies on novel molecules and their
properties, such as the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. In addition,
this project will provide training in both modern organic synthesis and
photochemistry for students, from undergraduate to post-doctoral, including
those from groups historically underrepresented in the sciences.