* 1152560
* SBIR Phase II:  CohortFS:  A Replicated, Parallel Storage System for Cloud Computing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Matthew Benjamin, Cohort FS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 10/31/2015
* USD 753,039.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II Project advances
CohortFS, a replicated, parallel storage platform for cloud computing. CohortFS
offers unique capabilities for data partitioning, secure data access and
retention, and flexible management of storage at very-large scale, with seamless
federation across geographically dispersed, separately-managed data centers.
CohortFS improves the flexibility and simplicity of cloud storage management and
facilitates uniform management of distributed volumes, whether local, remote, or
in the cloud. The CohortFS model for transparent encryption protects data from
storage providers and others in shared data center facilities, a key
consideration for cloud data privacy and security which are consistently found
to be the primary barriers to adoption of Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) and
cloud storage.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes advancement of
standards-based storage infrastructure, advancement of both open source and
proprietary storage technologies, and development of high-value software
infrastructure that can be readily commercialized. CohortFS innovations in wide
area replication and flexible data placement improve storage performance and
manageability in public and private clouds. Using the cloud as an enabling
medium, CohortFS translates advances in petascale data organization and secure,
wide-area replication to broader markets and commercial sectors. By improving
the economy and utility of storage at cloud scale, CohortFS widens the
applicability of cloud computing, speeds its adoption, and deepens its
impact?goals strongly supportive of the broader NSF mission.