* 1152577
* SBIR Phase II:  A High Strength and Durable Composite NanoWrap for Repair and Rehabilitation of Piping and Other Civil Infrastructure Systems
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,06/30/2014
* James Souza, Pipe Wrap LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will continue
the development, validation, and full-scale testing of a new patent-pending
nanoparticle-reinforced composite product for the repair and rehabilitation of
piping and other civil infrastructure systems. The overarching goal of the
research is to develop and demonstrate a composite system that can be used to
repair pipes without requiring expensive, and sometimes dangerous, cutout and
repair of pipe sections, while also meeting Department of Transportation (DOT)
requirements to qualify it as a permanent rather than temporary repair. In order
to meet these requirements, a composite wrap system is needed with fatigue
properties that are much better than current systems. Test results obtained in
Phase I demonstrate that the fatigue resistance of our new nanoparticle-
reinforced composite repair system outperforms traditional pipeline repair
composite materials currently on the market. The specific goals of Phase II will
be: 1) validation of initial results from Phase I; 2) extension of property
testing to prepare for full-scale testing under American Society of Mechanical
Engineers (ASME) PCC-2 requirements; 3) design of a manufacturing machine to
produce the new composite product and 4) completion of full-scale testing to
prove compliance with DOT regulations.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to significantly
improve the safety and reduce costs for repair of DOT-regulated and industrial
pipelines through the development of a high-strength, fatigue- and corrosion-
resistant pipe repair system with a design life over 50 years. There were 6,042
"significant incidents" related to pipeline damage from 1988 to 2008, resulting
in 427 fatalities, 1,805 injuries and property damage totaling $3.8 billion.
Composite repair products currently used to prevent pipeline failures are
economical, easy to apply, and can be used to repair other civil infrastructures
such as bridge columns and piers. However, current composite repair systems for
pipelines qualify only as a temporary repair due to their susceptibility to
fatigue, and therefore require eventual replacement via cut-out. Development of
a composite wrap system that qualifies as a permanent repair would have a
transformational impact on the pipeline industry, placing the commercial
potential of this product at $50-100 million, even with a relatively small
market share. In addition, with the availability of stronger and less expensive
field repairs, pipeline companies are likely to become more proactive with their
composite repair programs, resulting in an overall reduction in catastrophic
failures and incidents.