* 1152265
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Commercial Two-Dimensional Infrared (2D IR) Spectrometer for Characterization of Chemical Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Sterling Backus, KAPTEYN-MURNANE LABORATORIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2014
* USD 507,303.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a
prototype for a commercial two-dimensional infrared (2D IR) spectrometer and its
associated mid-infrared laser system. One of the most exciting developments in
the field of ultrafast spectroscopy in the last decade has been the invention of
2D IR spectroscopy. It is now being used to study problems in material science,
chemical dynamics, electron transfer, biophysics, polymer structure, solar
energy, analytical diagnostics and others. But while it is now recognized as a
valuable research tool, it is difficult to implement since it is only being
utilized by a relatively small group of ultrafast spectroscopists that
specialize in infrared spectroscopy. The research objectives of this project are
to design and develop a 2D IR spectrometer, including an efficient mid-infrared
laser source, which requires no technical skills to operate. It will utilize
mid-infrared pulse shaping, a newly designed optical parametric amplifier, and a
mid-IR pump laser. The system will be mechanically robust and computer automated
so that it will be used by 2D IR experts and non-experts
alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project is the development of a commercial 2D IR spectrometer that will be used
in academic, government, and industrial research laboratories worldwide with
applications spanning the biological, chemical and physical sciences. 2D IR
spectroscopy provides structural and dynamical information that is difficult to
obtain with other techniques, such as at inorganic/organic interfaces that are
important in solar cell research or membrane proteins associated with
pharmaceutical targets. There are more than 15,000 research laboratories
worldwide that utilize infrared spectroscopy of some type, and 2000 labs that
utilize ultrafast spectroscopy. Thus, the commercial potential is substantial.
The development of this laser technology has important societal implications due
to the wide range of scientific and industrial topics that this technology can
be applied.