* 1152322
* Scholars Award: Map Wars: The History and Sociology of Mapping Practices in Israel and the Palestinian Territories
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2019
* Christine Leuenberger, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 166,291.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the interlinkages between science,
politics and state-making. The focus is on how the geographical sciences become
entangled with politics, territorial claim making, and nation-state building in
Israel and the Palestinian Territories since 1948 until today. Qualitative
research methods such as in-depth interviewing, ethnography, and archival and
library research will be used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates: how geography, cartography and
mapping practices have become entwined with the building of nation-states; how
social, institutional, and political contexts shape map-making; how various
actors, institutions, and governments use maps to shape territorial visions; and
how maps relate to material structures (such as the West Bank Barrier). The
project also aims to develop a systematic and comprehensive methodology to
analyze how social and political concerns become embedded in the visual rhetoric
of maps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;New mapping
technologies and software greatly enable user-defined mapping practices. As a
result, various social groups increasingly disseminate alternative mappings. In
such an environment it is especially pertinent to focus scholarly attention on
developing conceptual tools for understanding the rhetoric of mapping practices.
The Israeli-Palestinian dispute over mapping provides a rich context for
theorizing about alternative mapping practices so as to emphasize the importance
of constructing integrative maps that recover diverse geopolitical visions. A
careful analyses of how and why different adversarial groups map the same
territory differently may serve as a resource for reconciliation; it will
contribute to a better understanding of the historical and political genealogy
of such diverging practices and provide insight into the social-ethnic histories
of diverse populations in Israel and the Palestinian Territories, and in other
suitably similar contexts.