* 1152876
* Collapse versus aggregation of proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* B. Montgomery Pettitt, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. B. Montgomery Pettitt, from the University of Texas Medical
Branch, Galveston, seeks to understand, through computational approaches, the
role of the solubility of the backbone and side chains in folding and
recognition in peptides and proteins.

The mechanisms governing recognition between proteins and the transition of
proteins from their unfolded state to their native state in cells still remain
as elusive fundamental questions. Recent experiments studying the interactions
between cellular osmolytes and proteins have challenged the prevailing paradigm
of the protein folding mechanism. Interpretation of those experiments holds that
the backbone solubility difference in osmolyte is a dominant driving force
rather than just the sidechains. Recent theoretical efforts to date have not
resolved the issue. Dr. Pettitt's goals are to computationally test hypotheses
concerning the magnitude of the nonideal backbone solubility in comparison to
side chain solvation as driving forces in protein folding. His group will use
glycine oligomers as models for the protein backbone and alanine oligomers as
small fast folders to understand side chain effects in quantitative comparison
to backbone.

This research effort aims to resolve a critical issue concerning the chemical
driving force for all protein folding. This goal has many far reaching societal
benefits and is generally important for the fields of protein engineering and
biotechnology. As such it will provide numerous interdisciplinary opportunities
for the inclusion of women and underrepresented groups in the project. All
participants will be encouraged to attend both national and local meetings of
relevance. Dr. Pettitt is well positioned to recruit minority and female
students and post-doctorates to participate in this project. His group works
with the Rice/Houston Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate and
the Houston-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, which includes the
University of Houston-Downtown, Texas State University-San Marcos, and Texas
Southern University, among others.