* 1152661
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative Green Technology for Advanced, Patient-Centered Home Hemodialysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Takuji Tsukamoto, Chemica Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2015
* USD 590,957.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the
further development of an advanced, mobile, easy-to-use, patient-oriented,
advanced Home Hemodialysis (HHD) system that minimizes the use of water (less
than 6 liters) and medical waste, and importantly, minimizes nutrient loss. End-
stage renal disease (ESRD) is a devastating, disabling disease. Many ESRD
patients and their family members are severely limited in the mobility and
freedom due to the time and effort of having hemodialysis (HD) treatments at
hospitals and dialysis centers. Our ultimate goal is to develop a next
generation lightweight HD machine (~22 kg) equipped with high precision
components and an innovative dialysate regeneration cartridge (DRC). This Phase
II program focuses on the construction of a prototype HHD machine that is fully
equipped with necessary functions and safety devices. The intellectual merits
are based on both the highly efficient and selective DRC composed of a
specifically functionalized sorbent, and the compact and highly efficient HD
machine that allows for a well-configured and accurately controlled dialysis
treatment. This development would greatly improve quality of life for ESRD
patients and their families by allowing for effective and comfortable treatment
at home, or even at work or school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project, if successful, is to reduce the
economic burden of ESRD on both patients and Federal healthcare programs. As the
number of HD patients approaches 3 million globally, it is becoming critical to
decrease the cost and resource burden of treating these patients by drastically
decreasing facility costs, use of water and energy in treatment. The second
impact is to increase patients' quality of life by facilitating greater
flexibility in the length and place of treatment (home, school, work). This
system also allows for the personalized dialysis treatment of patients through
selective adsorption of toxins. The proposed mobile, semi-portable HD machine
offers many advantages over currently available dialysis systems, resulting in
high commercial potential. The system will enhance the scientific and technical
knowledge in the fields of bioengineering of dialysis and chemistry of sorbent
technologies. Given the flexibility in dialysis treatment, the quality of life
of dialysis patients will be greatly enhanced. Since this product achieves two
goals simultaneously, namely improved treatment and reduced cost, it has a
significant advantage over many of the competitive products available today.