* 1152853
* Elucidation of the Factors Governing the Colorimetric and Luminescence-Based Responses of Supported Platinum(II) Salts to Aqueous Anions: Foundation for Effective Anion Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* William Connick, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 405,000.00

This award in the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms supports work by
Professor William Connick at the University of Cincinnati to prepare new
materials containing platinum(II) salts and to determine the factors that govern
the colorimetric and luminescence-based responses of these materials to aqueous
anions. These studies are expected to lead to new materials and methods for
their preparation. In addition, this research will provide fundamental insight
into the influence of micro- and nanoenvironments on structure and electronic
properties of the incorporated platinum salts. Ultimately, these studies are
expected to provide the knowledge needed to develop rational strategies for
designing aqueous anion sensing devices. The research will be accomplished by
exploring a series of synthetic strategies and employing a battery of physical
methods for materials characterization and investigations of ion exchange. The
research activities will bring together a research team composed of high school
students, undergraduate students, graduate students, and Professor Connick. In
collaboration with a Cincinnati Public Schools teacher, hands-on demonstrations
of these ion-exchange materials will be developed in order to help teach
fundamental chemical concepts to high students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the
importance of monitoring anion levels in the environment and the human body, the
rapid, on-site and low-cost detection of certain ions (e.g., oxyanions) remains
a significant challenge. For example, perchlorate anion poses a health hazard
because it persists for long times in the environment and interferes with
thyroid function. However, sensitive methods of perchlorate detection are
expensive and cumbersome for field work. The research conducted under this award
will lay the foundation for a new strategy for ion sensing. The resulting anion-
sensitive materials will exhibit characteristic phosphorescence when exposed to
certain aqueous anions, such as perchlorate. In principle, this anion-induced
response can be exploited for the rapid, low-cost detection of specific aqueous
anions in flowing natural water, underground plumes, industrial effluent, and
municipal water. Activities under this award will focus on developing methods
for preparing materials with these properties and determining how they work. The
resulting insights are an essential first step toward the development of
rational approaches for incorporation of these materials in ion sensing devices.
Thus, the research is expected to enable new technologies that promote
sustainability. The knowledge gathered from these studies also is expected to be
relevant in fields such as ion sequestration, vapor-sensing, chemical catalysis,
and non-linear optics.