* 1152252
* SBIR Phase II:  Thin Film Patterned Optical Retarders for Low Energy Smart Glass Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Ryan Tatzel, SmarterShade, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2015
* USD 782,873.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II project will develop a
low-cost smart-window technology. This project will utilize contemporary display
industry fabrication and processing technologies to create unique large-area
optical films. These films will be subsequently used to construct energy-
efficient smart windows that modulate transmission or reflection of light on
command. Windows, skylights, and other glazings made with this technology will
have the ability to darken on command. In this Phase II project, window-size
prototypes will be designed, constructed and evaluated. Production, material
costs, and prototype operation will be considered. Successful fabrication of
these prototypes will enable smart windows to be manufactured in an
electrochemically passive manner, simplifying their installation in existing
windows, minimizing up-front costs, and ultimately reducing energy bills. The
technology is also uniquely capable of being applied as an aftermarket or
retrofit solution.

The broader impact of this project will be a potential savings of billions of
dollars in energy costs in the United States alone, and a reduction of carbon
footprint. Buildings are responsible for seventy percent of the electricity
consumed in the United States. As part of a daylighting /natural heating
strategy, smart window technologies have received much attention for their
ability to reduce building energy consumption. Unfortunately, existing smart
window products suffer from severe limitations in lifespan, scalability and
cost. The technology to be developed is a radically different approach to smart
windows because instead of electrochemical processes, it utilizes stable films.
This affords more chemical stability, longer life, better manufacturing
scalability, power independence (via manual operation), and lower costs to the
consumer.