* 1152253
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Slurry Injector Device for Chemical Mechanical Planarization Application
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Yasa Sampurno, Araca, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2015
* USD 850,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a novel slurry injection device for applications in chemical mechanical
planarization (CMP), a key technology for integrated circuit (IC) manufacturing.
Different from the current slurry application method that applies slurry on the
pad center area during wafer polishing, this novel slurry injector device is
placed on top of the pad surface, injects the fresh slurry to where it is
needed, and reduces slurry mixing and dilution effects by blocking used slurry,
pad debris, and rinsing water from re-entering the pad-wafer interface. Tests
will be performed on various polishers to optimize the slurry injector device
design for different CMP processes. This slurry injector device is expected to
achieve higher material removal rates and reduce polishing defects compared to
current pad center area slurry application method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader/commercial impacts of this project will be the potential to reduce
slurry consumption and increase yield during CMP processes for the IC
manufacturing industry. In 2012, the global point-of-use slurry usage is
estimated to be in excess of 600 million liters corresponding to a total slurry
expenditure of approximately $1 billion. Assuming a conservative slurry savings
of 15 percent by this slurry injector device, it represents a potential $150
million savings in slurry and an additional $25 million savings in waste
treatment.