* 1152361
* IDBR:   Bat-mounted Recording and Wireless Transmission of Ultrasonic Calls
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Gary McCracken, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 06/30/2016
* USD 397,103.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acoustic communication and
echolocation of bats are among the most sophisticated and technically impressive
sensory capabilities in the animal world. The study of bats is important to gain
insight into these capabilities as well as to understand the roles of bats as
predators of agricultural pests and vectors of infectious disease. Specifically,
analysis of the acoustic signals used by bats for foraging and communication is
necessary to understand their community structure, hunting patterns, and the
signal processing underlying their capabilities. However, efforts to study bat
calls in natural settings have been limited by the constraints imposed by
ground-based recording equipment. Because of their small body sizes most bats
are incapable of carrying existing ultrasonic recording instruments. Therefore,
all studies to date have been conducted either in artificial laboratory
conditions with fixed recording equipment, or in the wild with ground-based,
typically stationary, recording equipment. Both methods have a variety of
serious shortcomings. Ultrasound signals are context-specific and vary rapidly
and over short distances, so a fixed recording device will not capture the same
signals observed by a bat. Laboratory conditions cannot mimic the complex
natural environment. With the use of ground-based recordings it usually is not
possible to separate the calls made by individual bats. The echoes reflected
from targeted insects often are too faint to be detected by ground-based
recording equipment. As a result, the information obtainable by ground-based
equipment is necessarily incomplete. With recent advances in electronics
technology, a wide variety of miniaturized sensors have become possible. This
project will include the development of miniaturized ultrasonic recording
devices to be mounted on bats for recording calls and echoes during flight. The
final design will utilize a custom integrated circuit (IC) to achieve a total
system weight under 1 g. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in an
acoustic monitoring device unlike any existing instrument. By reducing the
distance between the bat and the transducer from a few 10's of meters to a few
centimeters, the instrumentation developed in this project will realize an
improvement in signal quality of several orders of magnitude compared to
existing ground-based recording techniques. Furthermore, recordings of more
distant bats that are currently infeasible due to signal attenuation will be
made practical with the proposed instrument. A bat-mounted recorder will also
enable separation of signals from individual bats and the ability to follow an
individual bat over a significant distance. Additionally, the proposed research
will advance the design of ultra-low-power wireless instrumentation and
integrated circuit design. &lt;br/&gt;This project offers the potential to
introduce a breakthrough in methods for bat research. The knowledge gained
through the use of the proposed instrument will provide important insights into
communication among bats that are relevant to the role of bats as predators of
agricultural pests and to public health concerns regarding bats' role as disease
vectors. It will also contribute to the understanding of bats' ultrasonic
sensing capacities. The instrumentation developed in this project will also be
useful for a wide variety of other scientific investigations, such as the study
of song learning in songbirds or language acquisition in human infants. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project will provide an opportunity for graduate
and undergraduate students to work at the intersection of biology and
electronics. The integration of the proposed circuits into a complete recording
system will provide valuable practical experience in working with complex
electronic systems-on-chip.