* 1152725
* Developing Catalytic Methods to Control Cationic Electrocyclizations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Richard Eisenberg, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2015
* USD 460,604.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Alison Frontier and Professor Richard Eisenberg of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Rochester will develop strategies
to control reactivity and different types of selectivity in cationic
electrocyclizations using catalytic methods. Specifically, they will attempt to
achieve catalytic, asymmetric control of several classes of electrocyclization
processes, including 1) aromatic/heteroaromatic Nazarov cyclization (substrates
with relatively low reactivity), 2) a new version of the cationic Piancatelli
cyclization (substrates with relatively high reactivity), and 3) a cyclization/
rearrangement sequence able to convert a planar substrate into a cyclopentenone
product with adjacent quaternary centers. This third reaction sequence will be
employed in a synthesis of enokipodin
antibiotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing molecular complexity through
catalysis represents a key means of creating new useful compounds of potential
impact beyond the research laboratory. Furthermore, the research that students
conduct on this project, from the undergraduate to the postdoctoral level,
connects intimately with their education and professional training, and moves
them effectively along the path to becoming independent scientists. Laboratory
activities, detailed analyses and the formulation of new experiments form the
foundation of a true collaboration between these two professors, who will serve
as co-advisors for all project participants. These efforts will be complemented
by other activities that benefit student researchers while building a community
of scientists. In particular, addition of new scientific content to the Not
Voodoo website will be prioritized, to disseminate the knowledge of experts to
website visitors in more isolated laboratory environments. These innovative
activities, stimulated by research and communication, enhance the attractiveness
of chemistry and thus contribute in an essential way to the broader impacts of
the science studied.