* 1152357
* Elucidation of Reaction Mechanism with the Unified Reaction Valley Approach: Toward the Control of Chemical Reactions - Part II Investigation of Homogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Dieter Cremer, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

Elfriede Kraka and Dieter Cremer of Southern Methodist University are supported
by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry division to continue development of the Unified Reaction Valley
Approach (URVA). This project has the ambitious goal of introducing a completely
new methodology for the analysis of chemical reaction mechanism, with an
emphasis on providing an advanced understanding of homogeneous catalysis. The
focus will be on the reaction path, which the reaction complex traces in the
reaction valley. From the curving of this reaction path the chemical changes of
the reaction complex can be derived. The reaction mechanism will emerge in form
of "snapshots" of the reaction complex taken at the path critical points (which
correspond to extremal points of the reaction path curvature).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the URVA analysis the mechanism of a wide
variety of homogeneous catalysis reactions (including H2 generation and CO2
consumption) will be determined and results will be presented in a generally
accessible reaction library. The URVA programs and the reaction library will be
made available to the scientific community via the group's web page. New courses
in computational chemistry and reaction dynamics for undergraduate and graduate
students will bring the new methodology to the classroom.