* 1152752
* Spontaneous Refolding of Fibrillar Aggregates
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Igor Lednev, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2016
* USD 390,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Dr. Igor Lednev, from the University at Albany, SUNY, New York, will
study the mechanism of refolding of fibrils, which are protein aggregates with a
common cross-beta sheet structure. It is well accepted that fibrils are
extraordinarily stable and are the most energetically favorable forms of
proteins.

The main objectives of the proposed research are: (i) to establish the kinetic
mechanism of spontaneous refolding of apo-alpha-lactalbumin fibrils by a
combination of modern spectroscopic techniques, including deep ultraviolet Raman
spectroscopy, intrinsic fluorescence, atomic force microscopy, and scanning
transmission electron microscopy, with advanced statistical analyses, such as
chemometrics and 2D correlation spectroscopy, and (ii) to create a comprehensive
map of the accessible pathways of the refolding process by varying the solution
temperature, salinity and pH.

The spontaneous refolding of fibrils is relevant to disease, but, more
importantly, it is fundamentally significant for biology in general.
Understanding the mechanism of this process could allow control of the
biological activity of fibrils.

The proposed program trains both graduate and undergraduate students in advanced
methods and techniques. This cross-disciplinary project engages students in
biophysics, biochemistry and molecular biology, and provides future professional
scientists and engineers with a range of important technical skills.
Undergraduate and graduate students from historically underrepresented groups
(African-American and Latino students) will be engaged in studies related to the
proposed work. Research results acquired through this award will be integrated
into undergraduate and graduate courses, including Analytical Chemistry,
Instrumental Analysis and Theory and Techniques of Biophysics and Biophysical
Chemistry.