* 1152306
* IDBR (Type A): Development of app and web interface for automated anuran recognition and mapping
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Mark Bush, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/28/2018
* USD 368,675.00

A synergy of disease, climate change, pollution, exotic species and habitat
loss, is pressuring anuran populations worldwide. In the USA, while overall
anuran population declines are clearly evident, species that will be hardest hit
are hard to predict. The spatial and temporal monitoring of anuran populations
needs to be improved if the signs of further population failures are to be
identified and remedies sought. The ideal means to increase the coverage of data
is to put out sensors that would detect frogs, or have highly trained
researchers conduct surveys. However, both these options are cost-prohibitive. A
more cost-effective means to gather these data is to take advantage of the many
volunteers interested in the fate of anurans. The limitation to date has been
the time-consuming and inherently variable success in training those volunteers
to recognize anuran vocalizations. In the proposed research, machine-learning
algorithms and statistical analysis of sonograms will be used to provide
reproducible, standardized identification of calling anurans in real
time.&lt;br/&gt; A novel use of mobile devices (e.g. iPods, phones, and tablets)
is proposed to identify and map anurans. The vocal recognition software will be
developed as application (app) for mobile devices. By producing an efficient and
intuitive app, that integrates with an accompanying social network an army of
potential volunteers can be involved in mapping the abundance and range of
anurans. While this proposal takes advantage of cutting-edge technology in terms
of voice recognition, connectivity and social media, its purpose is not to
advance any one of those branches of technology. Rather it applies existing
technology in a novel way to increase participation in this aspect of citizen
science by more than an order of magnitude, and bring the cost of automated
voice recognition down by almost three orders of magnitude (from close to $1000
to ~$1). In providing a standardized means to recognize anuran calls, data
quality and the reliability of data gathered by volunteers will be
improved.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;General statement of project
importance&lt;br/&gt; Frogs and toads are excellent indicators of habitat
quality, not just of their spawning sites, but also of adjacent uplands. These
creatures are experiencing an unprecedented collapse in populations due to
habitat loss, pollution, and novel diseases. As the faltering of amphibian
populations may presage wider ecological problems, it is important to document
where species are most affected. In the proposed research, an application (app)
will be developed for smart phones and other mobile devices that will use
cutting edge voice-recognition software to identify frogs and toads. Currently
the average age for volunteers conducting anuran surveys is about 50. By using
modern social media and portable device technology the goal of this proposal is
to engage a younger audience. The affordability of the system will make it
appropriate for classroom use, and it has the potential to spur studies in
ecology, physics, geography, and math, as the students consider the data,
sonograms, and maps that the software will produce. Through active dissemination
we believe this app could quickly be adopted by thousands, perhaps tens of
thousands of users, many of whom would be new contributors to citizen science.