* 1152550
* EAGER: Bio-Beams - Functionally Graded Rapid Design & Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Neri Oxman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 08/31/2013
* USD 106,840.00

The research objective of this EArly concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER)is the creation of a research-driven framework for developing,
integrating, and evaluating digital fabrication technologies with biologically
inspired form generation to support sustainable construction. Functionally
Graded Rapid Fabrication (FGRF) is a novel design approach and technological
framework enabling the controlled spatial variation of material properties
through continuous gradients in functional components. The work will provide
research-based evidence for variable-property form generation informed by
environmental performance criteria such as variable-density concrete beams and
variable-elasticity polymer panels. Spatial variations of material properties
are traditionally achieved as discrete delineations in physical behavior by
fabricating multiple parts comprised of different materials, and assembling them
only after the fabrication process has been completed. Recent advances in
Computational Topology Design (CTD) and Solid Free-Form Fabrication (SFF) are
promoting the creation of building components with controlled micro-, and macro-
architectural features. The FGRF approach will combine a novel software
environment with a mechanical output tool designed as a 6-axes, 3-D printer to
allow computer control of material distribution within a monolithic structure.

If successful, the project will advance the ability of machines to fabricate
with variable properties, and will enable the control of their variation
according to the desired environmental input. The new approach will expand
current fabrication platforms and will be a significant first step toward
variable property digital fabrication. Being the first FGM construction
technology, the project has the potential to lead to a line of new research.
This interdisciplinary award makes contributions to the fields of digital
fabrication, computer-aided design, material science and mechanical engineering.
As a novel research platform, the FGRF approach has the potential for reaching a
large number of designers, engineers and scientists operating at the
intersection of digital design innovation and sustainable construction. Through
far-reaching collaborations applying new expertise and engaging novel
interdisciplinary perspectives across MIT, the investigator will not only invent
these tools and discover how to use them, but lead their translation into design
applications while evaluating their contribution to a radically new approach in
sustainable design & construction. Long term, this research is also expected to
contribute to understanding the theory and practice of sustainable rapid
fabrication of variable-property construction. Results will be distributed in
all of these communities through peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations, as well as through physical installations and demonstrations.