* 1152940
* Label-Free Electrochemical Capacitance DNA Sensing with Passive Wireless Radio Frequency Identification Technology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Yi Jia, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2017
* USD 372,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Office of Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professors Carlos R. Cabrera at
University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, Professor Yi Jia at University of Puerto
Rico - Mayaguez and their groups are developing a Label-Free Electrochemical
Capacitance DNA Sensing with Passive Wireless Radio Frequency Identification
Sensor Technology. Detection and characterization of DNA immobilization and
hybridization processes are important in many applications including
environmental monitoring and biomedical sensing. Current techniques for DNA
detection and characterization often requires sophisticated equipment and
complicated sample treatment. The supported research focuses studies on DNA
capacitive sensing mechanism and the DNA/surface interfacial conformational
characterization during DNA immobilization and hybridization processes with
passive wireless integrated RFID sensor technologies, with the aims of
developing an innovative, low cost lab-on-a-chip DNA sensing technology.

The development of the proposed low-cost, label-free DNA sensing technology will
enable the use of the device for different diseases (e.g. tuberculosis) or
hazardous materials (e.g. anthrax) detection at point of care, such as at home
or clinic. The proof-of-concept preparation of the label-free wireless RFID
biosensor will create spin-offs that may benefit our students and society. In
addition to the specific scientific contribution and technological advances that
will be the direct result of the proposed research, this work will improve human
society by broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in an
important area of biosensor technology.

This project will benefit the University of Puerto Rico by reinforcing existing
biosensor research and educational programs in the areas of wireless sensor and
integrated sensing technology, provide research opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, and enhance competitive research capability at UPR. The
project will also impact the society by disseminating the new scientific
knowledge, technological innovation, and educational course materials through
conferences, journals, project website and open house for K-12 students and
teachers. The students participating in the proposed project will be of Puerto
Rican origin, and thus the requested funding will lead to an increase in the
number of Hispanic and women students pursuing advanced degrees and professional
careers in science and engineering.