* 1152094
* Planning Grant: openHTML - Scaffolded Web Development Toolkit to Support Elementary Computational Literacy
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Susan Wiedenbeck, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 07/31/2014
* USD 207,991.00

Drexel University proposes the creation of a scaffolded web development tool
called openHTML that exposes learners to an appropriate beginner's model of HTML
and CSS architecture and syntax. In cooperation with Peoples Emergency Center in
Philadelphia, the Freedom Rings Partnership, and Hartford University, the
project staff will design learning experiences to address the needs of beginning
web developers in formal classes as well as self-motivated learners in informal
contexts like community centers. The planning grant will be used to support the
development and pilot studies of beta technologies and educational materials.
The project staff will use these activities as a context for design-based
research to investigate the impact of formative computational experiences on
learners' conceptual models of Web technologies, infrastructure, and
computational concepts. The planned project builds on the successes of the PI
and Co-PI in prior work on computational literacy, introductory computing
experiences, and development of programming expertise; the initial planning
stage lays the foundation for an ambitious, long-term design-based research
agenda.

Widespread computational competency is a vital component of a competitive
workforce and vibrant economy. By lowering the barriers to comfort and
competence with computing, this project aims to 1) engage individuals who may
not otherwise appear on the computer science education radar in creative
computational activities, 2) improve the tools available to web development
educators and learners, and 3) extend scientific knowledge about the development
of early computational thinking skills.