* 1152522
* Collaborative Research: Development and Application of the AMOEBA Polarizable Force Field
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* David Gohara, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 08/31/2016
* USD 108,000.00

Jay Ponder of Washington University in Saint Louis and David Gohara of Saint
Louis University are supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry, and the Office of
Cyberinfrastructure to improve the accuracy of the AMOEBA (Atomic Multipole
Optimized Energetics for Biomolecular Applications) force field model for
molecular simulation and to increase the range of applicability of the model via
parallelization of the underlying TINKER molecular modeling software. In this
project, the researchers develop new terms for an AMOEBA-2 model that encompass
physical effects missing from the original AMOEBA force field. In particular,
charge transfer, penetration effects and damped short-range dispersion terms are
being parameterized to remove the largest remaining systematic inaccuracies.
Comparison of the resulting short-range energetic model against quantum
mechanical calculations allow correct partitioning of internal energy into the
various terms, and provide a consistent basis for improving AMOEBA-2. The
existing TINKER code as well as the new energy terms are being parallelized
using a hybrid OpenMP and MPI paradigm. The resulting new potential and software
will be applied to two current problems that require both extensive simulation
and a high level of accuracy: prediction of organic crystal structures, and
computation of ligand binding in host-guest complexes. Both of these problem
areas have long represented "holy grail" applications for the field of
computational chemistry.

Molecular force field calculations are important tools in computational
biophysics, structure determination of bio-macromolecules, molecular design, and
modeling of the properties of molecules and materials. Methods, algorithms and
software developed under this project are being made available to the broader
community via periodic release of new versions of the TINKER molecular modeling
package. This package is widely used in academic research labs and in the
chemical and pharmaceutical industries worldwide. The team is also involved in
educational activities through University courses, as well as the provision of
tutorial materials and laboratory exercises for instructors wishing to use the
TINKER software in their own teaching.