* 1152678
* SBIR Phase II:  Commercial Development of An Intelligent Modular Robot Platform for Research and Education
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Graham Ryland, Barobo, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 12/31/2014
* USD 796,678.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will study the
feasibility for commercialization of an intelligent reconfigurable modular robot
system called iMobot, which was originally developed at the University of
California, Davis. Robotics has grown beyond automation to encompass systems
that are self-reliant, reconfigurable, mobile, intelligent, and aware of their
environment. iMobot has four degrees of freedom capable of full mobility and
assembly into clusters. Because of its flexibility, modularity, and
reconfigurability iMobot is an ideal platform for many research and teaching
programs at colleges and universities. iMobot allows researchers to study
artificial intelligence, swarm technology, robot collaboration, mobile
networking, sensor fusion, gait simulation, and programming for re-
configurability. Each module has am open architecture, with a processor capable
of embedded Linux. Users can customize software and accessories for their
specific needs. Proposed product feasibility research includes adaptable
connectivity between modules, intelligent plug-and-play sensors, a robust and
lightweight chassis, along with re-configurability. In this proposed Phase II
project, a professional design team will develop necessary technology related to
assembling into clusters including mechanical design, electrical interface,
sensors, algorithms, control and control software and customer interface.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is great. This proposed
project will be one of the first attempts to scale up an intelligent
reconfigurable modular robot for commercial deployment. The initial market for
iMobot will be for university research and teaching. With a standardized
hardware base using an open architecture users will be able to more widely share
their work with each other, and create a valuable open educational resource. The
future release of different iMobot versions will be for life-saving rescue and
search operations in the first responder system, and for K-12 education.
Robotics is an interdisciplinary field. The unique full mobility and
reconfigurability of iMobot are very appealing. Modules can be used alone or in
collaboration with others, making it a flexible and scalable educational tool.
Because of the homogeneous nature of modular robotics, the cost of manufacturing
is reduced through production of a large volume of similar parts. By introducing
students to interesting robotic projects with affordable hardware platforms,
which involve a variety of math, physics, information technology, and
engineering principles, we can excite their imagination and give them confidence
to pursue STEM careers, especially for underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged groups.