* 1152250
* Water splitting photocatalysis with first row transition metal oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Frank Osterloh, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2015
* USD 360,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Frank E. Osterloh from the University of California at
Davis will attempt to convert inexpensive and stable first row transition metal
oxides into effective photocatalysts for splitting water into oxygen and
hydrogen fuel. Even though many known materials absorb visible light strongly,
they are not being utilized for photochemical water splitting because
photochemical charge carriers are short lived, charge transport is slow, and
because of large overpotentials for water reduction or oxidation. In this
research these problems will be addressed by nanoscaling the materials and by
modifying the surfaces of the particles using chemical processes that will
improve reactivity. Advanced measurements on the nano-metal oxides will be
conducted to obtain new insight into the relationship between particle size,
electronic properties, and photocatalytic activity.

The water splitting reaction has long been considered as a possible method to
generate fuel from solar energy. Here, light is used to excite a material to
produce a photovoltage. That voltage can then be used to electrolyze (cleave)
water into hydrogen and oxygen. Hydrogen is an energy-rich molecule that can
serve as a versatile fuel for transportation, or to generate electricity and
other high value chemicals. Because sunlight is used as energy source for making
the hydrogen, no fossil fuels are used up and no carbon dioxide is produced that
would contribute to climate change. Today, solar water splitting is limited by
the lack of materials that have the desired reactivity and absorb visible light,
and that are chemically stable, abundant, and cheap enough for large scale
application of this technology. This project will attempt to develop transition
metal oxides as catalysts for the process. These oxides have been shown to
combine several promising properties, and they are cheap and abundant. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved in all aspects of the project. The
students will receive training in solar energy conversion and materials science.
Chemical demonstrations will also be developed to educate the public about the
importance of solar energy conversion.