* 1152196
* The Role of Water in "the Hydrophobic Effect:" Carbonic Anhydrase as a Model Protein for Physical-Organic Studies of Biomolecular Recognition
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* George Whitesides, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes in the Chemistry Division,
Dr. George Whitesides, from Harvard University, will study the molecular level-
details of the hydrophobic effect(s) in systems where the entropy-dominated view
(from the release of ordered water from a hydrophobic interface) does not apply.
A number of protein-ligand studies (theoretical and experimental) suggest that
both enthalpy and entropy of the water molecules in contact with a hydrophobic
interface are important. This work considers each of the three components
involved in the interaction between a protein and a ligand: the surface of the
protein binding site, the structure of the ligand, and the composition of the
medium that fills the binding site and surrounds the ligand. The system of
choice consists of arylsulfonamide ligands, which can be easily synthesized,
interacting with a model protein, human carbonic anhydrase (HCA). The structure
of HCA is known, and the researchers have a library of crystal structures of
complexes of HCA with arylsulfonamide ligands. The argument will be made that
the medium, which is often not considered, is as important as the protein and
the ligand, because the structure of the network of water molecules around both
the protein and the ligand will determine the enthalpic and entropic changes
that occur during binding. This study will combine thermodynamic measurements
(isothermal titration calorimetry), structural analysis (X-ray crystallography
and NMR) and molecular modeling to characterize the interactions between: (i)
HCA, (ii) an arylsulfonamide ligand, and (iii) the medium (whose composition and
complexity we will change). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work addresses two
"truths" that are accepted in biochemistry: (i) the hydrophobic effect is an
entropy-dominated process in which ordered waters are expelled from a
hydrophobic interface and (ii) the binding of a ligand (or substrate) to a
protein (or enzyme) results from the direct interaction of the two molecules,
the notion of a "lock-and-key" fit. Both of these "truths" are easy to visualize
and thus easy to explain in introductory courses. The work questions these
"truths", with the hope it will cause others to question methods in which they
approach not only the hydrophobic effect, but also molecular recognition. A
successful ligand (and in many cases a successful 'drug') binds tightly to its
target; however, we are unable to predict the structure of a tight-binding
ligand in a rational manner. Fundamental studies, such as the researchers work
on understanding the role of the protein, the ligand, and the medium in protein-
ligand binding, provide the information necessary to improve the processes we
use in rational ligand design. A model that takes the structure of the network
of water molecules in the active site of the protein will, greatly improve the
ability to design a tighter binding ligand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
actively involves undergraduates as URI/REU students, especially working in a
variety of physical measurements. They have also been coworkers in protein
expression and purification: this project provides wide opportunity to learn
high-level technical skills in protein chemistry. Dr. Whitesides and his co-
workers also lecture on this work at undergraduate colleges, where it provides a
good introduction to current concepts in biophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
output of this research is of interest in the pharmaceutical industry, where the
processes used to develop drugs have become prohibitively expensive, and where
there is renewed and active interest in computation and simulation of protein
ligands binding and of "rational lead development."