* 1152266
* SBIR Phase II:  Aqueous Precursors for High Performance Metal Oxide Thin Films
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Andrew Grenville, Inpria Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2015
* USD 1,099,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
spin-coatable liquid precursors for extremely high etch resistance pattern
transfer layers (hardmasks) to enable novel devices in advanced integrated
circuit manufacturing. The approach is to employ the fully inorganic metal oxide
dielectric precursors demonstrated during the Phase I project to provide
unparalleled etch selectivity for lithography spin-on hardmask layers. Such
materials enable new architectures and deep etches required for future device
generations which demand increasingly complex integration of materials to
compensate for the limited etch selectivity of conventional organic patterning
materials. The expected outcome is one or more inorganic spin-on hardmask
materials ready for scale up to manufacturing.

The broader/commercial impact of this project will be the potential to provide
materials to improve performance of integrated circuit devices manufactured at
dimensions below 22 nm. This project addresses key challenges in the
International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors related to patterning
requirements for future high performance electronic devices. The aqueous
precursors are synthesized from environmentally benign raw materials, thereby
reducing the environmental impact relative to conventional organic materials.
The materials and low temperature processes developed in this project will also
lay the foundation for broader applications in electronics, energy, and optical
coatings.