* 1152156
* Long-Term Human Ecodynamics in Coastal Peru: A Case Study of Polar-Tropical Teleconnections
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2011,01/31/2016
* Jeffrey Quilter, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2016
* USD 306,598.00

This research on adaptation to rapid climate change in Peru will be a case study
of how polar processes affect regions far from the poles but are strongly
influenced by polar events. The research team will use their established
research collaborations with interdisciplinary organizations such as the Global
Human Ecodynamics Alliance (GHEA) and the Climate Change Institute to link these
tropical changes to the Antarctic and Arctic. The project goal is to understand
the impact of climate change on human social systems by addressing long-standing
questions on human-environmental interactions over long periods of time. This
will be done by combining cutting-edge technology in the form of multi-spectral,
photographic and other forms of imagery on a GIS platform that will allow for
modeling of how the environment changed through time. This laboratory-based
research will be linked in a feed-back loop with on-the-ground investigation of
evidence of such changes. Changes include both short, punctuated, and long-term
events and cycles of change, as well as unique events. The project will marry
culture-historical and particularist research on ancient, historic, and
contemporary human actions with generalizing, scientific research. The research
will investigate how societies in specific times and places were aware of such
events and how they may or may not have prepared for them. In addition, the
research will chronicle the degree to which these societies were resilient or
not in reaction to these varying environmental and climatic changes. There has
not previously been an attempt to document these changes at this scale from
earliest times through to the current era. We believe that only by studying the
full range of human habitation and responses to environmental change will we be
able to successfully understand how these two forces
interacted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is potentially transformative
research. It will be a complete re-synthesis of archival data; fieldwork data;
and modeling of polar-tropical human ecodynamic systems. This project may be the
first major reassessment of such a large collection of interdisciplinary legacy
materials. As such, it has the potential to make major theoretical and
methodological contributions to a number of diverse scientific disciplines, but
more importantly will underscore the need for thinking in new ways about
geographic boundaries when assessing human ecodynamic processes. &lt;br/&gt;