* 1152474
* Intermolecular Forces from Interacting Densities
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Maria Szczesniak-Bryant, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 04/30/2016
* USD 325,545.00

Maria Szczesniak-Bryant and Grzegorz Chalasinki from Oakland University are
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
program in the Chemistry division to develop theoretical and computational
methods to study weak, non-covalent interactions. Such interactions between
closed-shell atoms and molecules govern a wide spectrum of chemical and physical
phenomena from protein structure and self-assembly to the properties of
materials and "sparse matter". Computational chemistry increasingly turns to
density functional theory (DFT) for a realistic description of these forces.
While DFT alone cannot accomplish this goal, the symmetry adapted perturbation
theory based on DFT made major inroads toward such a description. Yet
perturbation theory, too, has its limitations especially as concerns
convergence. The researchers are developing an alternative DFT-based method
which is not grounded in perturbation theory and which can provide equally
accurate, potentially exact, interaction energies. In the proposed approach the
interaction energy is defined as a functional of monomer densities and it can
accurately include all the essential components of interaction energy such as
electrostatic, exchange, induction, and dispersion. The formalism developed in
this project is expandable to large number of interacting subsystems. The PIs
intend to further generalize this approach to the open-shell case. The proposed
method is derived from the exact definition of supermolecular interaction energy
within DFT and, therefore, it can also guide the construction of new exchange-
correlation functionals designed for the treatment of intermolecular forces.

This project offers students at Oakland University, particularly undergraduates,
an opportunity to engage in basic research related to development and testing of
new computational methodologies. The proposed activities promote the
collaboration between researchers and students from Oakland, a mid-size regional
University, and the University of Warsaw, a prime research institution. The
proposed program will train graduate students in method development and computer
programming - the skills in much demand in today's knowledge-based economy. The
computer codes developed as a result of this project will be open-source and
available free of charge to a broad community of researchers.