* 1152547
* Molecular Plasmonics: Single Nanoparticle Assemblies, Single Molecules, and Ultrafast Stimulated Raman Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Richard Van Duyne, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2015
* USD 540,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Richard van Duyne of Northwestern University
and his postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate student researchers will be
supported to continue their investigations of surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy (SERS). Prof. Van Duyne and his research group will work on: (1)
developing single-molecule SERS (SMSERS) and applying it to electrochemical
measurements and (2) conducting fundamental studies of surface-enhanced
femtosecond stimulated Raman spectroscopy. Professor Van Duyne will continue his
wide-ranging activities in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a molecular
species is adsorbed to a metal surface with high curvature, there is a large
enhancement of the Raman scattering. Prof. Van Duyne and other scientists are
interested in understanding the mechanism for this enhancements and using it as
a means of improving the detection of chemical species in low concentration.
Already, plasmonic sensors have been developed for medical diagnostics and the
detection of chemical warfare agents. The goal of work like this is to build
more sensitive chemical detectors. The students working on this project will
gain useful experience in developing cutting-edge analytical spectroscopy tools
as well as developing a firm understanding of the chemistry and physics behind
the SERS effect. As part of this work, Prof. Van Duyne will continue his broad-
ranging efforts in education, and he will continue in his efforts at encouraging
students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in the sciences.