* 1152658
* IDBR:  A modular system for high-density, multi-scale electrophysiology
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Tim Blanche, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 10/31/2016
* USD 850,000.00

IDBR: A modular system for high-density, multi-scale electrophysiology
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Truly large scale electrophysiology--simultaneous
recording of thousands of individual neurons in multiple brain areas--remains an
elusive goal of systems neuroscience. The traditional approach of studying
single neurons in isolation assumes that the brain can be understood one
component at a time. However, in order to fully understand the function of whole
brain circuits it is essential to observe the interactions of large numbers of
neurons in multiple brain areas simultaneously. Microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) based electrode arrays are increasingly being used to address this
challenge. However, in order for these arrays to provide a transformative
advance in this field, it is imperative to scale up the number of electrodes by
at least order of magnitude, and at the same time scale down the instrumentation
to make the technology usable in freely behaving
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a complete system for
multi-scale electrophysiology in awake, freely behaving mice, using state-of-
the-art polymer and silicon nanomanufacturing to fabricate arrays of tiny,
ultra-compliant implantable neural interfaces, dubbed nanoprobes. The supporting
instrumentation will use a unique modular architecture with flexible microcables
to allow individual positioning of multiple probes. With this system, up to 640
electrodes can be distributed in up to ten different brain regions. The
stackable recording modules will be built around a commercially available
application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) that has been custom designed for
electrophysiological recordings, combining signal amplification, filtering,
signal multiplexing, and digital sampling on a single chip. Each ASIC supports
64 channels, dramatically reducing the size, weight, and cost of the recording
system. Multiplexing reduces the number of wires in the animal tether cable to
just 6 wires, instead of 640. A wireless module will support up to 128
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diminutive size of the proposed instrument
will revolutionize studies of the neuronal correlates of behavior, especially in
small animals such as mice, and the wireless module will create new
opportunities for "free roaming" large scale electrophysiology in ethologically
relevant natural environments. The instrument is intended to complement recent
advances in transgenic mouse models, such as light-activatable ion channels, by
dramatically scaling up the number of feasible electrode implants in this
increasingly important animal model. The instrument is also designed to be used
with multi-wire electrodes, tetrodes, and EEG or ECoG arrays. All components of
the system are mass-produced, ensuring that the instrument will be accessible to
the wider neuroscience research community. Beyond basic research, results from
this project will further the development of next-generation neural prosthetic
devices.