* 1152623
* IDBR:  A label-free biomolecular sensing instrument based on monolithic optical resonators and an optoelectronic swept-frequency semiconductor laser
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Richard Flagan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 12/31/2015
* USD 585,000.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes the development and
demonstration of a label-free sensing instrument based on the integration of an
electronically controlled linear swept-frequency semiconductor laser, a high
quality factor (Q) optical resonator with covalent surface functionalization,
and a microfluidic cell for analyte delivery. It will address a number of key
issues that currently prevent this technology from becoming an accessible,
affordable, and useful tool. These efforts will develop the optical cavity
sensing platform to a point where it is robust and repeatable, and provides
sensitivity and cost-effectiveness that are at least an order of magnitude
better than any available alternative biomolecular assay
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system will combine the results of two major
recent developments in the field of optical and laser physics: the high-Q
optical resonator and the phase-locked electronically controlled swept-frequency
semiconductor laser. The high-Q optical resonator is part of a monolithic unit
with an integrated optical waveguide, and is fabricated using standard
semiconductor lithography-based methods. Optoelectronic swept frequency lasers
will be developed at wavelengths relevant for aqueous sensing, and will replace
expensive and fragile mechanically-tuned laser sources whose frequency sweeps
have limited speed, accuracy and reliability. The resonator will be
functionalized using known techniques providing an adaptable and selective
surface chemistry. The sensor will include an integrated microfluidic flow cell
for precise and low volume delivery of analytes to the resonator
surface.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument represents an adaptable and cost-
effective platform capable of various sensitive, label-free measurements
relevant to the study of biophysics, biomolecular interactions, cell signaling,
and a wide range of other life science fields. It will be capable of binding
assays, thermodynamic and kinetics measurements, and has the potential for
additional impact through integration into existing instruments to replace less
sensitive analytical methods. The sensor also has potential applications in
point-of-care medical diagnostics, where it can enable early detection of
relevant antigens.&lt;br/&gt;The project is inherently multidisciplinary and
will develop expertise in and better understanding of the interplay between such
diverse fields as semiconductor lasers, optical nanofabrication, high speed
electronics, control systems, fiber-optics, microfluidics, biomolecular binding
assays, mass transfer, and integrated instrument design. It affords the
opportunity for two graduate students and an undergraduate student to take part
in a collaborative research effort under the close guidance of the PIs,
educating the students in the culture of scientific discovery, alongside
engineering and application considerations. The results obtained during the
course of the project will be published in leading scientific journals and
conferences.