* 1152302
* Single Cell and Subcellular Analysis by Laser Ablation Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Akos Vertes, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 03/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

This award by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program supports work
by Professor Akos Vertes at George Washington University - endowed to develop an
analytical platform for investigating metabolism changes in single cells and in
subcellular regions. This project aims to extend the reach of laser-based
sampling techniques to enable the mass spectrometric analysis of single animal
and human cells for the investigation of a vast array of biological problems.
Prerequisites for this goal include the sufficient focusing and delivery of the
laser radiation to the region of interest, improving the overall sensitivity of
the method, extending the coverage of metabolites and lipids present in the
cell, determining the chemical integrity and quantity of the sampled ions, and
enabling high throughput single cell analysis. The PI also aims to explore the
in situ analysis of subcellular domains within larger cells by combining
micromanipulation and microdissection with laser sampling and mass spectrometry.
Successful accomplishment of these goals will bring the capabilities of single
cell mass spectrometry to a new level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a broader sense,
the PI and his group develop new single cell and subcellular analysis tools and
methods that enable the study of diverse biochemical processes relevant for
chemistry and the life sciences. Due to the ability of the tools they are
creating to address various unresolved problems, the research itself has a
significant potential to benefit society. Integration of research and education
in the project is closely tied to the direct involvement of K-12, undergraduate
and graduate students in the process of scientific inquiry. Based on their
existing and planned collaborations with industry, the students will also have
an opportunity to be immersed in the conversion of new research results into
methods and devices that are applicable in various fields relevant to society,
including biomedicine, energy and homeland security. To broadly disseminate his
research, the PI plans to engage the media to reach the general public and
explain their results in an easily digestible format.