* 1152645
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-time Active Image Stabilization for Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Eric Drier, Mad City Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2014
* USD 508,224.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
commercialize an integrated system to actively stabilize an optical microscope
to the precision required by today's cutting-edge imaging methods. Microscopy in
the biological sciences is undergoing radical advancement on several fronts.
"Super-Resolution" (SR) techniques circumvent the diffraction limit on
resolution once thought to be insurmountable, and promise the ability to image
the structures and processes of cell biology at the molecular level. This will
usher in profound advancements in the understanding of the inner-workings of the
cell. However, significant interrelated barriers remain in the path towards
widespread use of SR techniques: (1) they are technically challenging and (2)
expensive to implement; and (3) they place physical demands on the microscope
platform it was not designed to meet. Foremost of these demands is that SR
methods require control over the movement of the biological sample and the
stability of the microscope system with nanometer precision. This commercialized
integrated system is designed specifically to address these issues and remove
these barriers. It uses a 3-axis, piezo-driven nanopositioning stage to control
sample motion and actively maintains the stability of the system using the image
as the reference point for this stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/commercial potential of this project lies in making SR methods routinely
useful to working biologists. These "game-changing" tools will advance our
understanding of the molecular bases of disease pathologies, and enable far more
exacting methods aimed at their treatments. The new insights will range from
those in molecular virology and the development of safer and more effective
vaccines, to the molecular mechanisms of neuronal signaling and learning and
memory. In fact, it is hard to imagine an area of cell biology that will not be
impacted by these emerging SR techniques. One of the pioneers of these methods
has likened them to the Hubble telescope: they enable people to see things they
simply could not see before. This analogy goes further: there is only one Hubble
telescope, and currently very few SR-capable imaging systems, due to both the
technical and economic barriers to their routine use. And while SR methods
expose the physical limitations of microscopes in an acute manner, their
stability and image acquisition requirements are not unique. Thus, this
commercial system will be much more broadly useful: it will also enable focal-
stability and molecular tracking at the nanometer-scale for any long-term
imaging experiment.