* 1152109
* New tools for new questions: a multi-site approach to studying the development of selective attention in crib bilinguals
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Rochelle Newman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 09/30/2018
* USD 559,719.00

Language development is shaped by the language that infants experience from
families and caregivers. Much of our knowledge about early language and speech
development is based on infants experiencing only one language (monolinguals),
usually English. However, most infants around the world, and many in the United
States, regularly experience more than one language at birth (bilinguals).
Research must give more attention to the role of bilingual experience in order
to better explain early language development. Bilingual children and adults
differ from monolinguals in several ways. For example, bilinguals tend to have
smaller vocabularies than monolinguals, but they are better at a wide range of
general cognitive control skills. These skills include the ability to attend to
one thing while ignoring something else (e.g., pay attention to a person's voice
while music is playing), and to shift attention between different objects or
events. If these differences are present even in young learners, they might have
important implications for how these children learn language. New research
suggests that some of the effects of bilingualism may be present even in
infancy; bilingually-exposed infants show some enhanced cognitive control
skills. To better understand how being bilingual changes an infant's cognitive
abilities, the current project examines the processing abilities of infants
within their first year of life, comparing infants exposed to one versus two
languages. We also compare infants exposed to three different specific language
combinations. Specifically, we ask the following questions: does bilingual
exposure affect how well infants can focus on words while ignoring background
sounds? Does it enable infants to better learn new patterns even in the presence
of distracting information? Among bilingual infants, is there an advantage if
the two languages are very similar vs. very distinct from one another? To
address these questions, the project also develops a new, innovative testing
system that enables running the same studies in multiple locations, for improved
access to diverse language populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parents, early
childhood educators, early intervention specialists, policy makers, and
researchers all benefit by improved understanding of the potential influences of
bilingual experience during infancy. The new knowledge created by the current
project will directly benefit basic research on speech and language development.
Undergraduate and graduate student learning and training will be enhanced
through mentored research experience at four different institutions. The new
testing system will be available for download from a public website, increasing
access to and opportunities for participation in research and thus advancing
knowledge and scientific discovery. The discoveries from the current project
will provide evidence for improving decisions by parents and caregivers
interacting with bilingual infants, and will suggest recommendations for
policies related to language, caregiving, and education.