* 1152022
* High-Speed Two Dimensional Separations Using Micro Free Flow Electrophoresis
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Michael Bowser, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Michael Bowser at University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
and his group will use micro free flow electrophoresis (uFFE) as the second
stage in 2D separations. FFE is a continuous analysis technique capable of
further separating analyte peaks as they elute off the first separation column.
Continuous analysis removes limitations encountered in previous 2D separations
caused by under sampling. Coupling with capillary electrophoresis (CE) or nano
liquid chromatography (nLC) is expected to be straightforward with no
complicated valving or timing required. It is anticipated that coupling with
uFFE will increase the peak capacity of these techniques 20 to 30-fold with no
sacrifice of efficiency or separation time in the first dimension separation.
Total 2D peak capacities are expected to reach 2,000 in separation times of
&lt;15 min. Experiments are planned to fully characterize the peak capacity and
compatibility of the many combinations of separation modes possible using this
approach. As a demonstration of the potential power of high speed 2D separations
CE-uFFE will be incorporated into online microdialysis assays for measuring in
vivo neurochemical dynamics. Online microdialysis requires high-speed
separations of complex mixtures, making this assay an ideal application to
demonstrate the advantages of the 2D separations developed in this proposal. The
technical benefit of the proposed approach lies in its increased peak capacity
without sacrificing separation time. 2D uFFE therefore has the potential to be
adopted widely, improving research capabilities and efficiency in many research
areas. Beyond practical advantages, exploration into 2D-uFFE will provide unique
insight into the fundamentals of separation science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers at UM-twin cities also intend to design the research project
described in this proposal with the goal of maximizing its impact on society
through intellectual enrichment, mentoring and training opportunities, inclusion
of underrepresented groups and infrastructure enhancement.