* 1152770
* Physical Chemistry of Viral Evolution
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Alex Evilevitch, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2016
* USD 408,932.00

As a consequence of this award, Professor Alex Evilevitch, from the Carnegie
Mellon University, will conduct an investigation, featuring an array of
experimental tools, of how the physico-chemical properties of double-stranded
DNA viruses relate to viral assembly and infectivity. The work has the potential
to impact broadly the field of virology, and could inform new thinking about
viral diseases. This project is funded jointly by the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry and the Genetic Mechanisms
Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of the Directorate
for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Viruses consist of a protein shell
called a capsid that protects the viral genome. Often, and especially in double-
stranded DNA viruses, the negatively charged genome is strongly confined within
the small capsid volume, leading to tens of atmospheres of genome pressure. Dr.
Evilevitch and his co-workers have demonstrated that this internal pressure is
responsible for DNA release into the cell and subsequent infection. Because all
viral capsids are permeable to water and ions, the distribution and chemical
potential of water molecules inside the capsid determine the energy state of the
encapsidated DNA. At small DNA-DNA separations inside viral capsids (20-30
Angstroms), the electrostatic forces are dominated by the DNA hydration force,
the force required to remove one water molecule from the DNA surface to the bulk
solution. Dr. Evilevitch aims to demonstrate that the DNA hydration force is a
key physical parameter responsible for successful delivery of the viral genome
into the host cell. The energy of encapsidated viral genomes will be measured
with micro-calorimetry, and DNA hydration forces will be studied with atomic
force microscopy. Because the hydration force is dependent on the DNA packaging
density, strong correlations are likely to exist between the physical evolution
of the dimensions of viruses and the genetic evolution of viruses. Insight into
this physical aspect of viral evolution will be provided by this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Evilevitch's work will enhance fundamental
understanding of how viruses function. Most current anti-viral treatments slow
down but fail to cure viral infection fully. Rapid mutations of viral components
help virions to escape interaction with highly specific drug molecules.
Knowledge of the principles underlying viral assembly, infectivity and virion
survival is highly relevant to the mission of finding the remedy to many
infectious diseases. Learning how to control the viral genome hydration force
can lead to a new approach for interference with viral infections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational impact of this work will stem from
training of graduate students and enhancement of the undergraduate science
curriculum, with the creation of interdisciplinary and inter-departmental
undergraduate courses in physical virology, microbiology and biophysics.