* 1152538
* A Research Coordination Network Dedicated to Facilitating the Creation and Transfer of Knowledge
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Fiona Murray, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 12/31/2016
* USD 500,000.00

This project will create a research coordination network to develop lasting
collaborations among scholars from a variety of disciplines (e.g., economics,
management, and sociology) who study the creation and transfer of knowledge and
the implications of these processes for individual and organizational outcomes.
While a significant amount of research has been done in the area, the broad
field of inquiry is fragmented into multiple distinct groups, with some
researchers adopting an "organization-focus" and considering knowledge creation
and transfer within and across organizations, while others have adopted an
"individual-focus" emphasizing the life scientists and a third group has adopted
a "group-focus" investigating knowledge transfer among interacting teams.
Through the formation of network clusters focused around four common themes and
a series of workshops and conferences, this research coordination network will
help bridge the boundary or disconnect between these multiple "invisible
colleges" and make researchers more aware of theoretical arguments and research
findings developing outside of their school. The research coordination network
would encourage boundary-spanning interactions that are likely to result in
novel research projects and initiatives that will enable development of a more
complete view of the interplay between institutional factors such as
intellectual property rights and individual factors such as motivations and
incentives that affect the creation of scientific knowledge, its diffusion and
potential commercialization and use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
creation and transfer of knowledge is of great importance both to the scientific
community and to nurturing a national innovation ecosystem that will enhance
national competitiveness and security. Scholarly research is currently
fragmented so could benefit greatly from integration and an integrated view can
guide both national policy and organizational practice and the ability to create
and transfer knowledge is a distinct source of competitive advantage. Indeed, as
the half-life of products and even entire product categories has decreased, the
ability to create and transfer knowledge has become even more important because
both factors shape a firm's ability to improve existing products and work
routines and to develop new products and work routines. Research coordinated by
the network would improve our ability to manage the production and distribution
of knowledge within and between organizations. Scientists and women in
particular, must overcome a significant number of barriers as they attempt to
commercialize their ideas. Research that combines organizational and individual
factors could shed light on how best to overcome those barriers in particular
and to knowledge creation and transfer in general. New projects encouraged by
the network could prove particularly valuable for life scientists and the large
number of people who benefit from their ideas and innovations.