* 1152169
* Collaborative Research:  IDBR:  The Nanosizer:   A New Nanolithographic Tool for Preparing Combinatorial Arrays in Situ
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Adam Braunschweig, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 06/30/2013
* USD 275,000.00

The Directorate for Biological Sciences through their Instrument Development for
Biological Research program and the Division of Chemistry through Chemical
Measurement and Imaging support Prof. Chad A. Mirkin, Northwestern University,
and Prof. Adam B. Braunschweig, New York University, to develop a new instrument
to fabricate nanoarrays of biologically active probes. This new instrument,
termed the Nanosizer, will produce combinatorial arrays of oligonucleotides,
oligopeptides, and many other biologically active small molecules with sub-100
nanometer feature diameters over large areas (10's of cm2); thereby achieving
order of magnitude improvements in feature size, production rate, and cost over
current technologies and providing access to fundamental biological experiments
that could not otherwise be undertaken. This goal will be achieved by combining
massively-parallel tip based nanolithography strategies with new microfluidic
designs, and photochemically activated combinatorial surface syntheses.
Following proof-of-concept demonstrations, the instrument will be systematically
optimized with regard to chemical kinetics and reaction times and automated to
facilitate instrument operation. This interdisciplinary project uniquely
combines elements of chemistry, engineering, and materials science to create an
instrument capable of producing arbitrary patterns of soft matter over large
areas, where the chemical composition and position of every feature can be
controlled precisely.

The new instrument developed in the context of this collaborative proposal will
address a major problem for industrial and academic researchers by providing a
facile method for preparing arbitrary nanopatterns of biologically active
probes. Moreover, the Directorate of Biological Research will sustain Prof.
Mirkin and Prof. Braunschweig's outreach activities, including financial support
of summer students from minority-serving four year colleges to assist in this
project during the summer and a range of other outreach activities that increase
scientific awareness at eminent institutions including the Museum of Science and
Industry in Chicago, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, and the Young
Women's Leadership School of East Harlem.