* 1152489
* SBIR Phase II:  Intraoperative Detection and Ablation of Microscopic Residual Cancer in the Tumor Bed
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2012,06/30/2017
* David Lee, Lumicell Diagnostics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 994,168.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is aimed at
developing a handheld system that a cancer surgeon uses to detect and eliminate
microscopic residual cancer in the tumor bed after gross resection of the tumor.
An integrated laser ablation system instantly removes the cancer cells
identified by the imaging system during surgery, eliminating the need for repeat
surgery. Effective resection of cancer is often difficult because of the need to
spare essential tissue (blood vessels, nerves, brain) adjacent to the tumor and
the lack of visual resolution of the tumor bed during manual resection. The
integrated laser ablation system developed in Phase II will enhance the surgical
technique by quickly and precisely eliminating residual cancer cells in the
tumor bed. The objective of Phase II is to deliver a system ready for clinical
trials, which includes: increasing the ablation speed, developing a larger field
of view, and demonstrating efficacy in animal studies. After completion of this
program, Lumicell will validate the performance of the novel system in human
clinical trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project stems from improvements in patient care and reduction of healthcare
costs. Currently, around 50% of breast cancer patients and 35% of sarcoma
patients require second tumor de-bulking surgeries because a final pathology
report returns days after the initial surgery indicating that residual cancerous
cells have been left within the patient. Furthermore, 25% of the final pathology
reports do not detect residual cancer cells due to sampling errors fundamentally
inherent in the process. Thus, most patients require subsequent medical therapy
including additional radiation or chemotherapy treatment to prevent cancer
recurrence and metastasis stemming from residual cancer cells. The system is
designed to find and destroy residual cancer cells in real-time at a single cell
level. Tumors adjacent to critical nerve or brain tissue are particularly
difficult and a laser therapy guided by the proposed imaging system would allow
the surgeon to thoroughly eradicate cancer cells with minimal added work and no
adverse effect on surrounding tissue. Lumicell's novel single cell imaging
device combined with focused laser ablative therapy will have a significant
impact on preventing second surgeries and subsequent medical therapy resulting
in significant healthcare cost savings and improved patient care.