* 1152257
* SBIR Phase II:  Biological Treatment of Hydrocarbons in Shipboard Exhaust Gas Cleaning Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Richard Penny, EnSolve Biosystems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,034,332.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will address new
regulations being enacted in the shipping industry requiring Sulfur Oxides (SOx)
reduction from engine emissions. Many commercial scrubber systems effectively
remove SOx from engine emissions, yet none are designed to remove polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). EnSolve?s approach is to develop a combined
biological and mechanical system that can remove PAHs from the scrubber system
waste water. The results of the Phase I study confirmed the biomechanical
approach was effective in reducing PAHs at rates exceeding 99%.

The broader impacts of this research will be to provide the maritime industry
with a cost effective, reliable, and environmentally conscious treatment system
for removing toxic substances from the world?s oceans. Ships will be required to
either install scrubbing equipment or they will need to switch to more costly
low sulfur fuels. A switch to low sulfur fuel would increase current fuel costs
by over 88%. A commercial ship owner could realize annual savings of $2 million
per vessel in fuel costs using a scrubber system compared with purchasing low
sulfur fuel. An estimated 35,000 ships will be impacted by these regulations,
yielding a market opportunity for the proposed scrubber water treatment system
exceeding $5 billion. Other technologies under development utilize pure physical
separation methods that transfer the contaminants from the scrubber water to
another medium (i.e., filters) for disposal. Conversely, the proposed biological
approach is a regenerative process that would significantly reduce landfill
disposal, consumable, labor, and liability costs.