* 1152737
* Liquid Microjet Studies of Collisions and Reactions at the Surfaces of Aqueous Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gilbert Nathanson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 505,483.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Gilbert Nathanson of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison will couple liquid microjets with molecular beams to explore
collisions and reactions at the surfaces of volatile aqueous solutions. These
gas-liquid scattering experiments will be performed by directing a beam of atoms
or molecules at the surface of a liquid jet in vacuum and monitoring the
identities, energies, and reaction times of the products with a mass
spectrometer. Liquid microjets are narrower than a human hair and are surrounded
by only a thin vapor blanket, permitting scattering experiments to be carried
out using pure, basic, and salty water solutions with vapor pressures up to
several Torr. The proposed research is dedicated to learning how acidic gases
such as DCl and oxidizing gases such as F2 react with water molecules and ions
at or near the surface. The long term objective is to develop a molecular
picture of gas-water reactions by exploring the interfacial analogs of bulk
solvation, the "like dissolves like" rule, proton transfer, acid dissociation,
and oxidation-reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program benefits society
through its research, mentoring, and outreach activities. Scientifically, this
program will help reveal the ways in which gases and aqueous solutions react
industrially and in the environment. It will concurrently provide a setting to
mentor graduate and undergraduate students from a wide range of backgrounds. The
familiarity gained in this research will further be used to improve General
Chemistry classes on aqueous chemistry and to engage K-12 students and their
parents through hands-on surface chemistry workshops.