* 1152476
* SBIR Phase II:  Using Mycelium as a Matrix For Binding Natural Fibers And Core Filler Materials in Sustainable Composites
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Sue Van Hook, Ecovative Design LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,047,588.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to further
quantify the mechanical performance of mycological bio-composites that address
the automotive and structural core industries, while concurrently scaling and
demonstrating material production. The engineered composites market continues to
grow steadily because of the high strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight
ratios of these systems, as compared to conventional engineering materials.
Engineered woods are ubiquitous in the construction and furniture industries,
but due to domestic indoor air quality regulations (Toxic Substances Control
Act), these materials are being phased out or are forced to use expensive
formaldehyde-free adhesives. Similarly, the automotive industry is under
regulatory pressure in Europe to find alternatives to fire-retardant foams that
cannot be recycled due to inorganic filling agents. The technical results from
the Phase I effort have demonstrated bio-composite materials which can compete
both economically, and on mechanical performance, with the aforementioned
competitors, while meeting these legislative demands. A preliminary cost
analysis based on the process economics of our existing production facilities
projects retail costs 45% and 35% below the current state-of-the-art in the
automotive and furniture industries, respectively. We will work with key
industry partners to meet performance metrics and demonstrate quality pilot
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of this
project would be a customizable bio-composite for a broad range of markets,
including automotive, transportation, architectural, furniture, sports, and
recreation. These materials are truly sustainable, since both the laminates and
cores used in the sandwich structure consist of renewable materials. They also
require significantly less energy to make than other biocompatible composites,
because the material is grown instead of synthesized, and the material is
completely compostable at the end of life. The outcome of the proposed
development and demonstration will ensure that the bio-composite properties meet
the requirements for the target markets. Furthermore, over the course of this
grant, and in cooperation with Rensselaer and Union College, we will demonstrate
and scale the best manufacturing processes to a pilot stage capable of
manufacturing high volumes of quality product. Since these materials leverage
regional lignocellulosic byproducts from domestic agriculture and industry, a
regional manufacturing model is presently being pursued to reduce transportation
and feedstock costs. This will not only bring additional value to U.S.
agricultural markets, but will spur rural economic development through domestic
manufacturing. Finally, these advanced biological materials represent a new
paradigm in manufacturing, offering safe, biodegradable alternatives to
traditional petroleum-based alternatives.