* 1152772
* Dynamic Self-Assembly of Glycolipids for Unveiling Complex Glycan-Protein Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Xiaoyang Zhu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2013
* USD 300,000.00

In this award from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Drs. Xiaoyang Zhu and Hung-Wen Liu, from the University of Texas at
Austin, will develop a novel approach based on fluidic glycan microarrays to
carry out large-scale analysis of glycan binding proteins (GBP) binding affinity
and specificity at a quantitative level, and to guide the synthesis of
oligoglycan structures with enhanced affinity and selectivity. Glycans are
essential to all living organisms and glycan-protein interaction determines a
wide range of cell surface processes, such as pathogen recognition, cell-cell
communication, and the innate immune response. Mapping and understanding the
complex binding specificities of GBPs is one of the major goals of glycomics.
The fluidic glycan microarray used by Drs. Zhu and Liu offers two critical
advantages: (1) it allows precise control of glycan density over many orders of
magnitude, enabling the determination of not one data point in binding (as is
common in current glycan microarray technology) but rather a complete binding
isotherm with quantitative information on multivalency and the multivalent
binding constant; and (2) the dynamic assembly of simple glycans in the fluidic
lipid bilayer environment, combined with the flexibility of glycan structures,
may allow the functional simulation of complex oligoglycans in mediating binding
to GBPs, thus providing guidance in the targeted design and synthesis of more
complex oligoglycans. The long-term objective of the proposed research is to
develop an effective and quantitative tool in glycomics for the understanding
and analysis of the specificity and selectivity of
GBPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks fundamental understanding
of how cells in living organisms interact with their environment and, more
specifically, how influenza A viruses attack the human body. Subtypes of
influenza A virus have caused pandemics throughout history and pose grave danger
due to the continuous evolution of avian and swine viruses. This concern is
underscored by recent outbreaks of the H5N1 strain among avian population and
the high fatality rate (60%) in infected human population. Should such animal
strains acquire particular genetic mutations to allow human-to-human
transmission, pandemics could result. Understanding the targeting specificity of
influenza A virus is important not only for the surveillance of such threats but
also for the development of vaccines and treatments. In addition to fundamental
science, Drs. Zhu and Liu will also collaborate with a high-tech company,
MicroSurfaces, Inc., in translating academic research to the commercial world
and in developing new tools for biochemical research.