* 1152812
* Activation of Carbon-Hydrogen Bonds by Late Transition Metal Hydroxide and Amido Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Thomas Gunnoe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2015
* USD 425,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor T. Brent Gunnoe of the University of Virginia for
studies of metal-mediated C-H activation. The low temperature and selective
functionalization of hydrocarbons remains one of the foremost synthetic
challenges in the petrochemical industry. The proposed research is driven by the
ultimate goal of incorporating the 1,2-addition of C-H bonds across M?X bonds (X
= NR2, OR, etc.) into catalytic cycles for hydrocarbon functionalization. The
strategy for C-H bond activation involves the coordination of C-H bonds by the
metal center followed by metal-mediated transfer of a proton from the
hydrocarbyl unit to a heteroatomic ligand such as hydroxide or amido. Despite
recent examples of such reactions, including C-H activation by Ru(II) hydroxide,
Ir(III) alkoxide and Rh(I) aryloxide complexes, little is known about 1,2-CH-
addition across late transition metal M-X bonds. This is due, in part, to the
limited number of systems that have been studied. The proposed chemistry will
delineate fundamental aspects of 1,2-CH additions across M-X bonds by preparing
new d6 and d8 transition metal amido, hydroxide, alkoxide and related complexes,
exploring the ability of these complexes to activate C-H bonds of hydrocarbons,
and ultimately probing the mechanism and selectivity of aromatic and alkane C-H
activation. The mechanistic studies will be performed in collaboration with the
theoretical groups of Professor Thomas Cundari (University of North Texas) and
Professor Daniel Ess (Brigham Young University).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
selective functionalization of hydrocarbons is important to the commodity
chemical sector, fine chemical synthesis and the efficient utilization of fossil
fuels as energy resources. With the increase in global energy demand placing a
strain on fossil resources, more efficient conversion of hydrocarbons into
higher value materials is increasingly important. For example, selective and
efficient catalysts for the partial oxidation of hydrocarbons could streamline
energy intensive processes and provide a paradigm shift for the chemical
industry. However, such goals will not be achieved without addressing
substantial fundamental challenges in the field of catalysis, especially C-H
activation and functionalization reactions. In addition, the proposed research
will have long term impact by training future chemists in the area of synthesis
and catalysis, which is vital for competitiveness in the global chemical
industry.