* 1152672
* SBIR Phase II:  Automated and Self-Service Electronics Recycling Kiosk
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Mark Bowles, ecoATM, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Glenn H. Larsen
* 02/28/2014
* USD 516,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II project is designed to
commercialize a consumer self-serve, automated kiosk for the evaluation, buy
back, and collection of used electronics directly from consumers. Prototype
kiosks deployed during Phase I provided convincing proof of the feasibility of
the baseline technical approach to the visual and electrical inspection
technology, robotics, and the market. Financial metrics achieved were many
multiples better than industry leading kiosks such as Coinstar or Redbox.
Further R&D is required to achieve enough reliability in the automated
inspection systems and the kiosk hardware to lead to the permanent removal the
kiosk attendants in field that currently serve as the fail-safe mechanism in the
current prototype systems. Broad commercial success relies on the development of
a robust, designed-for-manufacturability (DFM), designed-for-serviceability
(DFS), commercially reliable kiosk with a minimum retail field life of 5 years
that incorporates needed improvements learned from Phase I including refinements
to the visual inspection system and algorithms, electrical inspection system,
test station robotics subsystems, ergonomics, GUI, and channel management
systems. ecoATM also hopes to further develop the system?s capability to offer
personal data erasure and expand accepted device types to potentially include
digital cameras, portable game players, printer cartridges, laptops, eReaders,
and tablets.

The broader impact of ecoATM?s patented system is that we finally achieved the
threshold of consumer convenience and financial incentive required to inspire
mass consumer participation in electronics recycling. Our pilot market tests
indicate that we harvested 20 times more used phones than the next closest
competitor in the test areas. As ecoATM scales nationally we will divert mass
amounts of toxic eWaste from our landfills, and put huge sums of cash back in
the hands of our customers and the retail locations hosting the kiosks,
providing stimulus and incentive for these stakeholders to help forever alter
the current wasteful lifecycle of consumer electronics. On average, each ecoATM
collects enough eWaste to offset its own annual energy consumption after just 5
days placement resulting in 360 days of CO2 offset. An average ecoATM collects
over 7,000 phones per year, which according to the EPA calculator is equivalent
to taking the CO2 of 35 houses off the grid for a year. National and global
media have taken notice of ecoATM already and even the United Nation?s Low
Carbon Leadership Program recognized ecoATM as one of the best ideas in the
world for the reduction of CO2 on a global basis.