* 1152129
* Conference: 3rd Micro/Nanoscale Heat &amp; Mass Transfer International Conference, Atlanta, GA, on March 3-6, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Zhuomin Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2012
* USD 20,000.00

PI: Zhang&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1152129&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will fund
travel to the 3rd Micro/Nanoscale Heat &amp; Mass Transfer International
Conference at Georgia Tech Global Learning Center, Atlanta, GA, on March 3-6,
2012. The Conference is sponsored by the ASME Heat Transfer Division and Georgia
Institute of Technology. The importance of nano-science and engineering has been
well recognized by research communities and governmental organizations. It is
believed that breakthroughs in nano-science and technology will change all
aspects of the society, from energy utilization, biomedicine to homeland
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is intended to provide a forum
for researchers and educators around the world to exchange the state-of-the-art
research and development and identify research needs in this emerging field. The
conference will include keynote and invited presentations, contributed oral and
poster presentations, as well as panel discussion on the current status and
future opportunities. A special issue of ASME Journal of Heat Transfer will be
published after the conference for selected papers that will be reviewed
according to the Journal?s review criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF funding
will be used to subsidize the registration fees for graduate and undergraduate
students so that they can enjoy all social and other functions as regular
attendees with significantly reduced cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this conference is to promote and encourage international collaboration
and interactions, especially in the new frontiers of micro/nanoscale heat and
mass transfer and their impact to society. Such interactions will enable future
opportunities in engineering research, including new directions and
transformation research. Many of the participants will present newly research
works funded by the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of the conference is that it will bring together experts in nano-
science and engineering which have accomplished nanoscale science and
engineering researches that can affect broad areas in materials, energy,
transportation, environment, national security, and health care. The conference
will promote academic-government-industry collaborations and international
corporations. As an effort of human resource development, young researchers,
including junior faculty and graduate students, especially those from the
underrepresented groups, will be particularly encouraged to attend the
conference so that to provide them with opportunities of interaction and
collaboration with their peers within and outside of the United States.