* 1152707
* SBIR Phase II:  A Photonic Crystal Based Spectrometer for Manufacturing Process Control
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Nadia Pervez, Chromation Partners, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2016
* USD 1,114,248.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project investigates an
inexpensive ultra-compact optical spectrometer based on photonic crystal arrays.
Current spectrometer technology, based on diffraction gratings, has pushed the
limits of current manufacturing in terms of miniaturization, and has already
benefited from economies of scale. In contrast, the photonic crystal
spectrometer does not use diffractive grating optics, allowing significantly
decreased size and cost. The photonic crystal spectrometer is a compact spectral
sensing solution suitable for applications where grating spectrometers are too
bulky or expensive and dye filter arrays do not offer the needed performance. In
this project, the photonic crystal spectrometer module developed in Phase I will
be further developed and customized for visible and UV applications. Low-
resolution implementations targeting molecular absorption/emission applications
will use extensions of the technology developed in Phase I. In addition, a new
technology will be developed for high-resolution implementations targeting
atomic absorption/emission. The anticipated results of this project are
customizable spectrometer modules suitable for applications in water,
biological, and chemical analysis, as well as other applications where a
moderate number of spectral signals are indicative of state.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the expansion
of low-cost spectroscopic techniques to applications which have previously been
infeasible due to limitations in range or resolution of commercially available
technologies. The commercial potential includes new handheld and portable
instruments for chemical, photometric, and biological sensing. Photonic crystal
spectrometers can be integrated into compact form factors that enable in situ
measurement for manufacturing process analysis and in-process feedback control.
Applications include solid-state lighting characterization and testing,
emissions control, portable sensing, and personal health care. The
electrochemical pH and oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) measurement market, a
proxy for the pH sensing market addressed by this technology, was valued at $112
million in 2006. The platform spectrometer technology has the additional
potential to be applied in other areas within the water testing market, which
has an aggregate value of $4 billion.