* 1152638
* SBIR Phase II:  Enhanced materials for renewable fuel  production and efficient emission reduction
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Erin Orazem-Stoimenova, GRT, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will expand on the
successful work from Phase I project on synthesis and characterization of metal
oxide nanocomposite materials that can capture HBr and be regenerated to produce
bromine. The capture and regeneration capabilities of these materials are
integral to the economic viability of the GRT Gas-to-Fuels/Chemicals rocess and
the GRT Propane-to-Propylene Process. In the GRT Processes, natural gas alkanes
are (1) reacted with bromine to form reactive lkyl bromides that are (2) reacted
over catalysts to produce alkanes, aromatic compounds and olefins. The metal
oxide nanocomposite was ound very efficient at sequestering HBr produced in the
process as a metal bromide. The use of metal oxides allows for a very
inexpensive eparation of HBr from the hydrocarbon products. Subsequent oxidation
of the metal bromide produces bromine. Thus the bromine needed in 1) is
generated in situ as necessary and is fully contained within the process. During
Phase I, we identified metal oxide nanocomposite materials with favorable
capacity and capture-regeneration cycle stability that makes industrial use
economic. The proposed work is targeted at conducting further testing of these
composite nanomaterials on a larger scale and in combination with other Process
steps.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it can
contribute to the urgent need for methods to economically produce renewable
hydrocarbon fuels and high value chemicals that are more efficient than existing
technologies. GRT is developing novel processes for the conversion of methane,
ethane and propane into higher value hydrocarbons suitable for gasoline and jet
fuel blend stocks, aromatic compounds or high value chemicals which can cost-
effectively utilize stranded and/or small reserves of natural gas and shale gas.
This upgrade of inexpensive natural gas to high value transportation fuels and
chemicals at the source is very valuable because it eliminates the need for gas
processing and pipeline transportation. The commercial viability of these
technologies depends on energy efficiency and the capital cost of plant
equipment. Improvement in the performance and stability of solid reactant/metal
oxide nanocomposite materials will make substantial improvements in both of
these metrics and hence in the commercial viability of the GRT Processes.