* 1152415
* IDBR:  Development of Ultrasensitive, Superfast, and Microliter-Volume Differential Scanning Nanocalorimeter for Direct Characterization of Biomolecular Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2013,06/30/2015
* Lei Zuo, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Award Abstract: Development of Ultrasensitive, Superfast, and Microliter-Volume
Differential Scanning Nanocalorimeter for Direct Characterization of
Biomolecular Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All biological phenomena depend
on molecular interactions, which is either intermolecular, as with ligand
binding to a protein, or intramolecular, as with protein folding. As a label-
free and immobilization-free method, modern calorimetry instrumentation is the
gold standard for directly characterizing the thermodynamic profiles of
molecular interactions, including Gibbs free energy, enthalpy, entropy, specific
heat, and stoichiometry, providing valuable information for investigating
biolomolecular mechanisms and drug design, information that cannot be obtained
from structural or computational methods alone. However, the current state-of-
the-art calorimeters require large-volume, high-concentration proteins and need
very long measurement times, which limits their utility for biological studies.
The objective of this award is to develop an innovative MEMS-based differential
scanning nanocalorimeter and array to reduce the consumption of biological
macromolecules from milliliters to micro liters, and to decrease the measurement
time from hours to minutes, and thus enable direct, precise, and rapid detection
of biomolecular interactions. To achieve this goal, four specific tasks are
planned, including 1) designing and fabricating ultrasensitive low-noise
sensors, 2) minimizing the parasitic heat loss of the nanocalorimeter, 3)
designing and integrating low-noise electronics and feedback controller, and 4)
testing and applying this technology to membrane protein study and
pharmaceutical screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed differential
scanning nanocalorimeter will significantly reduce the sample volume and shorten
the measurement time, and provide a powerful tool for comprehensive high-content
thermodynamics studies, in the early stage of drug discovery, and in the study
of membrane proteins. This multidisciplinary research will provide excellent
opportunities to young scientists and engineers, especially women and
underrepresented minorities. Interaction with national laboratories and industry
at different ends of the application spectrum will enable accelerated
implementation of the developed knowledge.