* 1152720
* SBIR Phase II:  Computational Low-cost Arrayed Infrared (CLAIR) Cameras
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Kenny Kubala, FiveFocal LLC
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2014
* USD 611,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
revolutionary approach to the lens and opto-mechanical design and fabrication
process for long wave infrared (LWIR) imagers with the goal of reducing cost,
size, and weight. To date, the high cost of sensors has made LWIR imagers
accessible only in markets where performance -not cost - is the driving factor,
allowing expensive and bulky optics to reign. New process improvements are
significantly reducing the size and cost of LWIR microbolometer sensors, making
optics the limiting factor for weight, size, and cost reduction. The research
objectives are to extend the technology developed in Phase I and validate the
final manufacturing and testing process for the optics and camera assembly to
show that the final architecture can meet the market requirements for module
volume, weight and price when scaled to high volume production. The development
will scale the process to larger arrays and will take the necessary steps to
evaluate the solutions mechanical reliability. The solution will be implemented
and tested through arrangements with industry partners. The anticipated result
is a demonstration of an LWIR camera that meets the needs of the infrared (IR)
vision enhancement and thermography markets.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to extend the sale of
IR imagers into cost-sensitive commercial applications. Currently IR imagers are
targeted for expensive military applications, but there is a large need for
reduced cost systems in safety, security, and industrial markets where thermal
imaging offers enhanced viewing over the visible spectrum. Thermal imagers
provide visibility in complete darkness, which enables imaging in adverse
conditions needed by automotive collision detection, search and rescue and
security applications that require identification of humans in conditions of no
light. In industrial use, LWIR thermography can improve energy efficiency by
identifying thermal leaks and can predict imminent process faults. The impact to
society is as ubiquitous as the commercial opportunities and constitutes an
increase in emergency search effectiveness, city street safety, and energy
conservation. The scientific and technological understanding cannot be
understated: technological innovation occurs most rapidly near manufacturing
capability. Already, labor costs are driving current labor-intensive IR lens
fabrication overseas. The proposed innovations remove the labor-intensive
component, bolstering the US as the dominant manufacturer in this emerging
market while enhancing science in parallel process development, material
property innovation, and IR sensor performance.