* 1152776
* GOALI: Collaborative Research:  Development and Application of Monte Carlo Simulation Tools for HILIC, Ion Chromatography, and SERS Chemosensors
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Jake Rafferty, North Hennepin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 09/30/2015
* USD 72,183.00

In this collaborative GOALI award, co-funded by the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging Program of the Division of Chemistry and the Biotechnology, Biochemical
and Biomass Engineering and the Chemical and Biological Separations Programs of
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transports Systems
Division, Professor Joern Siepmann of the University of Minnesota, Prof. Jake
Rafferty of North Hennepin Community College and their undergraduate and
graduate student researchers will work collaboratively with scientists from the
Dow Chemical company to model the molecular processes taking place in a variety
of analytical and separations experiments, including: reversed-phase liquid
chromatography, hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatrography, ion
chromatography, and the analyte distribution in self-assembled monolayers used
for surface-enhanced Raman scattering. The computational approaches that Profs.
Siepmann, Rafferty and their students are developing will be combined with
experimental data measured by Dr. Mark Schure and collaborators at Dow Chemical
to better understand the process taking place in these experimental systems. The
ultimate goal of these kinds of experiments is to improve these processes for
science and engineering applications. The ability to cleanly and efficiently
separate complex chemical mixtures into their separate components is of critical
importance to a number of important industries, including the production of fine
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, etc. The separation and purification steps in the
production of these commodities is also one that can use significant quantities
of materials and produce significant amount of waste. By developing better
methods for separations, Siepmann, Rafferty and others hope to improve the
selectivity and efficiency of these important processes. The graduate and
undergraduate students working on this project will gain useful experience in
academic and industrial settings, which will help prepare them well for a wide
variety of careers in science and technology. This project will also involve the
participation of high school and community college students in this research,
which will help to excite and engage the next generation of scientists.