* 1152631
* IDBR:   Bridging Electronic Focus and Aberration Control for Scanning Laser Microscopes from Lab to Commercial Readiness
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* David Dickensheets, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 05/31/2015
* USD 311,966.00

A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Dickensheets at Montana State University
to develop a new instrument for electronic focus and aberration control in
biological microscopy, with particular application to microscopy of thick living
tissues or intact animals. A critical tool for studying living systems in their
natural state, high-resolution microscopy of living and intact tissues remains a
tremendous challenge. This project addresses a major technological barrier for
in vivo microscopy: controlling the focus and managing aberrations when imaging
through thick, unprepared specimens. &lt;br/&gt;Most current instruments for
vital microscopy rely on mechanically fixing the specimen in some manner and
then translating the microscope objective lens in or out to adjust focus. A
system has been developed based on a deformable MEMS mirror (MEMS is an acronym
for micro-electromechanical systems) that adjusts the location of the beam focus
in the sample while maintaining the objective lens in a fixed position. There is
no mechanical translation of any lenses or of the sample, and therefore no
vibration. Precise control of the mirror shape eliminates spherical aberration
at every depth. Fast response time allows focus stepping or scanning, and when
synchronized with lateral beam scanning allows sectioning of 3D samples along
any oblique plane or even along convoluted surfaces such as a cell membrane. No
competing technology offers the precision, speed and potential low cost afforded
by MEMS deformable mirror technology. The underlying technology of electronic
focus and aberration control using a MEMS deformable mirror has been
demonstrated in our laboratory. The aim in this project is to bridge the gap
between our first prototype demonstration and an instrument ready for
commercialization and broad distribution. When fully developed, this technology
will turn any laser scanning confocal or two-photon/multi-photon microscope into
an electronically controlled 3D imaging instrument, capable of x-y, x-z or
arbitrary trajectory scanning. With the proposed instrument and future software
development, many sophisticated image acquisition schemes would become possible
including multi-plane imaging, enhanced depth of focus at high NA, and image
feature tracking and stabilization.&lt;br/&gt;The scope of potential use for
this new technology is extremely broad. The first module in development is for
scanning laser microscopes, but future applications include fast, aberration-
free electronic focus control for wide-field white light and fluorescence
microscopes and miniaturized in-vivo microscopes designed for laparoscope,
endoscope or catheter platforms that presently have extremely limited ability to
adjust focus in situ. Advances made with the deformable mirrors will be of
interest for applications in astronomy, photography and optical data storage. In
addition to its scientific impact the project embraces integration of research
and education, training one female engineering Ph.D. student and providing
research experience for several undergraduate engineering students, who will
participate directly in cross-disciplinary activities with biology researchers
as they vet the technology. This project will also participate in an established
summer internship program for students and faculty from tribal colleges in
Montana.