* 1152755
* Integrated Paramagnetic Resonance of High-Spin Co(II) Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* David Tierney, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2015
* USD 389,200.00

In this project, funded by the Chemistry Division's Chemical Structure, Dynamics
and Mechanisms Program, Professor Tierney of the University of New Mexico will
systematically investigate a large library of high-spin (hs) Co(II) coordination
compounds with mixed N/O/S donor sets, encompassing 4-, 5- and 6-coordination.
The work is founded on an integrated approach to paramagnetic resonance,
simultaneously applying frozen-solution multi-frequency electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) and fluid-solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), to map the
field- and temperature-dependence of electron-nuclear hyperfine interactions.
EPR-based techniques are used to map ground state electron-nuclear hyperfine
interactions onto three-dimensional structure. Excited state effects are
examined in detail by UV-vis-NIR spectroscopy, by field- and temperature-
dependent NMR relaxation and by NMRD. The resulting information will define the
factors controlling electron dynamics in these electronically complex systems.
Pulsed EPR techniques (ENDOR and ESEEM at both X- and Q-bands) and NMR of
heteronuclei, including 11B in pyrazolylborate complexes and 19F incorporated
into ligands, will be utilized to aid in solution speciation. The goal is to
develop a deeper understanding of how excited state mixing determines ground
state electronic properties and solution dynamics. Target molecules include a
series of spin-crossover complexes, examining the role of structural dynamics in
the magnetic hysteresis required for translation into functional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complexes of high-spin cobalt(II) are important
to the study of metals in biochemistry, as well as to modern magnetic materials
and catalysts. For example, these complexes can be used as spectroscopic probes
of the mechanisms of enzymatic reactions. Also, they can used to construct
switchable magnets on the molecular or nano-scale. Such materials are at the
frontier of research in modern computer miniaturization. A wide range of
magnetic resonance techniques will be employed for determining the structural
features of these interesting molecules. This research provides training
opportunites for early-career scientists, as well as graduate and undergraduate
researchers. Many students involved in this research have presented their
research locally, and several have made presentations at regional and national
meetings. Results from this research program have been incorporated into the
undergraduate chemistry curriculum, including experiments that utilize low-
temperature EPR, paramagnetic NMR, and X-ray structure determination.