* 1152520
* Economy and Identity at Tiwanaku Settlements in the Osmore Valley, Southern Peru: Zooarchaeology and Bone Chemistry
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Susan deFrance, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2017
* USD 94,482.00

With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Susan deFrance and
colleagues will conduct laboratory zooarchaeological and bone chemistry analyses
of animal remains from several Tiwanaku sites located in southern Peru. The
Tiwanaku, one of the early imperial states of the Central Andean region,
flourished from roughly A. D. 600-1100. The homeland of Tiwanaku culture is the
highlands of Bolivia, southeast of Lake Titicaca. In these high plains the
Tiwanaku built a massive capital characterized by sunken temples, monumental
stone architecture, and elaborately engineered raised agricultural fields. The
Tiwanaku also reared domesticated llamas and alpacas, the only large mammals
domesticated in the New World. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sometime early in their
history, Tiwanaku colonists immigrated to other regions. A large contingent of
Tiwanaku colonists settled along the Osmore River in southern Peru near the
modern city of Moquegua. Previous excavations have revealed that Tiwanaku
settlers commandeered the best agricultural land and that they established
corrals for their domesticated animals. A working hypothesis is that settlement
occurred in two waves by two distinct extended lineages, each with their own
economic specialization: agriculture versus pastoralism. Important questions
remain about the degree to which Tiwanaku inhabitants in this periphery were
under direct political control by their highland capital or as autonomous
colonies. Animal rearing and the production of animal products (e.g., fiber for
textiles, meat, bone for tools) are hypothesized to have been locally autonomous
and not used to support the highland capital. The analysis of animal remains
from sites affiliated with each lineage will be used to help support or refute
the model of lineage autonomous colonization and economic specialization
(pastoralists versus agriculturalists). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis will
consist of the creation of two types of data sets. One will be the
zooarchaeological identification of the animals present at the various sites.
DeFrance will work with graduate students and undergraduate students using
facilities of the Contisuyo Museum in Moquegua to identify the animal remains.
Differences in the animals present, the parts of the carcass, how they were
butchered, and how and where they were discarded will be used to determine if
the colonies were locally autonomous as is hypothesized, or if parts of animals
were shipped to other areas to support the state. The other data set will be an
analysis of bone chemistry isotopic signatures from a sample of the camelid
(llama and alpaca) remains to determine at what elevation these animals were
reared and if ritually-sacrificed camelids were fed special foods that differed
from non-ritual animals. A specialist in bone chemistry, Erin Thornton, will
conduct the bone chemistry analysis. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The information that
will be generated from this project is important because it will help
archaeologists and anthropologists understand how ancient imperial states, such
as the Tiwanaku, functioned, colonized distant regions, and the economic and
ritual activities that they undertook to maintain their identity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will work with the Contisuyo Museum to
include long-term and temporary exhibits on animal use thus providing a public
dimension to zooarchaeology.