* 1152008
* Workshop: A Conversation Between AI and OR on Sequential Decision Making,held at Rutgers University, Spring 2012.
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Warren Powell, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 12/31/2013
* USD 42,610.00

Sequential decision making in the presence of uncertainty arises in problems
that span transportation and logistics, energy, health and military operations.
Real-world instances of these problems are fundamentally intractable, beyond the
reach of our most powerful computers. Parallel research among communities such
as operations research and computer science has produced a diversity of
algorithmic strategies that offer unique features, but significant language and
notational barriers have limited the sharing of ideas. This workshop will
consist of a series of conversations so that leading professionals, post-docs
and students from both communities will better learn the languages of both
communities. A major activity will be the design of challenge problems that
benefit from the combined skills of both communities. For example, the problem
of optimizing fleets of UAVs is a problem class that would be solved in very
different ways by each community. Computer scientists tend to solve these as
swarms of loosely coordinated, independent agents. Operations researchers have
the tools to optimize these fleets using large-scale optimization, reflecting
the perspective of a single controller. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
workshop will lead to avenues for improved collaboration between the operations
research and computer science communities, including a roadmap for future
collaboration between the two research communities. Ultimately this should lead
to increased capabilities for solving problems that have been intractable up to
now by exploiting the unique skills that each community brings, most prominently
the computational power of machine learning and mathematical programming.