* 1152347
* Molecular Motifs Governing Gemini Surfactant Self-Assembly into Complex Lyotropic Liquid Crystalline Phases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Mahesh Mahanthappa, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Mahesh Mahanthappa of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison will study the delicate balance of forces underpinning the
self-assembly of gemini ("twin tail") amphiphiles in water to form
nanostructured soft materials known as lyotropic liquid crystals (LLCs). By
chemically synthesizing and characterizing the LLC phase behavior of a variety
of structurally diverse gemini surfactants, Mahanthappa and co-workers will
identify specific amphiphile structural motifs that direct gemini surfactants to
spontaneously form aqueous bicontinuous LLCs. Bicontinuous LLCs are useful
materials comprised of interpenetrating aqueous and hydrophobic domains that
percolate in three-dimensions over macroscopic length
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will enhance our understanding of the
forces governing molecular self-assembly in water, which is of significant
fundamental and practical importance. Discovery of new molecular design criteria
favoring bicontinuous liquid crystal formation may have important implications
in the design of new drug delivery materials and next generation membranes for
water purification, fuel cells, and batteries. The broader impacts of this
project will include training undergraduate and graduate students in the
interdisciplinary area of organic materials chemistry, disseminating research
results through scholarly publications and national conference presentations,
and developing laboratory modules/demonstrations for high school seniors and
college freshman to illustrate surfactant self-assembly in water toward the
design of technologically useful, nanostructured materials.