* 1152803
* Organic Transformations with Dihapto-Coordinated Arene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Walter Harman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2015
* USD 470,000.00

Professor W. Dean Harman of the University of Virginia is supported by the
Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry to conduct research that
explores the ability of specially designed tungsten complexes, known as
dearomatization agents, to coordinate and activate various types of aromatic
molecules toward novel chemical transformations. The cornerstone of this
approach is the implementation of highly pi-basic transition metal complexes
that forms strong back-bonding interactions with the aromatic molecule. The
research focuses on three areas: 1) the activation and manipulation of phenols
and anilines 2) the activation and manipulation of polyaromatic hydrocarbons and
3) the development of enantio-enriched dearomatization agents that can be used
for the synthesis of enantio-enriched organic products derived from aromatic
molecules. These new methodologies will be used to generate new organic
compounds that will be broad-screened for biological function and medicinal
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New synthetic methods that can convert ubiquitous
aromatic molecules into highly functionalized molecules provide facile routes
for the preparation of new synthetic substances not readily available from other
methods. In most cases, these are entirely new compounds, and are of interest to
the biochemical and medicinal communities as potential leads for the development
of new biological probes and medicines. The project is highly interdisciplinary,
combining elements of coordination chemistry, organometallics, organic, and
medicinal chemistries. As a result, Ph. D. and undergraduate students involved
with this research will receive the type of broad education required for them to
be successful as modern synthetic chemists.