* 1152771
* Binary Palladium-Based Anode Catalysts for the Ethanol Oxidation Reaction in an Alkaline Medium
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Xiaowei Teng, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2016
* USD 375,000.00

With this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program, Prof. Xiaowei Teng
of the University of New Hampshire (UNH) will develop new palladium (Pd)-based
binary heterogeneous catalysts for direct ethanol alkaline fuel cell (DEAFC)
reactions. Ethanol has been considered a promising fuel in power technologies,
for its high energy density, low toxicity, and availability from biomass.
However, the ethanol oxidation reaction is plagued by slow kinetics, inefficient
electro-oxidation at room temperature, and its expense when platinum is used as
a catalyst. This proposed work will investigate the structure and
electroactivity of low-cost Pd-based anode catalysts with highly-efficient
oxidization of ethanol in an alkaline medium, and will advance the cost-
effective use of DEAFCs. To understand and optimize the structure-
electroactivity relationship for the DEAFC reactions, the proposed research will
include: (1) Evaluating the stability of Pd-based binary catalysts and studying
their ability to break the C-C bond of ethanol using Density Functional Theory
(DFT) calculations, (2) Synthesizing and characterizing Pd-based catalysts using
combined techniques, including state-of-the-art aberration-corrected Scanning
Transmission Electronic Microscopy (STEM) and synchrotron-based Extended X-ray
Absorption Fine Structure spectroscopy, and (4) Measuring electroactivities of
the proposed Pd-based catalysts for the DEAFCs in an alkaline medium and
understanding the mechanism of the EOR through in-situ X-ray Absorption Near
Edge Structure spectroscopy, through which the optimal Pd-based nanostructures
will be determined for highly-efficient oxidation of ethanol into CO2 with C-C
bond cleavage in an alkaline medium. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
builds upon the researchers' past accomplishments in DFT calculations,
functional nanomaterials, catalyst design for fuel cells, and synchrotron- and
STEM-based spectroscopic techniques, and integrates an educational program
dedicated to the cross-disciplinary training in materials science and
electrocatalysis. The outcome of the research will impact DAEFCs technology by
completely replacing Pt with an alternative low-cost, highly-efficient anode
nanocatalyst. The project outcome will support directly the nation's effort to
diversify its energy supply portfolio, and help to reduce the global carbon
footprint. More importantly, the research will be coupled with an educational
program dedicated to training and teaching students about the power of the
structure-function relationship, not only for DAEFCs but also fundamental
catalysis that drives so many processes. The research and education integration
in this program will provide graduate and undergraduate students with a cross-
disciplinary effort that joins material science and electrochemistry.
Additionally, the students will have opportunity to receive direct training at
national laboratory facilities using state-of-the-art equipment, and to
experience how such resources can be utilized throughout their careers to
advance research and technology.