* 1152846
* Development of Bio-Inspired Synthetic Metallopeptidases: Insight from Theoretical Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Rajeev Prabhakar, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2016
* USD 351,000.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Rajeev Prabhakar from the University of Miami will utilize theoretical
and computational chemistry techniques to derive guiding principles of peptide
hydrolysis and apply them for the development of efficient bio-inspired
synthetic metallopeptidases. The selective hydrolysis of the extremely stable
peptide or amide bond (-(O=)C-NH-) of peptides and proteins plays a critical
role in a wide range of biological, biotechnological and industrial
applications. A wealth of experimental data indicates that remarkable changes in
catalytic efficiency can be attained in peptide hydrolysis with modifications in
the metal ions or the ligands (direct and indirect) of the metal centers. The
approach is to first understand the roles of metal(s) and ligands of mono- and
binuclear metal center containing enzymes and their existing synthetic analogues
in their functioning. This knowledge will then be used to modify metal(s) and
ligands and rigorously integrated with experiments performed by our
collaborators to design the next generation of efficient synthetic
metallopeptidases. These analogues can offer the following advantages over
natural enzymes and synthetic reagents: (1) they are inexpensive and may be
recyclable, (2) being smaller in size they impose little or no steric
constraints, (3) they can cleave proteins either terminally or internally, and
(4) their properties can be tuned for specific applications such as protein
engineering, proteomics and therapeutics. The calculations will also validate
the applicability of different density functional theory (DFT) functionals,
force field parameters, hybrid quantum mechanics(QM) and molecular mechanics
(MM) such as QM/MM and QM/QM/MM methods and mechanical and electronic embedding
schemes on the transition metal containing complexes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
potential advantages to society offered by the synthetic metallopeptidases
developed in this project include energy, water and raw material conservation
and therapeutics, which are critical to energy reliance, environmental
protection and health. This project also has a significant broader impact in
terms of training and involving current and future generations of students at
the graduate, undergraduate and high school levels throughout the year. In
particular, it will engage talented students from socio-economic and
educationally disadvantaged families to advance research in theoretical
chemistry. The high school students will be engaged in research through the
Honors and Executive Internship Program (HEIP) of the Miami-Dade County Public
Schools, the American Chemical Society's (ACS) Project SEED (Summer Experiences
for the Economically Disadvantaged) and a summer workshop to be designed by the
PI called CATCH-Computational and Theoretical Chemistry for High School. The
undergraduate students will be provided research opportunities through NSF
support and two specialized courses and a summer research program offered in the
department.