* 1152605
* SBIR Phase II:  Compliant Nonlinear Quasi-Passive Orthotic Joint
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2015
* John Rokosz, Adicep Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2015
* USD 797,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to create a
leg brace that addresses the underlying causes of mild/moderate walking
dysfunction affecting 150 million people worldwide. Novel brace elements called
Morphologically Switched Orthotic Joints combine field-adjustable, non-linear
torsion springs with microprocessor controlled clutches to change the brace's
mechanical state dynamically according to the user's gait. Internet updatable
software, executing under a multi-processor, fault tolerant brace operating
system, samples the brace's 40 sensors to monitor leg posture and activate
clutch state transitions. Novel brace concepts include soft/flexible tissue
interfaces that adapt to brace misalignment, a joint configuration that provides
greater range of motion compared with existing braces, and a fitting scheme with
potential for self-fitting capability. Three research objectives are planned:
optimize the brace design for comfort level while minimizing interference with
Activities of Daily Living (ADL); build/test five prototype braces; and conduct
human subjects testing with disabled volunteers to assess brace safety and
benefits. Primary biomechanical benefits include dynamically adapting to the
user's leg strength to provide full support at all knee angles and reducing the
total force across the knee joint by up to an order of magnitude during mobility
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial potential of
this project stems from creating a brace that offers biomechanical benefits that
substantially surpass those of existing devices without interfering with non-
mobile ADL. Anticipated benefits include: allowing Knee Osteoarthritis (KOA)
patients to walk with less pain; improving walking/stair-descent safety;
adapting to the user's preferred step-length/walking-speed; reducing the effort
needed to walk; and allowing a full day of mobile ADL (including a 20-mile walk)
on a single battery charge. This will have a transformative effect on the
existing leg brace market (120K offloading braces/yr alone) and improve Quality-
of-Life for as much as 40% of the world's population suffering mobility
dysfunction. The benefit for KOA patients includes a new treatment alternative
for multicompartmental or obese KOA patients or for patients who cannot have
knee replacement surgery. The benefit for walking/stair-descent safety includes
potential for reducing the incidence of falls. Falling accounts for two thirds
of accidental deaths and is the leading cause of restricted activity days
amongst America's elderly; persons with leg weakness have a four- to fivefold
increased risk for falls; directly addressing leg weakness therefore has
potential to increase longevity and reduce healthcare spending.