* 1152042
* RUI: Measurement of DNA Thermal Denaturation (Tm) on Surfaces to Quantify the Effects of Surface Interactions on the Stability of Hybridized DNA Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Aric Opdahl, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2016
* USD 271,586.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Aric Opdahl of the University of Wisconsin - La
Crosse and his undergraduate student researchers will be supported to
investigate the thermal denaturation of DNA on surfaces using a variety of
analytical methods, including surface Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence imaging,
atomic force microscopy, and other methods. The work aims to elucidate how the
stability of DNA changes upon binding to surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides
being important as the carrier of genetic information in many higher organisms,
DNA is increasingly being used in nanotechnology, medical diagnostics, and other
unexpected areas of technology. Many of the newer applications of DNA in
technology require the immobilization of DNA onto solid surfaces or other
structures. The binding of DNA to surfaces causes changes in its properties that
are still poorly understood, it is the aim of research like that of Prof. Opdahl
and his students to learn much more about the ways in which the properties of
DNA change upon binding. Besides the broader scientific impact of this research,
the undergraduate research students participating in this research will be
exposed to cutting-edge research in analytical chemistry with a talented
researcher and educator. The research program also includes an international
collaboration with the International Iberian National Laboratory, which will
broaden the horizons of the young people working with Prof. Opdahl on this
research.