* 1153657
* SICB 2012 Society-Wide Symposium:  The Impacts of Developmental Plasticity on Evolutionary Innovation and Diversification; January 3-7, 2012  Mtg; Charleston, SC
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Armin Moczek, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 11/30/2012
* USD 6,037.00

Evolutionary theory, the conceptual framework used to explain the origins of all
biological diversity, has itself been evolving over the past two centuries.
Since the early 20th century, biologists have been integrating Darwinian
evolution and genetics in what is known as the Modern Evolutionary Synthesis: as
we learn more about the genetic mechanisms that produce individual organisms, we
can better understand how processes such as natural selection shape these
genetic mechanisms to produce new traits, new species and new strains of
diseases. While this fusion of disciplines has proven enormously fruitful, it is
becoming increasingly clear that evolutionary theory is primed for another leap
forward in its own evolution, through the integration of developmental and
environmental biology into the existing conceptual framework. Historically,
biologists considered only a single role for the environment in evolution; it is
the agent of natural selection, determining which individuals are well-adapted
to survive long enough to leave similarly well-adapted offspring, and which
poorly-adapted individuals do not. However, developmental biology now tells us
that the environment also impacts how genes are translated into traits during
development, with the same genes producing different traits in different
environments (developmental plasticity). Thus, the environment affects what
traits develop in different individuals, and then selects among them. Theory
predicts that this dual role of the environment can impact the types of traits
that evolve, the way new species form, and the speed with which evolution
occurs. It is time for theory to be tested by experimental evidence; thus, the
society-wide symposium is designed to advance the field beyond recognizing the
need for further research toward designing and implementing effective research
programs. In the integrative spirit of this new line of inquiry, a diverse group
of researchers has been assembled who study developmental plasticity and its
consequences in a variety of organisms, using diverse approaches. This focus on
translating thought to action should stimulate new avenues of research in many
labs, most importantly providing new ideas to graduate students and beginning
investigators, the new generation of scientists tasked with determining all of
the consequences of unprecedented rates of environmental change.