* 1153384
* EAGER: Policy Design for Reproducibility and Data Sharing in Computational Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,12/31/2013
* Victoria Stodden, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2013
* USD 168,800.00

Scientific computation is emerging as absolutely central to the scientific
method, but the prevalence of very relaxed practices regarding the communication
of experimental details and the validation of results is leading to a
credibility crisis. Across the computational sciences, the research community is
now questioning traditional modes of communication and seeking to implement
methods for scientific knowledge transfer that make replication of published
computational findings possible. This typically means making all details of the
computations - the data and code - underlying published computational results
conveniently available to others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making data and code
openly available raises myriad questions regarding appropriate and effective
ways of reaching the goal of&lt;br/&gt;reproducible research. The requirements
of scientific journals exert a powerful influence on publishing decisions, and
are also the least well-understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to
build an understanding of the current state of journal policy regarding
reproducibility of published computational results, and of the factors
underlying journal policy changes toward the adoption of data and code sharing.
The highly granular nature of&lt;br/&gt;computational science research provides
a natural experiment for the study of effectiveness of policies in communities
with different attendant pressures such as data and codebase size, privacy and
legal barriers, capital intensity and level of instrumentation, and industrial
collaboration, to name a few. Measures of effectiveness can be ascertained since
domain-specific journals show a spectrum of positions on data and code sharing,
from requiring both to ignoring the issue altogether.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
findings will in turn inform the creation of guidelines regarding effective data
and code sharing policies across the computational research landscape. In
addition, this research will conduct detailed case studies describing successful
approaches journals have used to further reproducible research. Finally, this
project will also act as a case study itself, with the open release of the data
and code underlying its published results and analysis of how best to facilitate
reproducibility for similarly situated research.