* 1153775
* EAGER: Distilling a Process for a National CI Roadmap from NSF Collaboratories
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2017
* Ashok Krishnamurthy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rajiv Ramnath
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Many large NSF Collaboratories are individually solving sometimes very similar
CI challenges and utilizing the same academic research software. These projects
also face very similar challenges in the development of new research software
necessary to achieve the science objectives of the collaboratory. Alignment, re-
use and coordinated development of enabling CI across these projects could lead
to a National CI Roadmap, greatly enhancing infrastructure for research and
education in the US. However, adopting new technologies and approaches mid-
project imposes sufficiently high risk to the success of the science goals of
the individual projects that this level of coordination and leverage rarely
experienced at a deep level. This research will explore the risks and benefits,
and development of new processes and communities to establish a coordinated
National CI Roadmap.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In developing new processes for
coordinated CI, the investigators and participating collaboratories will examine
issues and concerns including: risk assessment and management for outsourced
services and participation and utilization of developing or emerging open source
software; privacy, integrity, assurances; code management; separation of
software at the boundary of domain science and enabling infrastructure;
virtualization; federated identity and group management; hosted data management
and analytics offerings; integration with and dependence upon campus services
and communicating with campus IT leadership.