* 1153105
* Design, synthesis, and applications of a uniquely multi-functionalized small organoboron molecule for organic synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Daniell Mattern, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2016
* USD 241,398.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Takashi Tomioka of the Department of Chemistry at University
of Mississippi will explore the synthetic applications of a unique, multi-
functionalized small organoboron molecule, diaminoboryl acetonitrile. Despite
its structural simplicity as well as potential importance, no study for its use
in organic synthesis has been developed. The deprotonation of the acidic
hydrogen on the methylene carbon of diaminoboryl acetonitrile with an
appropriate base should generate a novel, nucleophilic alpha-diaminoboryl
carbanion species that could be utilized for a variety of practical applications
in chemical synthesis.

Installing and transforming functionalities on organic molecules are the most
fundamental and crucial technologies in chemical synthesis, which is needed to
address the ever-increasing demand on complex organic molecules. This project
intends to develop new and efficient synthetic methodology based on the unique
chemistry of diaminoboryl acetonitrile. If successful, it will positively impact
any area of activities where the synthesis of organic molecules is needed. These
areas of activities include the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and specialty
chemical industries. The project will also provide excellent trainings to the
graduate students and undergraduate students involved, including those currently
underrepresented in Chemistry.