* 1153600
* Scholarships for Transfer Students in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Herbert Dershem, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2018
* USD 528,994.00

This project provides scholarships for academically talented students with
financial need who transfer to Hope College from a community college to major in
biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, geological and environmental
sciences, mathematics, or physics. Scholarships of up to $10,000 per year are
offered to up to seven transferring students each year over four years. The
scholarships are renewable for a second year if the student meets eligibility
requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to (1)
improve the collaboration between local community colleges and Hope College STEM
programs; (2) recruit to Hope College STEM students at community colleges who
would not ordinarily consider attending the college; (3) increase the number of
community college students who transfer into STEM programs at Hope College; and
(4) increase the retention of community college transfers in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year this project will identify and recruit students
on seven community college campuses in Hope's geographic region. Scholarship
recipients will be selected after personal interviews and review of their
college admissions packets. Selection is based on promise for academic success
and potential for the scholarship to affect career choice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All students supported by these scholarships are given the
opportunity to participate in a summer research project at Hope College in the
summer before they begin studies at Hope. They are also supported in their study
by intensive faculty advising, timely and appropriate academic assistance, and
education, internship and research opportunities. In addition, S-STEM Transfer
Scholars participate in the Fostering a Community of Excellence in Science
(FACES) program, which was launched for a cohort of incoming freshmen in the
Fall of 2010. This program provides peer mentoring, career counseling and
community building activities for STEM majors to help them make the transition
to the college and prepare for careers in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project builds upon the
nationally recognized Hope STEM programs, the current Hope CSEMS and S-STEM
projects, the FACES mentoring program, and the college's extensive
infrastructure for student support to enable students to transfer and pursue
degrees in one of the STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This project especially targets community college students who usually do not
consider attending a private liberal arts college like Hope, thus increasing
economic and racial diversity in STEM fields at Hope. A significant number of
Hope STEM alumni pursue post-graduate studies in science and engineering fields.
Thus graduates with strong STEM educations from Hope will not only enter the
workforce, but many of them are likely to pursue post-graduate degrees in STEM
fields.