* 1153688
* SPARK - Increasing the Recruitment and Retention of Female Undergraduates in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Anne Ngu, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2017
* USD 599,982.00

This project will create a scholarship program called SPARK to offer eighteen
scholarships to an undergraduate cohort comprised of first year, low income,
academically talented engineering, and computer science majors at Texas State
University - San Marcos. Scholarship support will continue for 3 years. Targeted
recruiting and clearly defined selection criteria will help to create a strong
cohort. Participants will live in a shared community integrating learning,
mentoring, and academic enrichment. They will also participate in two highly
engaged experiential learning summer sessions created specifically for the
scholarship program. SPARK will help students refine skills critical to success
in a 21st century workforce: adaptability, problem solving, innovation,
empowerment, and leadership through the shared residential learning community,
co-enrollment in STEM-related courses, a dedicated first year university
transition course, and special summer sessions. Regular mentoring sessions will
focus on career exploration, personal development, and research opportunities.
The project will increase the number of talented female students attaining
undergraduate engineering and computer science (ECS) degrees and contribute to
the effort to achieve a more diverse STEM workforce.