* 1153823
* EAGER:  AnalyzeD - Analyzing Engineering Design Activities
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Martin Steinert, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Collopy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 132,000.00

The research objective of this EArly concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award is to quantitatively measure, model, and understand the
relationships between engineering design behavior (actual engineering activity),
problem solving preference (individual psychological predisposition), and real-
time physiological responses of engineers (EEG, ECG, and other physiology
telemetry data). It will result in an engineering design measurement system that
will help improve decision analysis models by reducing individual behavior-based
uncertainty, as well as data that will support the formation and optimization of
design teams, enabling new insights into the interactions between engineering
designers and their contextual environments (e.g., computational and
collaborative tools, spaces, and machines). This research will facilitate the
integration of analytical creativity and structured engineering approaches with
the less structured creativity of divergent rapid prototyping to enable design
teams and technical organizations to increase the level of transformation,
speed, and value of their product/system development and design
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
provide insight into the underlying cognitive processes taking place as
engineering designers make decisions (alone and in teams), including the
relationship between the amount of stress experienced under different amounts of
uncertainty based on the type of design activity and the problem solving
preference of the individuals. The results will enable the development of new
supportive tools and environments to assist in the resolution of complex
engineering challenges, while taking the individual psychological
predispositions of the engineers and the specific divergent or convergent nature
of the design activity into account. This knowledge will enable the facilitation
of mental pivoting between the divergent and convergent engineering design
phases, as well as the maximization of each individual engineer's participation
and output in both phases.