* 1153357
* Collaborative Research: Metabolite repair - Uncovering the hidden support system for metabolic networks
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Christopher Henry, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 506,912.00

Intellectual Merit. Most pro- and eukaryote genomes encode hundreds of enzymes
of unknown function; finding what they do is a critical task for post-genomic
biology. Mounting evidence implicates many of these enzymes of unknown function
in "metabolite repair", i.e. in reversing damage done to metabolites by unwanted
enzymatic side-reactions or chemical degradation. Because metabolites are under
constant chemical attack (e.g. by oxidation or hydrolysis) and enzymes make
wasteful and toxic catalytic errors, it follows that efficient functioning of
meta¬bolic networks demands a support system dedicated to meta¬bolite repair.
This system has been glimpsed by classical biochemistry, genetics, and
metabolomics but most of it remains hidden. This project will therefore dissect
the metabolite repair system by combining chemical biology, comparative
genomics, and metabolomics using bacterial models and plants. Specific aims are
to: (a) identify 30-50 target metabolites that are highly prone to chemical or
enzymatic damage (i.e. that need repair) by cheminformatics, genome-scale
metabolic reconstruction, and data mining; (b) predict genes encoding conserved
repair enzymes for target metabolites using comparative genomics, and predict
chemistries for the repair reactions; (c) test 20 repair predictions by knocking
out the repair gene in a model organism, analyzing metabolomic profiles in
normal and stress conditions, and identifying structures by cheminformatics; (d)
validate repair reactions by mass spectrometric authentication of structures, by
biochemical assays of recombinant proteins, and by functional complementation of
bacterial or plant mutants; and (e) incorporate validated repair functions in
next-generation genome-scale metabolic models. &lt;br/&gt; This project
integrates modeling in two ways. First, it makes innovative use of modeling to
predict a priori the metabolites most likely to need repair. Second, adding
validated repair functions to genome-scale bacterial models sets up a virtuous
cycle of prediction 'experiment' further prediction to drive discovery in
metabolite repair. It also pioneers an essential modeling development: Models
that capture the cost of uncontrolled formation and degradation of unwanted
metabolites.&lt;br/&gt; Research in the emerging field of metabolite repair has
the potential to displace a current paradigm of metabolic routes operating with
perfect precision by one where the illusion of a flawless system is maintained
by a battery of unobtrusive but critical repair functions. Moreover, metabolite
repair is almost surely crucial to stress adaptation, to aging, and to metabolic
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training in comparative genomics, metabolomics, chemical
biology, and integrative modeling to two PhD students and three postdoctorals
who will spend time away from their own institution each year at another
collaborating institution. Un-dergraduates will participate. In addition, there
will be a training outreach component with three facets: (a) Eight two-day
hands-on workshops (2 per year) at different universities to train PhD students,
post¬doctorals, and faculty in comparative genomics using SEED databases and
tools. At least three work¬shops will be at minority-serving institutions. Each
workshop will train 10-12 people. (b) Development of a web page in which the
instructional content of the workshop will be available for distance learning.
(c) Instruction of project postdoctorals and students in how to organize and
present workshops, culminating first in their acting as teaching assistants, and
ultimately in them teaching themselves.