* 1153693
* The Panulirus Hydrographic Stations: Years 59-64
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 03/31/2017
* USD 695,718.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Hydrostation 'S' located some 25 km south east of
Bermuda in the Sargasso Sea represents the site of the longest maintained
oceanographic hydrography timeseries. Initiated by oceanographer Henry Stommel
and co-workers in 1954, this invaluable biweekly timeseries has been in
existence for nearly 58 years. Historically, the Hydrostation 'S' program
through its core hydrography measurements and other ancillary work has
facilitated a diversified measurement program. The dominant theme of these
studies has been long term change relating to climate issues using the
unprecedented near six decades of physical hydrography. These data clearly show
substantial inter-annual and decadal variability throughout the full water
column although significant long term trends exist in the thermohaline
properties of both the upper ocean and deep waters. For waters consistent with
subtropical mode water at this site (~300 m depth), the long term trend in
temperature and salinity is + 0.009 C per year and 0.002 salinity units per
year, respectively, while for deeper waters consistent with Labrador Sea Water ,
the observed trends are -0.005 C per year and -0.001 salinity units per year .
Interestingly, for the past five years, the observed trends for these water
masses are opposite to the long term trends. Hydrostation 'S' data have been an
important resource in helping understand variability in the various water masses
of the subtropical gyre by establishing links to climate state (North Atlantic
Oscillation) and large scale mass transport (Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation). As a result of collaboration with other investigators, the
Hydrostation 'S' program continues to deliver a broad research list and
complementary to the core hydrography,&lt;br/&gt;these ancillary projects have
yielded the longest time-series of carbon dioxide (now 29 years old), tritium
and helium and trace organics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perhaps one of the more
important aspects of this timeseries is the support framework and multi-decadal
synthesis context it provides for other oceanographic programs in this region.
These data are considered as a service to the community as a whole being openly
distributed and subsequently an invaluable resource for understanding ocean
processes. All data for this current award have been processed and data through
December 2010 are available for full access while data through July 2011 can be
accessed as preliminary data. This renewal will maintain the same sampling
program of near biweekly sampling consisting of deep CTD casts and discrete
samples for salinity and
dissolved&lt;br/&gt;oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Hydrostation 'S' cruises have played a large role in
education at BIOS by providing students one day trips to the Sargasso Sea such
that these cruises now routinely host large student groups (e.g., Princeton
University graduates). Hydrostation 'S' cruises have also proved to be a key
platform for resident undergraduate, graduate and local high school students,
for gaining experience and conducting independent research projects. Due to
their short duration, Hydrostation 'S' cruises continue to prove useful for both
local and international media reporters. During this past year media teams from
Time Magazine, National Geographic and NBC News have participated on
Hydrostation 'S' cruises resulting in articles and documentaries highlighting
this time-series and its role in helping understand ocean variability and
climate change. In the past few years, there has been a large increase in
educational and outreach activities on these cruises primarily due to the
arrival of the R/V Atlantic Explorer at BIOS.