* 1153382
* REU Site: "Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics at Missouri State University"
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Leslie Reid, Missouri State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2015
* USD 298,255.00

The Department of Mathematics at Missouri State University will offer summer
research opportunities in 2012, 2013 and 2014 in the fields of algebra,
combinatorics, analysis, differential equations and numerical analysis. Junior
and senior undergraduate students from across the country are invited to apply,
but we are especially targeting students from nearby institutions where
undergraduate research is limited. This program will involve undergraduate
students in active research, help them reach a higher level of independence in
mathematical reasoning, and encourage them to pursue graduate studies. The
students will learn to assimilate the latest research through reading,
discussions and constant interaction with their cohort and experienced faculty
mentors. Participants will learn how to effectively communicate their results by
writing and presenting them to the mathematical community, and in some cases by
publishing in refereed journals. This program is designed in order to achieve
the goal of improving participants' understanding of mathematics, leading to the
discovery of original results through high-quality research. We are fully
committed to substantially increase the participation of women, minorities,
persons with disabilities, and first generation students.

An NSF-sponsored program such as this is one of the best ways to attract and
retain talented undergraduate students, and to help them realize their full
potential for research, by involving them in direct interaction with a diverse
group of students and experienced faculty mentors. Every effort will be made to
foster a sense of community among the REU team of faculty mentors and students,
with the goal of providing the undergraduate participants with the experience of
being part of a well-integrated research team.