* 1153401
* A belowground framework for predicting how plant-microbe interactions couple carbon and nutrient economies of forests
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Tom Evans, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 405,045.00

Temperate deciduous forests occupy millions of acres across the Eastern and
Midwestern US and perform vital ecosystem services by storing carbon (C),
improving water quality and mediating climate. These forests have undergone and
are currently undergoing dramatic changes in forest composition owing to human
activities. The goal of this research is to develop a predictive framework for
examining how tree species and their associated soil microbes influence C and
nutrient cycles in central hardwood forests. Much of what is known about the
role of tree species in influencing C and nutrient cycling is based on
measurements of processes occurring in the forest canopy, despite the fact that
roots and other belowground processes play a vital role in storing C and
releasing nutrients. This project will integrate observational and experimental
plot-level data with models and satellite imagery to examine how trees with
different symbiotic fungal associations influence C and nutrient dynamics. To
determine the importance of belowground processes to C and nutrient cycling,
trees will be experimentally girdled, a process which physically blocks the flow
of sugars to roots. A predictive framework for scaling plot-level data of
C-nutrient cycling to ecosystem, regional and global scales will be developed by
updating a nutrient uptake model and developing a land cover classification from
remotely sensed data. Collectively, these approaches will enable the
incorporation of plant-soil interactions into C cycle-climate models, and result
in novel insights into how shifts in forest composition may influence ecosystem
functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project will provide
integrative training of undergraduate and graduate students in ecology,
ecosystem modeling, and remote sensing. Moreover, the results of this research
will be disseminated through reports developed for public land managers (state
and federal forests). Reports designed for private landowners will also be
produced to disseminate this information. Knowledge about C and nutrient
dynamics in forests containing different tree species will enable private
landowners, state extension offices and NGOs to make management decisions that
enhance ecosystem services such as C storage. Importantly, this knowledge will
enable the incorporation of critical plant-soil interactions into regional scale
models of C cycling, and address a critical knowledge gap in the ability of
policy makers to predict climate change impacts.