* 1153797
* Collaborative Research:  Collective Action Dynamics in the U.S., 1960-1995
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Neal Caren, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2016
* USD 97,107.00

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1154896&lt;br/&gt;Jennifer
Earl&lt;br/&gt;University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1153797&lt;br/&gt;Neal
Caren&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SES-1155008&lt;br/&gt;Edwin
Amenta&lt;br/&gt;University of California,
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: Collective Action Dynamics in the U.S., 1960-1995&lt;br/&gt;Social
movements are critical vehicles for political and social engagement,
allowing&lt;br/&gt;individuals to act collectively to influence government,
business, and other vital social&lt;br/&gt;institutions. This project examines
four important questions about social movements using&lt;br/&gt;combined and
augmented data from two prior NSF-funded projects, the Dynamics of
Collective&lt;br/&gt;Action project and the Political Organizations in the News
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the project will compare social movement
dynamics using data on protest events versus data on social movement
organizations (SMOs) with the innovative dataset described above. Second, the
project investigates how disruptive tactics affect news media coverage of social
movements and social movement organizations by using data on protest events.
Given the continued importance of the news media, better understanding the
dynamics that drive media attention is an important question for social movement
scholars. Third, the project assesses the extent to which protest and the news
coverage of SMOs may influence public opinion trends over time. Specifically, we
expect that specific types of movement events shape how favorably the movement
is perceived, that this shifts over the lifespan of the movement and depends on
political responses to the movement. Finally, our project will examine a key
methodological issue of interest to researchers: Selection bias suggests that
the news media cover only a portion of social life and do so in selective and
structured manners. Our project will use data on protest events and SMOs to
pinpoint the differences between selective reporting on protest events versus
the selective reporting on SMOs. Quantitative analyses will rely on negative
binomial models, ARMA models, multinomial logistic regressions, as well as time
series analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the dynamics that shape political participation in a democratic context is an
issue of broad interest to the general public and policy makers alike.
Similarly, furthering our understanding of media coverage and public opinion of
political activism is important to a broad set of stakeholders. Findings from
this study may be of interest to policy analysts involved in monitoring domestic
and international events and trends. Broader impacts also include the creation
of publically available dataset on domestic political activism since 1960 at a
scale hitherto unknown. In addition, methodological advances produced in the
process of creating the data set, as well as those derived from analysis will be
made available to the public. The project will also offer substantial research
training to undergraduate and graduate students.