* 1153981
* Workshop on Deploying Post-Disaster Quick-Response Reconnaissance Teams: Methods, Strategies, and Needs
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2013
* James Kendra, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 12/31/2013
* USD 95,820.00

This award supports a two-day workshop in Arlington, VA, in 2012 on conducting
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grants that have been supported by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) following major disasters. Scholars in a number of
disciplines have long recognized the importance of deploying research teams to
the site of a disaster as soon as possible in order to gather perishable or
ephemeral data, i.e., data that might be available for only a short period of
time. Initial data gathering, scoping out the likely scientific content,
proposal development, assembling a team (including collaboration with colleagues
in the affected area), and reaching the field quickly are among the challenges
in this research. While findings from RAPID studies have enriched knowledge
across the phases of disaster, techniques for conducting quick-response research
are less shared across the research community. The workshop will provide a forum
for information exchange and development of best practices, including new and
innovative ones, for this demanding research genre. Projected workshop attendees
are RAPID grant recipients, as well as representatives of the principal research
centers, agencies, and societies whose work involves disaster-related research.
The objectives of the workshop are to explore burgeoning methods for developing
initial situation awareness after disaster strikes (such as through growing
social media); transforming initial situation awareness into researchable
questions for transformative potential; team-building and best practices for
deploying researchers (including the prospect of novel approaches); and
recommendations to NSF and the hazards community on how to best organize and
support RAPIDs following a major disaster for maximum efficiency, alacrity in
reaching research sites, and scientific benefits. The outcome of the workshop
will be a workshop report. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP), and the workshop report will be archived on the NEHRP
web site (http://www.nehrp.gov). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF has developed the
RAPID program as a mechanism for funding small-scale exploratory projects on an
expedient basis to enable researchers to get into the field quickly to gather
perishable or ephemeral data. More recently, researchers have been supported by
NSF to conduct quick-response research for major earthquakes and tsunamis
worldwide. Disaster research often requires multidisciplinary knowledge, and it
is anticipated that the workshop will be valuable in helping scholars from a
variety of disciplines to share best practices for conducting quick-response
research and to build cooperative networks.