* 1153192
* The Effects of Raw Material Variability and Heat Treatment on Flake Production and Use: A Controlled Experiment
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Harold Dibble, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 90,803.00

With support from the National Science Foundation Dr. Harold Dibble will conduct
a series of experiments directly relevant to the understanding of how stone
tools (lithics) are made. While modern flintknappers (those who replicate stone
tools) are able to reproduce forms found in the archaeological record, most of
the fundamental processes involved are not well understood. These experiments,
building on an earlier set of experiments also funded by NSF, will extend the
results of those experiments to investigate the effects that raw materials may
have on fundamental aspects of lithic manufacture and use. Among the independent
variables to be tested are (a) different rock types that were used by
prehistoric peoples and (b) how subjecting those materials to heating affects
their properties both in terms of manufacture and use. The two major sets of
dependent variables to be examined include (a) "flakeability" (including the
amount of force required to remove flakes as well as the degree of variation
-and thus predictability - of flake size and shape produced under identical
conditions), and (b) edge sharpness and durability (i.e., two primary
considerations for using stone tools for tasks such as cutting and scraping).
The results of these experiments will directly address criteria that may have
been used in the past for selecting certain kinds of rocks and altering their
properties through heat treatment for the manufacture and use of stone tools.
Stone tools constitute a principal source for understanding most of the last two
and a half million years of human prehistory and constitute a prime source of
archaeological data. Researchers wish to understand how they were manufactured
and to do this they must understand the properties of the raw materials from
which they are made. The research to be conducted has a goal that is much
broader than understanding a particular technology or identifying specific
processes in the production of particular lithic types. Rather, the goal is to
test specific relationships among the independent variables used by all knappers
(prehistoric and modern alike) to control the sizes and shapes of flakes. As
such, it speaks directly to the fundamental processes underlying the knapping
process and is intended to give lithic archaeologists a much better
understanding of how these independent variables affect the morphology of
flakes. In this way the results of this experiment will be relevant to virtually
all geographic areas and temporal periods that yield lithic assemblages. This
experiment will also form the focus of an undergraduate course at the University
of Pennsylvania in experimental archaeology. This will give them first-hand
experience in experimental design and methodology. As has been the case with all
research done by the PI, the experimental operation and results will be made
accessible to the larger public through a website designed specifically for this
purpose (www.oldstoneage.com).