* 1153487
* RI: SMALL: Statistical Linguistic Typology
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Hal Daume, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2013
* USD 365,970.00

This project considers the unification of two view of language:
that&lt;br/&gt;from natural language processing and that from linguistic
typology.&lt;br/&gt;Our view is that typological information is both useful for
solving&lt;br/&gt;real-world natural language processing thats and
automatically&lt;br/&gt;derivable from language data. This research first
explores how to use&lt;br/&gt;typological knowledge to improve performance on
problems such as&lt;br/&gt;dependency parsing and machine translation for low
density langauges.&lt;br/&gt;Intuitively, our statistical models waste time
exploring a hypothesis&lt;br/&gt;space that is too big: the space of realistic
grammars is much smaller&lt;br/&gt;than the space of all grammars. The second
part of this research&lt;br/&gt;considers the automatic acquisition and
boostrapping of typological&lt;br/&gt;knowledge from raw text. The outcome of
this research is: (a)&lt;br/&gt;improved statistical models for hard natural
language processing&lt;br/&gt;problems; and (b) a larger library of typological
universals that have&lt;br/&gt;been derived automatically from data. Our
outcomes are empirically&lt;br/&gt;evaluated on the raw language processing
tasks and in terms of the&lt;br/&gt;quality of the universal implications mined
from data, but comparing&lt;br/&gt;them with known repositories of universals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our results will impact the fields of natural language
processing and linguistics. From the research side, this research will find
applications in a wider variety of problems than the ones we intend to study; in
particular, the use of linguistic universals in natural language processing
technology&lt;br/&gt;will fundamentally change the way multilinguality is
addressed in this&lt;br/&gt;field. From a linguistics perspective, the goal of
this project is to&lt;br/&gt;shed new light on linguistic universals. This
should impact not only&lt;br/&gt;the area of typology, but also the study and
preservation of&lt;br/&gt;endangered languages. By automatically identifying
typological&lt;br/&gt;features and implications from data, the process of
documenting&lt;br/&gt;endangered languages could be made more efficient: leading
to a&lt;br/&gt;smaller loss of knowledge of these languages.