* 1153250
* Scholars of Excellence in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Scott Steinbrink, Gannon University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 06/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Gannon University continues the Scholars of Excellence in Engineering and
Computer Science (SEECS) scholarship program. Over the five-year grant period,
the program supports 20 academically promising students per year. The goals of
the SEECS program are to: 1) increase the enrollment of financially needy,
academically talented students in engineering and computer science programs; 2)
assist students through scholarships and rigorous academic support, and 3)
foster professional development to prepare students for STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cornerstone of the program is the Professional and
Personal Enrichment Seminars which offer a single, shared experience for all
scholars. Developmental workshops build social, academic, and career skills.
Organizational and leadership skills are developed through team activities,
colloquium speakers and field trips. The seminar includes a service-learning
team design activity. Paired with a community non-profit organization, the
students identify and design a solution to a STEM-related problem to aid the
organization. Such enrichment activities make students more aware of the role of
STEM professionals and help them develop social and leadership skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project impacts are multifold: 1) to enhance the
referral network and partnerships with the Erie City (PA) School District and
local Talent Search programs; 2) to disseminate the program structure and
successes as a model for implementation; 3) to empower students to provide STEM
solutions to local non-profit organizations, and 4) to increase the involvement
of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM professions.