* 1153342
* External Research: A primary component in American Indian Retention, Graduation, and Matriculation
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Diana Morris, College of the Menominee Nation
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 07/31/2015
* USD 500,000.00

College of Menominee Nation (CMN) seeks to increase the number of
CMN&lt;br/&gt;STEM students participating in external research-based student
internship opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;External research is defined as research
outside of CMN and outside of the Menominee&lt;br/&gt;Reservation and other
local communities. The project is expected to increase STEM
student&lt;br/&gt;retention, graduation, and matriculation rates.&lt;br/&gt;The
project uses three strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#1048696; Development and
coordination of the project: Key activities include hiring a
researchbased&lt;br/&gt;internship coordinator, reviewing feasibility of
requiring research-based internships for&lt;br/&gt;STEM degree attainment,
coordination of advisory board meetings, and leveraging of
outside&lt;br/&gt;partners to establish consistent research-based
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#1048696; Efforts to institutionalize the project:
Key activities under strategy two include researching,&lt;br/&gt;and organizing
the research opportunities, creating a database of opportunities,
developing&lt;br/&gt;and coordinating processes, developing and maintaining a
research-based internship&lt;br/&gt;webpage, and leveraging funding to provide
student support for such opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#1048696; Provision of
critical student support activities aimed at increasing STEM
student&lt;br/&gt;participation in external research-based internship
opportunities: Activities include&lt;br/&gt;recruiting STEM students to
participate in program, matching students to
appropriate&lt;br/&gt;opportunities, assisting with applications, and
preparation for requirements, and interviews,&lt;br/&gt;assisting students make
connections, encouraging students through the process, advocating&lt;br/&gt;for
student acceptance into internship programs, providing extensive follow-up and
developing&lt;br/&gt;and coordinating a series of workshops related to research-
based internships.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Tribal Colleges are key
contributors to the body of knowledge on American&lt;br/&gt;Indians. To date
many Tribal Colleges have integrated research opportunities into their
STEM&lt;br/&gt;capacity; however the focus has been on providing these
opportunities within the context of the&lt;br/&gt;tribal colleges system and
community. Although these experiences are indeed valuable to&lt;br/&gt;gaining
student interest and are providing numerical increases in retention and
graduation rates,&lt;br/&gt;they exclude critical exposure opportunities for
students outside of the institution and outside of&lt;br/&gt;the community. To
date, CMN has documented increased retention and graduation rates
of&lt;br/&gt;students participating in external research. However these are only
a handful of students. It is&lt;br/&gt;critical that further study on the
importance and impacts of external research-based
internship&lt;br/&gt;opportunities within the tribal college system take place.
Such data will focus on the impacts of&lt;br/&gt;external student research and
how it achieves the ultimate outcomes of NSF?s investment in&lt;br/&gt;tribal
colleges: ensuring students graduate, matriculate into four-year and graduate
STEM&lt;br/&gt;programs, and enter the workforce system as diverse qualified
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: CMN?s project will build upon the
research of the several NSF TCUP grants&lt;br/&gt;it has completed, continuing
the investigation of essential research in discovering
and&lt;br/&gt;understanding how Tribal Colleges and the unique strategies they
implement promote STEM&lt;br/&gt;education in minority students. As an
institution that serves predominantly Native American&lt;br/&gt;students, CMN?s
project further advances the research of American Indian
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;education in STEM courses and programs as well as
contributes to the global body of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge in underrepresented
minority STEM education. Short term impacts include increases&lt;br/&gt;in
retention and graduation rates at CMN. Long-term project impacts include an
increase of&lt;br/&gt;American Indians in four year and graduate STEM programs
as well as an increase in American&lt;br/&gt;Indians in STEM employment fields.