* 1153994
* IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2011) Student Travel Awards
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Dylan Shell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Richard Voyles
* 08/31/2012
* USD 40,000.00

This proposal requests travel funds from NSF to assist 50 US students to
participate in IROS 2011, which will be held in San Francisco, CA, Sep. 25-30,
2011. The purpose of this Group Travel Grant Proposal is to make it possible for
US students and postdocs to attend the conference, present their work, and forge
connections with colleagues from around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
year mark the 50th anniversary of robotics. In addition to the regular
conference, IROS 2011 will feature interactive presentations, robot
demonstrations, thematic plenary sessions on design, bio-robotics, and
intelligent transportation, and special-topic symposia celebrating 50 years of
robotics. As part of this award, students will also have the opportunity to
participate in these historical events and learn more about the field of
robotics. Travel funding will be in the form of partial airfare reimbursement
and full reimbursement for student registration to approximately 50 U.S.
students who plan to present at least one paper at the
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "big two" major international robotics
conferences were outside of North America this past year, so demand should be
very high from American students and professors to attend this major robotics
event. The benefit to student learning and mentorship by encouraging attendance
of students by direct monetary means brings large dividends in student
confidence, knowledge and expertise.