* 1153494
* EAGER/Collaborative Research:  New Concept of Sorption Hysteresis and Disjoining Pressure in Concrete and Other Adsorbent Microporous Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Zdenek Bazant, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2014
* USD 90,000.00

The objective of this EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to elucidate the cause of sorption hysteresis in hindered adsorbed
layers in micropores, which has remained fundamentally unexplained for over 60
years. Two mechanisms are investigated. One consists of a series of snap-through
instabilities during the filling or emptying of non-uniform pores, due to the
non-uniqueness of the misfit disjoining pressure where the pore thickness passes
through integer multiples of the monolayer thickness. The second consists of
molecular coalescence, or segregation, within a partially filled layer, either
by spinodal decomposition (linear instability of homogeneous filling) or by
nucleation at defects or pore openings. At the macroscale, both mechanisms lead
to heterogeneous filling or emptying across many parallel pores and large
changes in the disjoining pressures calculated from thermodynamics. These
changes are an essential part of any physical theory of drying creep and
shrinkage. Another goal is to identify from sorption tests the pore size
distribution and the internal surface area, and the third goal is the prediction
of fluid transport through microporous solids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sorption
hysteresis in microporous solids controls microscale stresses which govern creep
and inelastic deformations in and around the micropores and the energy
dissipation during sorption. The energy dissipated by sorption cycles
contributes to material damage. These phenomena are of fundamental interest for
predicting the damage and creep in all kinds of concrete structures, release of
methane from coal deposits, gas sequestration capacity of rock, gas release from
shale, etc. A course incorporating the subject of the proposal will be
developed. The work will contribute to the education of both undergraduate and
graduate students. Undergraduates will be involved on a special-purpose work-
study program.