* 1153122
* Synthesis and Studies of Water-Soluble, Alpha-Helical Polypeptide with Charged Side Chains
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Jianjun Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Patten
* 07/31/2014
* USD 275,961.00

In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division, Jianjun Cheng of the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign will synthesize and study water-soluble, alpha-helical
polypeptides with charged side chains. Polypeptides are important materials with
broad applications and characteristic secondary structures. Water-soluble
polypeptides bearing charged side chains typically adopt random coil
conformations due to side-chain charge repulsion. In this study, we aim to
develop water-soluble, alpha-helical polypeptides by elongating charge-
containing amino-acid chains to position the charges distally from the
polypeptide backbone and then to study their biophysical properties. Preliminary
studies will be performed to test these polymers for use in cell penetration and
bacterial inhibition. The broader impacts involve training undergraduate and
graduate students, participating in summer high school outreach and
undergraduate broadening participation activities at the University of Illinois,
and disseminating research results through publications in journals and
presentations at conferences. Peptides are chains of chemically linked amino
acids and are the components of proteins. This work will expand the repertoire
of chemistry that can be used to create new large molecules that mimic natural
biomaterials and will lead to a better understanding of how peptides can be
engineered to form stable secondary structures, such as an alpha-helix, in
water. The results of these studies could have many important long term impacts
on applications in which protein-based materials are important, including long
term applications in medicine, pharmaceutical processing, and nanotechnology.