* 1153533
* SBIR Phase I:  Robot-Assisted Patient Transfer and Rehabilitation Device
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Gilbert Lovell, Advanced Technology and Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 01/31/2013
* USD 149,912.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project, Robot-Assisted
Patient Transfer and Rehabilitation Device, is to develop a device that provides
institutional and home patients of limited mobility with a means to accomplish
several important tasks for daily living. Several promising concepts that
exploit robotics technology have been identified that may prove more effective
than currently available transfer devices for both patients and caregivers. The
proposers will conduct clinician-guided research & development activities to
evaluate and further develop these robotic approaches to the bed transfer
problem and arrive at a medically sound, operationally robust and cost-effective
concept for incorporation into a multi-functional mobility device for
institutional or home settings. The device concept(s) emerging from the effort
will be evaluated by nursing professionals to determine the most useful and
feasible combination of functions in a single apparatus.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will benefit civilian
and military healthcare systems. In the civilian sector as well as the military,
the aging of the baby-boom generation and the rising body mass of the average
patient is contributing to increased demand for the proposed device.
Furthermore, existing patient transfer methods result in more than 200,000 nurse
and caregiver injuries costing approximately $1 billion per year in the US. The
influx of injured veterans returning from the Middle East is a clear impetus to
the development and introduction of new patient handling devices, as many of
these veterans will be in need of mobility and/or nursing assistance for years
to come. The proposed robot-assisted patient transfer and rehabilitation device
can be used in hospitals, rehabilitation centers, physical therapy, nursing
homes, and private home care. The device will significantly improve the patient
quality of life while reducing nurse and caregiver injuries.