* 1153689
* Facility Support: Accelerator Mass Spectrometry at PRIME Lab
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Paul Muzikar, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 05/31/2016
* USD 2,699,900.00

The Purdue Rare Isotope Measurement Laboratory (PRIME Lab) routinely measures
10Be, 26Al, 36Cl and 129I in rock, soil, water, and air for a large community of
NSF-sponsored and other users providing i) state-of-the-art measurements for
routinely-utilized radionuclides for the NSF user community, ii) chemical
preparation services for those NSF investigators who do not have their own in-
house laboratories or expertise, iii) new measurement techniques that will be
used in future geoscience investigations, and iv) NSF geoscience investigators
with the knowledge needed to apply radionuclides to geoscience problems. The
measurement of radionuclides by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) is an
essential component of the study of Earth surface processes and Quaternary
geology. These radionuclides are used to date landforms, fluids, and sediments,
and to determine rates of erosion, soil formation, and tectonic deformation,
geologic processes that directly impact human populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These measurements are reported in hundreds of scientific
reports published in numerous internationally recognized journals. We are
actively engaged in teaching sample preparation methods to the next generation
of researchers, independent of their affiliation. PRIME Lab also employs
numerous undergraduate Purdue University students, teaching them the basics of
data acquisition and data analysis. PRIME Lab plays a significant role in the
larger education community in the West Lafayette area. Working together with the
College of Science counselor and the Department of Physics Outreach Director,
PRIME Lab hosts hundreds of students annually on laboratory tours.