* 1153210
* Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Paul Karabinos, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 09/30/2012
* USD 35,100.00

This award will support the second biannual Structural Geology and Tectonics
Forum, which will be held in June, 2012, at Williams College in Williamstown,
Massachusetts. The forum will bring together specialists in structural geology
and tectonics for oral and poster presentations, fieldtrips, short courses, and
workshops for a total of seven days. The three days of presentations will
include six sessions, one of which will focus on education. Each session will
highlight an important area of current research and/or education, will be
anchored by a distinguished keynote speaker, and will showcase relevance of work
on the topic. Poster sessions with abundant time for full participant
interaction will accompany each session. The forum will be organized to maximize
the exchange of ideas between participants in open discussions. Sessions will
provide ample opportunity to ask questions of individual presenters, assess the
current state of our knowledge, and consider productive areas for future
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the formal meeting, there will be
fieldtrips, short courses, and workshops. These activities will take place in
the two days before and after the forum. Fieldtrips will focus on different
aspects of the structural geology of the North Appalachians and/or superb field
examples of structural processes. Short courses will be held on using Google
Earth and Google SketchUp for research and teaching, GPS technology and GIS
software for fieldwork, and in situ mineral dating. Finally, workshops on
building digital databases in structural geology, and maintaining research
programs at community colleges, two-year colleges, and minority-serving
institutions will be convened prior to and after the meeting,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The forum will be designed to facilitate
community building and personal interaction within different segments of the
structural geology community. It will bring together faculty from research
universities, liberal arts colleges, community and two-year colleges, and
minority-serving institutions. Importantly, there will be group discussions on
critical developments in structural geology and tectonics, and what future
research priorities should be. This community building effort will help create a
stronger, more vibrant group of scientists and help introduce graduate students
and advanced undergraduates to our discipline. This setting will be particularly
useful for graduate students, who will be able to use the venue and informal
nature of the forum to find out what research is taking place at other
institutions, meet a wide range of faculty, and develop useful contacts.
Students will also be able to present their own work in a friendly environment
where they can obtain thoughtful and useful feedback, as well as providing
opportunity to build new scientific collaborations. Abstracts, field guides, and
short course notes will be disseminated through a dedicated website that will be
publicly accessible.