* 1153488
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Research, Markets, and Herbal Medicine in Ghana
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Damien Droney, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2013
* USD 17,435.00

Stanford University doctoral student Damien Droney, under the guidance of Dr.
Tanya Luhrmann, will conduct research on the cultural variability of scientific
practice. Droney will address the paucity of social science research on the role
of science in contemporary African societies and other post-colonial contexts by
conducting an ethnography of scientific herbal medicine in the West African
nation of Ghana. Scientific herbal medicine, often referred to in Ghana as
"neoherbalism," is a form of herbal medicine practice explicitly based on
scientific research. This research is conducted at universities and research
centers, but it is also done by herbal medicine practitioners without any such
formal affiliation. This study therefore describes the features and cultural
politics of scientific practice in a non-Western and non-institutional context.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through surveys, participant-observation, and semi-
structured interviews with herbal medicine students, researchers, and
practitioners, this study will describe how different participants in
neoherbalism define and practice science. By producing data from large research
institutions as well as small herbal medicine clinics, this project will provide
a description of scientific research specific to the culture and political
economy of Ghanaian herbal medicine, thus furthering the anthropological
understanding of science in its cultural context. Furthermore, as a study of the
inclusion of locally manufactured herbal medicine in West African public health
systems, this project will contribute to the growing anthropological literature
on the role of pharmaceuticals in public health by examining the place of
scientific research in medical provision.