* 1153120
* Surface-Enhanced Solar Energy Conversion System for Advancing Alternative Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Arunava Gupta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 05/31/2016
* USD 419,550.00

With this award from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division
Professors Shanlin Pan and Arunava Gupta of the University of Alabama will
investigate surface-enhanced solar energy conversion systems for advancing
alternative energy. Intense electromagnetic field around plasmonic antenna of
well-defined metallic nanostructures will be utilized to enhance the light
absorption cross-section of visible-light-active photocatalysts for
photoelectrochemical water splitting and other photoelectrochemical reactions.
Advanced photoelectrochemical, spectroscopic and microscopic tools, such as
ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy, photoelectrochemcial
microelectrode, and microelectrode, will be used to probe the interfacial charge
transfer dynamics and local photoelectrochemistry near the surface-enhanced
photocatalysts. The comprehensive research program includes the following
components: nanostructure fabrication, structural characterization,
photoelectrochemical and spectroelectrochemical studies, and theoretical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work brings together a multidisciplinary team
that will make significant contributions to scientific knowledge, education
outreach and infrastructure in a study related to renewable energy, which is an
area of top priority for the nation. The scientific outcomes of the project will
include both advances in the fabrication of a new class of nanostructured
photocatalysts and fundamental understanding of their photoelectrochemical and
materials characteristics. Results from the work are relevant both for improving
the water splitting efficiency of visible-light-active photocatalysts to produce
hydrogen and power efficiency of hybrid organic photovoltaic devices. The PIs
will collaborate with the Alabama Science in Motion (ASIM) Program to develop a
clean energy education program for high school minority and underrepresented
students and teachers in west central Alabama. The proposed project will provide
support for graduate and undergraduate students, including underrepresented
minorities, which will contribute to their broad interdisciplinary training. An
important aspect of the proposed project is the capacity to provide hands on
experience in topical research areas. Project personnel will play a key role in
several ongoing education and outreach activities related to the proposed
research. These include collaboration with local schools to facilitate
participation by high school students in research, public tours and
demonstrations.