* 1153500
* Fourth International Conference on Porous Media and its Applications in Science, Engineering and Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Kambiz Vafai, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2012
* USD 22,500.00

CBET-1153500&lt;br/&gt;PI: Vafai&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pioneering works in
the area of fluid transport as well as some aspects of heat transport in porous
media go back to the beginning of this century. Convective heat transfer in
fluid-saturated porous media has gained considerable attention in recent decades
due to its relevance in a wide range of applications such as thermal insulation
engineering, water movements in geothermal reservoirs, heat pipes, electronics
cooling, bio applications, underground spreading of chemical waste, nuclear
waste repositories, direct contact heat exchangers geothermal engineering, grain
storage, combustion and enhanced recovery of petroleum reservoirs. This is due
to the wide range of applicability of these research areas in contemporary
technology. Radiative heat transfer and multiphase transport processes in porous
media, both with and without phase change, have also gained extensive attention.
Three highly successful conferences on Porous Media and its Applications in
Science, Engineering and Industry were held in 1996 in Kona, Hawaii, and in 2007
in Kauai, Hawaii, and in 2010 in Montecatini, Italy. Various researchers in
porous media worldwide attended these conferences. This conference is built on
the last three conferences to reflect the research done internationally in the
currently active areas of the topic. The presence of the highly successful
Journal of Porous Media and both editions of the very well received Handbook of
Porous Media and the book entitled Porous Media: Applications in Biological
Systems and Biotechnology creates an additional impetus to further galvanize
this conference. Papers of high quality will be considered for submission to the
Journal of Porous Media and Special Topics and Reviews in Porous Media-an
International Journal and other leading journals in the field of porous media.
This conference will clarify various outstanding issues in the field of porous
media through interactions with experts in this field. This conference will be
held on Potsdam, Germany from June 17 to 22, 2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will convene world experts in various aspects of the field of Porous
Media. The experts in the field will convene in an ideal setting and discuss the
state of the art and various controversial issues. The results of these in depth
discussions will very helpful to both the experts as well as the researchers in
the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experts from various disciplines participate in
the conference as members of the organizing committee and as speakers. A number
of relatively younger researchers from different disciplines will be involved in
this conference. The broader impact of this conference will cover fields of
Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Nuclear
Engineering, Biomedical Engineering and Hydrology. It is anticipated that a
review article based on the results of this conference will be published in one
of the leading journals related to Recent Advances in Porous Media Research and
its Future Implications.