* 1153295
* Collaborative Research: Autonomous Lagrangian Floats for Oxygen Minimum Zone Biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Craig McNeil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,199,518.00

Intense oxygen minimum zones (OMZ) of the world's oceans, though constituting a
small fraction of total oceanic volume, host critical biogeochemical processes
and are central to understanding the ocean's N cycle and its biogeochemical and
isotopic signatures. OMZ's are sites for a large portion of marine combined N
loss to N2 (25 to 50%) and dominate the ocean N isotope budget through
cogeneration of 15N and 18O enriched NO3 -. Major outstanding issues include the
magnitude of this N sink, the stoichiometry between NO3 - loss and the
production of biogenic N2, the microbial pathways leading to N2 production, as
well as the interaction between these OMZ processes and the surface export of
organic matter as well as physical circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
request funding to develop a new, in situ, autonomous tool for studying N loss
in OMZ's. It will allow observation of variability over a range in temporal and
spatial scales that are critical for understanding controlling processes and
better estimating the magnitude of N-loss. The sustained deployments possible
with autonomous platforms will be critical for detecting any response of OMZ's
to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen is often the limiting nutrient for biological
production in the oceans, and the current global marine nitrogen balance has
been in much debate due to a number of uncertainties and questions. A successful
development of this proposed sensor-float package may help in resolving some of
the important questions on the spatial and temporal variabilities of the OMZs.
In turn, such knowledge is essential in assessing the global nitrogen balance in
the current and future oceans. This proposed project would involve active
participation of undergraduates, graduates and postdocs, as well as the training
of a K-12 science teacher. This project would also foster collaboration with
international researchers. The PI's have partnered with Ocean Explorium at New
Bedford Seaport to provide an educational outreach component designed to aid
teacher development and create a field trip program for teachers in the south
coast of Massachusetts. The proposal will support post-doc, graduate and
undergraduate students.