* 1153397
* U.S.-India Workshops for Catalyzing Research Collaborations in Connection with the 10th ISHMT-ASME Heat and Mass Transfer Conference, Chennai, India
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,12/31/2015
* Raj Manglik, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 12/31/2015
* USD 45,000.00

PI: Manglik CBET-1153397

The purpose of this workshop/conference award is to bring together U.S and
Indian scientists and researchers working in the field of heat and mass transfer
and to foster and promote collaborations. The workshops will be held in the
December 2011 to January 2012 timeframe and will be centered around the 10th
ISHMT ASME Heat and Mass Transfer Conference at the Indian Institute of
Technology Madras, Chennai, India (Dec 27-29, 2011). Five workshops are being
planned that will be located in Chennai (the conference site) or nearby (or
easily accessible) city to deal with the following emerging areas with
significant current research thrust in both countries:

- Thermal Design & Management in Electronics - Heat & Mass Transfer in
Biological Systems - High-Performance Heat Exchange Systems for Energy
Sustainability - Advances in Fuel Cell Engineering - Advances in Energy,
Combustion and Transportation

This conference is the premier venue for disseminating research findings for
India's thermal sciences and engineering community and the workshops located
around the conference will attract participants from research organizations
(academia, industrial centers, and national labs) all over India. Also, US
delegates will have the opportunities to meet and interact with researchers from
many other Asian countries who generally do not attend technical meetings in
Europe and the US.

Currently, there is strong interest between the two countries both politically
ansd scientifically to promote collaborations. These workshops centered around
the ASME-ISHMT meeting will facilitate the researchers in the two countries to
collaborate.

The workshops will address fundamental and emerging areas in heat and mass
transfer and will enhance US-India cooperation on future thermal technologies,
share informatin, build institutional bridges, and promote educational and
cross-cultural experiences for all participants. The US delegation will be a
diverse group and include beginning and established researchers, women, under-
represented and early-career faculty members.

Since strong research collaborations are developed through sustained
interactions, and periodic discussions and refreshment of ideas, the proposed
visit will strengthen current and ongoing collaborations and discussiions, and
will enhance successes achieved through prior workshops and collaborations.