* 1153905
* Timed for a Successful Career:  NSF/AWM Travel Grants for Women in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2017
* Shari Moskow, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2017
* USD 492,399.00

The Association for Women in Mathematics will administer the NSF-AWM Travel
Grants Program for a three-year period. This program, which has run for over
twenty years, supports the travel of women in the mathematical sciences who wish
to actively participate in domestic or international research conferences, as
well as longer-term visits to work with a mentor. Funding is allocated
competitively, and allows approximately one hundred and forty-four regular
travel grants and twenty-six mentoring grants to be awarded over the three-year
period. Most of the funding is intended to benefit mathematical sciences
research, but a portion of the travel grants will fund mathematics researchers
to participate in mathematics education research conferences and mathematics
education researchers to travel to mathematics conferences. A portion of the
mentoring grants will foster communication between mathematicians and
researchers in mathematics education and related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent data indicate that women's participation rates in
conferences and mathematics workshops remain lower than their proportion in
academic departments, especially at the junior ranks. By providing grants that
draw women's attention to the benefits of sharing their knowledge and
communicating their results, AWM is intervening positively to increase the role
of women in the profession. Reports by an independent evaluator have confirmed
that this program is reaching its target group of women with excellent training
and serious research potential who do not have consistent access to resources
enabling them to attend mathematics meetings. In addition, the mentoring grants
have succeeded in starting many of the junior women participants in fresh new
research directions and have broadened their view of mathematical research
careers.