* 1153503
* CRI: IAD: A Service-Oriented Architecture for The Computation, Visualization, and Management of Scientific Data
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2011,05/31/2013
* Claudio Silva, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2013
* USD 135,356.00

Advanced computing capabilities are now essential to solve complex problems in
science and engineering. Computer models have become fundamental to basic
research. They are increasingly useful in addressing, in realistic detail, the
subtle parameters of the physical systems being modeled. Underlying this
increasing relevance of computer models is the enormous, and relatively recent,
increase in available low-cost compute power. These advances in computing power
and hence in computer modeling and simulation have brought about the emergent
field of scientific computing, in which scientists and engineers from multiple
disciplines collaborate in understanding a variety of complex systems not
approachable only a few years ago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This infrastructure
project establishes a high-resolution display wall to be used for scientific
visualization at the Polytechnic University of New York and high-performance
GPU-based computing cluster at the Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute
(SCI Institute) at the University of Utah. This unique resource enables
scientists to efficiently carry out increasingly complex scientific computations
and visualizations in a collaborative environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
infrastructure enables research in efficient execution of simulations;
streamlining the creation of complex data products; producing high-quality
visualizations; and scientific workflows leading to simplifying the process of
designing simulations and analyzing their results. This project has the
potential to impact a variety of applications where computation, visualization,
and management of scientific data are currently the bottlenecks. Through our
interdisciplinary collaborations, this project will have immediate impact in
helping improve the scientific discovery process. The involvement of graduate
and undergraduate students in the project will provide mentoring opportunities.
New courses will be offered that are tightly integrated with the goals of the
project, including courses on parallel programming using GPUs and on scientific
data visualization and management. The project team members are committed to
recruiting minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project
will be disseminated as research papers and as freely available tools in the
project website (http://www.cs.utah.edu/~csilva/projects/NSF-IIS-0751152/).