* 1153846
* Collaborative Research: Quantum Decision Theory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Zheng Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 40,622.00

Ever since Tversky and Kahneman's influential research exposing the failures of
classical probability theory to describe human reasoning under uncertainty
(1974), decision researchers gave up almost all hope to find an axiomatic
foundation for understanding human judgments and decisions. Instead, they turned
to the idea of using tool boxes of heuristics to explain myriad decision bias
and errors. The project will further develop a new theoretical application of
quantum probability theory (the mathematical foundation of quantum theory) to
human judgment and decision making. Quantum probability theory fundamentally
differs from classical probability theory. The critical question is which set of
probability rules provides a better description of human judgment and decision.
In the Principal Investigators' past several years of research supported by NSF,
they have shown that quantum probability theory provides an innovative,
coherent, and mathematically principled approach to account for many paradoxical
findings in judgment and decision research (i.e., conjunction and disjunction
errors, interference effects, question order effects). The current project will
further develop and test a consistent quantum probability account of violations
of classic probability rules found in question order effects. The investigators
will extend the quantum model for order effects to make a priori predictions
about the direction of order effects and also to be able to account for measures
with multiple ordinal levels.

The broad and long term goal of this research program is to break new ground and
pioneer a new path by building probabilistic and dynamic systems for social and
behavioral sciences from quantum rather than classical probability principles.
This project will study whether it matters in what order questions are asked on
a survey. The investigators regularly organize workshops on quantum probability
models of cognition at annual meetings of Cognitive Science Society and Society
for Mathematical Psychology. They have organized two special journal issues on
the topic: one appeared in the Journal of Mathematical Psychology (2009) and the
other is forthcoming in Topics in Cognitive Science. Their work has been cited
across disciplines, ranging from cognitive science, decision science, economics,
engineering, to mathematics, physics, and astronomy.