* 1153345
* SBIR Phase I:  Biomimetic Adhesive for Seroma Prevention
* TIP,TI
* 01/27/2011,10/31/2011
* Bruce Lee, Kensey Nash Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2011
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel biomimetic adhesive for seroma prevention. Commercial
bioadhesives have demonstrated mixed results as they are hampered by weak
adhesive strengths, the need to mix precursors, and undesirable degradation
rates. Thus, there continues to be an unmet clinical need for the development of
a new and improved adhesive for seroma prevention. Nerites Corporation has
developed adhesives that are synthetic mimics of the mussel adhesive proteins
that can bind strongly to rocks and ship hulls in a wet, turbulent saline
environment. Nerites? new series of adhesives requires no mixing or dissolution
before use, and demonstrates significantly higher strength than currently
available adhesives. Therefore, Nerites believes that these new materials will
significantly improve clinical outcomes of many patients suffering from seroma.

The broader/commercial impacts of this research are a potential reduction in
seroma formation, a postoperative complication in many surgeries. Although the
market for Nerites? adhesives may eventually expand to include any surgery where
tissue planes are separated, the initial focus involves procedures where
postoperative drains are the standard of practice. The benefits that result from
reduced use of drains include increased patient comfort, shorter hospital stay,
reduced chemotherapy duration, and decreased risk of wound infection. Therefore,
Nerites? initially targeted surgical procedures include mastectomy,
abdominoplasty, and open ventral hernia repair, with a combined estimate of more
than 500,000 surgeries performed annually, where incidences of seroma formation
can be as high as 59%.