* 1153114
* STS Postdoctoral Fellowship: The impact of mathematics on inferring classifications and phylogenies
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Beckett Sterner, Field Museum of Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2015
* USD 120,000.00

Introduction This proposal will examine the biological basis of mathematical
modeling in computational biology. Systematic biologists make classifications
and phylogenies of organisms. Doing so depends on the idea that adding more data
will cause their results to converge statistically. However, the biological
basis for this convergence varies considerably and is heavily contested across
inference methods and organisms. This project will approach the problem of
justifying statistical convergence in systematic biology by adopting a hybrid
approach that integrates philosophical analysis with a historical study of the
reception of statistical methods in systematics over the past sixty years,
including numerical taxonomy, cladistics, and maximum likelihood methods. The
study will emphasize how the use and value of statistical methods varied across
areas of systematics, such as microbiology, zoology, and paleontology. The
researchers will develop computational methods for tracing reception in
published journal articles in order to achieve a comprehensive, comparative
analysis. The project will use the path-breaking OCHRE database system, which
provides an innovative data structure in the digital humanities that can support
changing analytic categories over time (a semi-structured instead of relational
database).

Intellectual Merit This project is an interdisciplinary collaboration
integrating biology, philosophy of science, and history of science to study the
strengths and limitations of statistical methods in systematics. The Field
Museum is an ideal location for this collaboration because of the excellence and
diversity of its research in systematics, including cutting-edge projects on
integrating data for biodiversity studies, on molecular techniques for the Tree
of Life project, and on the history and philosophy of systematics. The study,
with its focus on statistics as a constraint on research in systematics, will
open a new epistemological perspective on individuality as a complementary
problem, especially with regards to individuating structural elements in
classifications or phylogenies and with regards to individuating characters in
organisms. Examining how different areas of systematics received and
appropriated statistical methods will greatly expand current historical
knowledge of theoretical advances in microbiology and botany over the past sixty
years. In addition, the project will develop research tools for investigating
the mathematization of biology and other sciences, an increasingly important
problem in the history and philosophy of science. For example, one result of the
proposed research will be computational methods for analyzing the transformative
effect mathematization had on the structural relations among research problems
in systematics.

Potential Broader Impact Using an integrated interdisciplinary approach to
address a key practical problem in biology today, the results of this research
will cross boundaries to impact science policy in biology and other fields in
the digital humanities. The project will produce a targeted evaluation of the
basis of statistical convergence that is relevant to current debates among
policy makers and biologists about the value of mathematics and high-throughput
data gathering techniques. Results will be disseminated in interdisciplinary
journals and conferences that regularly include biologists in their audience.
New computational methods developed in the project will be incorporated as Java
modules in the OCHRE system, which is made available for use in academic
research and has a web-based graphical user interface. The new computational
methods and associated results will also be presented at workshops on digital
humanities and digital history and philosophy of science.