* 1153052
* RUI: Molecular Characterization of Aggregation and Guest-Host Solvation by Bile Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* David Rovnyak, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2016
* USD 159,185.00

In this project, Professors David Rovnyak and Timothy Strein of Bucknell
University are funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program
of the Division of Chemistry, to conduct a wide ranging study of bile acid
aggregation using multiple techniques including nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), fluorescence and electrophoresis. Bile acids are cholesterol-derived
amphiphilic molecules in the liver which facilitate lipid and cholesterol
transport. Predominant in aqueous solution as their salts (a.k.a. bile salts),
fundamental physico-chemical properties of these important molecules are not
well understood. Indeed it has been difficult to achieve consensus on bile
aggregation, namely, the intermolecular interactions and dynamics that give rise
to properties such as critical micelle concentration(s), aggregation number(s),
gel formation, and guest-host interactions, beyond Small's model of bile
aggregation proposed ca. 1968. Also, the capacity of bile aggregates to
differentially solubilize the enantiomers of certain chiral compounds has not
been characterized at a molecular level. This project will use the various
techniques to detect and validate behaviors that have the potential to help
explain seemingly disparate reports in the literature. For example, preliminary
work has shown that NMR methods unambiguously delineate separate early and
primary micellization stages that have not been clearly observed before.
Further, planar fluorescent probes that exhibit strong solvatochromism are used
to detect and characterize the presence of hydrophobic regions of the bile
micelles. Micellar electrokinetic capillary electrophoresis will be used as a
sensitive probe of aggregation stages and of guest-host interactions. Through
the use of these complementary techniques, we a better understanding of the
complicated intermolecular chemistry of bile salts will emerge. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Bile acids are fascinating naturally produced molecules whose complex
properties have challenged scientists for decades. Bile acids can interact
strongly with certain classes of oils, form gels with desirable properties such
as the capacity to promote topical drug delivery, and most recently are being
found to play much wider roles in the maintenance of human health than
previously understood. Bile acids can also help distinguish among isomers of
compounds that would be difficult to separate by other means. Yet there is a
need to explain bile acid properties and behaviors on the molecular scale. With
deeper insights into the molecular scale behaviors of bile acids, there is the
possibility to tap into greater potential for new applications of bile acids,
and for better understanding of their broader roles in human biology. The
undergraduate students working on these projects will be involved in all aspects
of this project. They will acquire hands-on experience in the design of
multifaceted experiments, the use of sophisticated spectroscopic
instrumentation, and in analyzing and interpreting data collected using those
instruments. This experience provides students preparation for further study or
future employment.