* 1153476
* EAGER: Application of Calibration Convolution Integrals to Diffusion Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,02/28/2013
* Jay Frankel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2013
* USD 28,954.00

CBET-1153476&lt;br/&gt;PI: Frankel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will
initiate the development of a transformative calibration method for estimating
surface heat flux in highly hostile thermal environments without requiring
surface instrumentation. This concept has substantive merit for investigating:
a) the effectiveness of thermal protection systems associated hypersonic flight
vehicles or for understanding thermal efficiencies in hypersonic combustors; b)
heat transfer on unreachable surface structures such as found in combustion
liners, small chambers, and containment walls as a result of a hostile thermal
event; and, c) heat transfer on structures emanating from pool fires or
explosions. A comprehensive method is proposed that integrates physical,
experimental, mathematical and computational principles. The resulting analytic
formulation implicitly possesses full-sensor characterization, probe
positioning, host material thermophysical properties, diffusion physics, and
mathematical constants required for stable and accurate surface heat flux
predictions. The new calibration method leads to a Volterra integral equation of
the first kind; and, thus the coupon or specimen can be interpreted as a
transducer ready for practical implementation. Further analytical and
computational study is required for real-world implementation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposal centers about
critical applications for new material development involving high temperature
environments. Responsive state-of-the-art accurate methods for estimating
surface heat flux and temperature that includes sensor characterization still
requires resolution for many applications involving highly hostile environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will impact aerospace, energy, fire,
combustion, geophysical, defense and national security research and developments
in a timely and responsive manner.