* 1153822
* Learning Reading Strategies for Science Texts in a Gaming Environment: iSTART vs iTG
* CSE,IIS
* 08/16/2011,04/30/2012
* Danielle McNamara, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2012
* USD 87,599.00

It is well known that many students find science text challenging to comprehend.
Students' reading ability is partly to blame. Reading problems become most
apparent when the student is faced with a challenging text for which they have
knowledge deficits. Science text, in particular, has many technical terms that
are difficult to ground in everyday experience. Thus, there is a need for
reading comprehension interventions to improve science comprehension. This
project compares the effectiveness of two types of tutoring environments in
improving high-school students' ability to understand challenging science text.
Both environments contain the same pedagogical content, but present it
differently: as a lesson or as a game. The first environment, developed and
tested over the past 5 years, is an automated reading strategies tutor called
iSTART (Interactive Strategy Training for Active Reading and Thinking) that uses
animated pedagogical agents to deliver interactive instruction on self-
explanation and reading strategies (comprehension monitoring, paraphrasing,
generating inferences). Instruction occurs in three stages with each stage
requiring increased interaction on the part of the learner. Results across a
wide range of studies indicate that iSTART is highly effective in improving
students' ability to understand challenging science text. While effective,
iSTART can be somewhat unappealing to an average high-school student in extended
practice situations. While students need extended practice to master the
strategies, iSTART becomes monotonous over time. To increase students'
engagement, an alternative version of iSTART practice will be developed that
allows students to practice iSTART strategies in a game environment. iSTART-The
Game (iTG) will present the same reading strategy practice to students, but will
incorporate game-based principles to enhance engagement. This project examines
whether a gaming environment for learning strategies for science text
comprehension more effectively sustains students' attention and engagement
during training, and thereby results in improved acquisition and mastery of
these strategies. In the first year of funding, an automated reading strategy
tutoring system that is framed in a gaming environment will be developed. In
Year 2, pilot studies will be conducted to refine the system. In Year 3,
practice using the strategies will be compared in three conditions: iTG, iSTART,
and a control condition. Students will practice the strategies over a period of
five additional sessions after the initial training. This experiment will
provide information on the potential value of iTG over time and specifically,
whether iTG engages students over repeated practice sessions. The potential
interactive effects of individual differences such as prior science knowledge,
reading skill, and motivational levels will also be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to better
understanding of engagement as a factor in learning gains. It is predicted by
the investigators that many students who do not find the standard tutoring
environment sufficiently engaging will significantly benefit from the
alternative approach. Most importantly, this instructional intervention should
be especially valuable for those students most at risk due to having lower
ability and interest in science. This research will accomplish the goal of
creating a test-bed learning environment intended to improve reader engagement
and advance our understanding of the potential instructional gains from such
environments. The project will contribute to our understanding of the
relationship between game features and engagement. It will provide students with
tools that help them more effectively meet the challenges of learning from
difficult science texts. In addition, this research will contribute to our
understanding of the roles that cognition and emotion play in fostering
learning, the specific processes involved with learning from science texts, and
the complex interplay of factors such as reading strategies, knowledge, reading
skill, interest, and motivation.