* 1153568
* Assessing the Role of Ecological Change on Economic and Demographic Transformations Between the Late Neolithic and Early Bronze Age in the Sizandro River Valley, Portugal
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Katina Lillios, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2016
* USD 235,534.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Katina Lillios (University of
Iowa) will lead an interdisciplinary team of US, Portuguese, and German
researchers in a three-year archaeological project to determine what caused the
collapse of complex societies around 2200 BC in the Sizandro River valley, west-
central Portugal. The Sizandro River Valley Project brings specialists from
archaeology, biological anthropology, and geoarchaeology to study the economic
and demographic changes experienced by the ancient communities of the Sizandro
River valley. During the Late Neolithic, the Sizandro valley was home to a
thriving population, who lived in large fortified settlements and buried their
dead in collective tombs. Trade goods that originated in the Portuguese interior
and as far away as North Africa have been found in Late Neolithic sites along
the Sizandro. During the Early Bronze Age (2200-1500 BC), many settlements were
abandoned, and long-distance trade declined. During this same time, the
sheltered estuary at the mouth of the Sizandro shrank as sea level fell,
accelerated by hillslope erosion attributed to intensive Late Neolithic
agriculture. Loss of the estuary might have cut the valley off from maritime
trade, and silting of the river might have impeded trade with the interior.
Estuarine resources dwindled and disappeared, and riverine ecosystems were
transformed. However, the causal relationship between these ecological changes
and the abandonments and collapse has never been tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sizandro River Valley Project will contribute to a
better understanding of the history of complex societies, including their
collapse, by providing a detailed case study of one such collapse. It will also
broaden the range of social and ecological contexts within which collapse has
been studied. Most studies of collapse have been focused on vulnerable
environments, such as the Classic Maya collapse in AD 900 in the rainforests of
Central America, and the AD 1300 collapse in the American Southwest. Without
broader knowledge, scholarly and popular understandings of climate change and
societal collapse will remain limited.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to
evaluate the relationship between ecological change and social collapse in the
Sizandro Valley and, ultimately, understanding of the regional transformations
that occurred in Portugal, Dr. Lillios and her team will study mobility, diet,
and settlement patterns. Specialists will analyze human skeletal remains and
their bone chemistry from sites dated to prior to and post collapse. The team
will also conduct excavations at the Late Neolithic-Early Bronze Age burial of
Bolores to collect additional skeletal material. To assess changes in settlement
pattern and their economic significance, team members will carry out two seasons
of survey. Sites will be mapped, tested, and dated to more precisely
characterize the changes in settlement pattern between the Late Neolithic and
Early Bronze Age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sizandro River Valley Project will
provide valuable educational opportunities for students and will strengthen
working partnerships between US, Portuguese, and German archaeologists. Results
will be broadly disseminated in scholarly publications, conference
presentations, digital databases, public lectures, and classes. Project members
will also share their findings in Portugal with local citizens, tourists, and
schoolchildren.