* 1153665
* EAGER: Next Generation Hybrid Simulation - Evaluation and Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Sanjay Govindjee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this Early-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
is to explore new ideas to overcome the heuristic approaches of hybrid
simulation research of the past decade. In hybrid simulation, the structure is
typically idealized into several substructures, where some of the substructures
are modeled analytically and the remaining substructures are physically tested
and their measured responses are used in the computational algorithm for the
numerical integration. This research aims at establishing the fundamentals of
hybrid simulation to allow it to become a reliable method for simulation of
structures and structural systems. Recent advances in computational mechanics
will be used to create algorithms for hybrid simulation through an integrated
approach involving both theory and experiments. In that regard, modified
variational principles will be used to change the geometric structure of the
governing equations for the purposes of time stepping. The research will be
conducted using a verification and validation paradigm in which experiments,
conducted in the George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES) and the Civil and Environmental Engineering Structural
laboratories at the University of California, Berkeley, will be used to identify
the correct theoretical models and algorithms for hybrid simulation by means of
different test structures and a tailored experimental program. This exploratory
approach brings together the two fields of hybrid testing and computational
mechanics, in a synergistic fashion, aiming at the interdisciplinary advancement
of the field. If successful, this work will represent a major conceptual shift
from the present hybrid simulation techniques and will establish a thorough
basis for hybrid simulations rooted on sound experimentation coupled with
theoretical and applied multi-scale mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
structural safety of the built environment is critical to all citizens. When
faced with the challenges of constructing bridges, buildings, power plants, and
other infrastructure to withstand the extreme forces from earthquakes,
hurricanes, and other natural disasters, engineers need to be able to test new
ideas in a safe and reliable manner without having to construct full-scale
prototypes. The research aims at providing engineers a robust methodology to
reliably test components for new designs without having to build complete
structural systems solely for test purposes, leading to safer and more reliable
structures for everyone. This award also aims to train a new generation of
engineers to be knowledgeable in both the theory and practice of hybrid
simulation.