* 1153701
* Pathway to Achievement: The PASS Program
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2012,06/30/2017
* John Loughman, Lehigh Carbon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2017
* USD 600,000.00

Through this project, the college is providing structured support for a cohort
of financially needy students who demonstrate academic potential for completing
a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) associate degree
program. Approximately 60 to 80 eligible students are being awarded scholarships
of up to $5,000 per year to enroll in programs leading to employment in a STEM
field or transfer to a STEM baccalaureate program. Targeted programs include
biotechnology, chemical technology, computer science/information technology,
drafting, electronics and electrical technology, engineering, geospatial
technology, industrial automation, manufacturing technology, mathematics,
mechanical technology, nanofabrication technology, and natural science.

In addition to financial assistance, the project is providing activities to
encourage retention through program completion that include (a) a mentoring
program that gives scholarship recipients an opportunity to interact with
professionals in STEM fields, (b) a series of lectures and discussion panels
with STEM professionals, (c) workshops on academic and career topics, (d) field
trips to industries and four-year colleges and universities, (e) intensive
faculty advising, (f) a newly formed student organization (STEM Club), and (g)
informal study groups.

Project objectives are to: (1) Increase the financial support available to
address the unmet financial need of students enrolled in eligible associate
degree STEM programs; (2) Retain at least 85% of S-STEM scholarship recipients
from the spring semester to the fall semester of a two-year program; (3) Provide
structured support for the S-STEM cohort so that at least 85% of the students
will graduate with a STEM associate degree and/or transfer to a four-year
institution; (4) Increase opportunities for S-STEM scholars to interact with,
and receive mentoring from, STEM professionals; and (5) Create awareness of STEM
career opportunities, particularly for students from underrepresented groups.

Intellectual Merit: S-STEM scholars participate in project activities as a STEM
learning community cohort, supported by the faculty members from the science,
computer science and information technology, mathematics, and technology
divisions. The activities bring together students from different STEM majors for
interdisciplinary engagement, expanding their knowledge of the impact of other
disciplines on their chosen field and creating awareness of career pathways open
to them through advanced education. These students are being better prepared for
the STEM workplace through interaction not only with faculty and other students
but also with STEM professionals.

Broader Impact: The interdisciplinary learning experiences outside the classroom
help form a foundation on which to build more extensive interdisciplinary
connections within the curriculum. Relationships with the business community and
four-year institutions are being strengthened, and the activities can be
expanded for students outside the S-STEM project. Through dissemination of
activities and results, this project is serving as a learning community model
for other community colleges that offer a large selection of STEM programs for a
diverse population and are attempting to bridge the various disciplines with
interdisciplinary learning activities to better prepare students for continuing
education and the workplace.