* 1153548
* Quantile Regression and L1 Regularization
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Roger Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2017
* USD 268,306.00

Since Quetelet's work in the 19th century, quantitative social science has
emphasized the "average man," and conventional statistical methods have sought
to estimate the effects of policy interventions on this average man. But such
effects are often quite diverse: medical treatments may improve life expectancy,
but also impose serious short term risks on some patients; reducing class sizes
may improve performance of good students, but not help weaker ones or vice
versa. Quantile regression methods have helped to explore these heterogeneous
effects. In contrast to least-squares methods that focus exclusively on
estimating conditional mean effects, quantile regression methods enable
researchers to focus attention on differential effects at various conditional
quantiles. These methods have broad applicability throughout science, and have
been increasingly employed in biology, medicine, ecology, hydrology, meteorology
and other fields as well as in econometrics. Quantile regression is gradually
evolving into a comprehensive strategy for the analysis of statistical models
focused on estimating slices of the conditional distribution, thereby
complementing the exclusive focus on conditional mean models obtained by least-
squares based methods. The project proposes work on a variety of new
developments of these methods including: model selection, nonparametric
inference, time series and survival analysis, and models for multivariate and
longitudinal data. Related work on models of unobserved heterogeneity employing
empirical Bayes methods and recent developments in shaped constrained
nonparametric maximum likelihood methods is also proposed.