* 1153003
* Protic Acid Catalysis of Organic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Johnston, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 05/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program is supporting the research of
Professor Jeffrey N. Johnston of the Department of Chemistry at Vanderbilt
University to develop new protic acid-catalyzed reactions to form carbon-carbon
and carbon-heteroatom (nitrogen and/or oxygen) bonds. An emphasis continues with
the identification and development of functional groups (e.g. diazo alkanes and
azides) that can be activated toward carbon-carbon bond formation by protic
acids without protonative self-decomposition. Underlying the development
activities is a study of the mechanistic pathways involved and the elucidation
of factors leading to high selectivity. This approach will secure a fundamental
understanding of reactivity, and in so doing, provide a framework for broader
conceptual application and development. The development of diastereoselective
variations of these reactions will be an emphasis of this phase, leading
ultimately to their application in the synthesis of complex contiguous
aminopolyols. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop greener
chemical methods to more rapidly and efficiently prepare chiral small molecules.
Successful development of the methodology will have an impact on synthesis in
the pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. This project also provides
research training for graduate and undergraduate students and contributes to the
development of a workforce in STEM fields.