* 1153888
* REU Site:   Integrative Biology of Social Behaviors (IBSB)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Joseph Lonstein, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2015
* USD 336,000.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to
Michigan State University, providing research training for 10 students during
the summers of 2013-2015 focusing on the Integrative Biology of Social
Behaviors. Participating students will receive 10 weeks of hands-on research
experience with projects involving a wide range of model organisms (rodents,
carnivores, birds, lizards, salamanders, fish, insects, and digital organisms)
and levels of inquiry (molecular, cellular, systems, individuals, populations).
Twelve faculty members in the departments of Fisheries and Wildlife,
Neuroscience, Psychology, and Zoology will serve as mentors. In addition to
their research work, students will benefit from weekly journal clubs and
research presentations from the mentoring faculty; will participate in modules
related to research ethics, statistics, laboratory safety, applying to graduate
school, and careers in the biological sciences; and will participate in outreach
activities at a local nature center. At the end of the program, students will
present their activities at a university-wide undergraduate research symposium.
These activities will sharpen the students' critical and scientific thinking
skills, provide a unique opportunity to gain experience with laboratory and
field research methods, and help prepare the next generation of researchers
studying the biology of social behaviors. Undergraduates entering their junior
or senior year will be recruited through personal contacts and by mailings and
emails targeted to institutions that can provide the most diverse pool of
candidates. Students will be selected based on academic record, any previous
research experience, letters of recommendations, and potential for outstanding
research in behavioral biology. Students will be tracked in part via Facebook to
determine their continued interest in their academic field of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience. Assessments
of interns and participating faculty members will be comprised of a REU common
assessment tool (Undergraduate Research Student Self-Assessment) and other
questionnaires, as well as one-on-one interviews that assess interns' topical
knowledge in the field, their sense of community, and their knowledge about
professional development. More information is available at www.msu.edu/~ibsb, or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Joseph Lonstein at lonstein@msu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Heather Eisthen at eisthen@msu.edu).