* 1153274
* Building strategic interdisciplinary partnerships among natural and social scientists and practitioners to foster sustainability in a rapidly changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* F. Stuart Chapin, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 03/31/2015
* USD 125,001.00

The Ecological Society of America (ESA) will hold an interdisciplinary workshop
to engage many disciplines and types of practitioners to co-design the
scientific framework for Earth Stewardship, an effort to engage scientific
knowledge in societal decision making about sustainable futures. ESA has hosted
four meetings involving academics and practitioners in social, psychological and
physical sciences, religion and ethics, urban design and regional planning, and
civil engineering. These exploratory meetings revealed a widespread professional
concern with stewardship of the Earth?s life support and socio-ecological
systems. This award will support a workshop to leverage efforts in Earth
stewardship. The objectives are to bring together academics within the natural
sciences, social sciences, and humanities along with practitioners in planning,
design, engineering, government and civil society to develop a strategic plan
for Earth stewardship and develop a strategy for learning, communicating and
teaching about Earth stewardship. This effort is designed to complement the
emerging science of sustainability by facilitating substantive intellectual
exchange among disciplines concerned with the scholarship supporting
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many current efforts are aimed at applying
scientific principles to solving problems of sustainability. The focus of this
workshop is on stewardship, rather than on applying basic knowledge. Such
stewardship is especially crucial with mounting global changes in the form of
urbanization, human migration, population growth, global eutrophication and
toxification, land use conversion on continental scales, and economic and
resource dependency that cross international borders. The knowledge shared and
pilot projects to be identified at the workshop will contribute to science,
education, and the civic dialogue in ways that can shape more sustainable
trajectories in an uncertain world.