* 1153435
* EAGER:  Multiscale Modeling of Heterogeneous Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Karel Matous, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2013
* USD 134,091.00

The objective of this Early-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is to improve physical understanding of microstructure on the overall
macroscopic behavior of heterogeneous layers by computational analysis using the
multiscale cohesive model. The multiscale cohesive model proposed in this work
is capable of coupling physical processes at the micro-scale to the macroscopic
response in order to derive a homogenized cohesive law with a point-wise
attached heterogeneous micro-continuum. The model can account in a natural way
for coupling of normal and shear effects. The gradients pertinent close to the
crack tip will be resolved by a second order/nonlocal scheme. The
thermodynamically consistent reduced order model that retains essential
information, while remaining computationally attractive, will have a high
practical value.

This project will yield an integrated scientific tool for analysis of
heterogeneous layers, such as multi-functional adhesives, dental adhesives, bone
adhesives, geological interfaces, subjected to complex loading conditions by
integrating multiscale techniques with computational materials science. On the
educational side this project will provide a unique setting for
multidisciplinary education of one graduate student as it involves computational
solid mechanics, computational science and multiscale modeling. The PI will
participate in engineering education partnership between the University of Notre
Dame and the Riley High School, South Bend, IN. Broadly, the goals of this
partnership are: i) to enhance core skills in modeling and data analysis; ii) to
introduce students to leading edge research ideas by demonstrating its relevance
to both their academic courses and everyday lives; and iii) to mentor inner-city
students for college preparation.