* 1153232
* EAGER: Catalytic Transformation and Kinetics of Lignin-Carbohydrate Complexes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Michael Wong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 09/30/2013
* USD 121,722.00

ABSTRACT

Intellectual Merit:

Lignocellulose can be thought as a spatially and compositionally complex mixture
of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. There has been great progress in
understanding and controlling the breakdown chemistry of cellulose and
hemicellulose, in the upconversion of their constituent carbohydrate
intermediates into ethanol, BTX, furans, and other chemical species. In
contrast, there is less progress on lignin and the effect of lignin interaction
with cellulosic components during the process. The association of lignins with
carbohydrates presents a serious challenge for the utilization of
lignocellulosic biomass.

This proposal from Investigators Michael Wong of William Marsh Rice University
and Conrad Zhang of KiOR Inc. describes a one-year collaborative research plan
between the university and industrial corporation that focuses on the
"interface" chemistry between the building units of lignin and cellulose of
different feeds, and to study the impact of this chemistry on the rate and
product distribution profiles during a thermocatalytic conversion process.
Unlike other studies which either focus solely on model lignin or cellulose
breakdown products, this project focuses on lignin-carbohydrate complexes (LCCs)
as a model of a lignocellulose breakdown intermediate. It is hypothesized that
the pyrolytic decomposition of lignocellulose generates LCCs as a chemical
intermediate, and its chemistry is, so far, not accounted for. The goals of this
work are to determine the heterogeneously catalyzed transformation routes and
kinetics of LCCs, and to establish some general criteria for designing catalytic
materials that can control LCC transformation pathways and kinetics.

Broader Impacts:

The renewed academic and industrial interest in lignocellulosic biomass as a
sustainable source of fuel, chemicals, and energy has been tremendous, in
response to the worldwide concerns of energy security, global warming, and
sustainable development. Various approaches to convert lignocellulose into
higher-value products are being investigated, with catalytic conversion into
transportation fuel and basic chemicals as a promising direction. The unknown
nature of the "interface" between the lignin and cellulose fractions in
lignocellulose presents technical challenges in the catalytic upconversion of
biomass. Studying lignincarbohydrate complexes addresses these challenges,
potentially lowering the activation barrier to improvements in
commercialization.

This project, as a collaboration between a university and a company, will also
provide for the multidisciplinary training of 1 post-doctoral research associate
in chemical kinetics, heterogeneous catalysis, and materials chemistry, state-
of-the-art analytical techniques, and industrial collaborations. The post-
doctoral member will receive guidance and training according to a well-defined
postdoctoral mentoring plan.