* 1153926
* Collaborative Research: Health volunteers in rural Ethiopia: Discourses and experiences of status, motivation, and wellbeing
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Kenneth Maes, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2016
* USD 86,362.00

Dr. Kenneth Maes of Oregon State University, in collaboration with Dr. Svea
Closser of Middlebury College, will undertake research to advance understanding
of the effects of volunteering on individuals' psycho-social well-being. Many
poor countries rely heavily on unpaid and low-paid labor for internationally
funded health-development projects. Low-level, underpaid work is often thought
to be exploitative and demoralizing, but health-development project planners
often claim that low-level employment and volunteerism in this sector bolster
workers' psychological well-being and social status. Although studies conducted
in western contexts provide support for links among altruistic behavior
(including volunteering), social status, and mental well-being, these links have
not been rigorously examined in non-western, low-income contexts. This research
will test these links in one such context: Ethiopia.

Using social science methods such as interviews, document analysis, participant
observation, and survey methods, this study will address three main questions:
(1) What material and immaterial benefits do low-level workers in Ethiopia seek
through providing their labor to health-development projects? (2) To what extent
and in what ways do social respect and mental or spiritual satisfaction accrue
to poor, low-status workers? (3) How do assumptions that low-level workers gain
such benefits function to justify forms of unpaid and low-paid employment, from
the varied perspectives of international donor organizations and project
implementers, local government officials, and workers themselves?

To answer these questions, the project will focus on a rural health-development
project in Ethiopia that aims to improve maternal and newborn survival, and that
connects one of the wealthiest donor organizations in the world with the
Ethiopian Ministry of Health and Ethiopian community health workers. The project
will thus examine labor policies and the experiences and well-being of workers
within a global health-development economy that links international, national,
and local actors.

The potential broader impacts of this research are quite substantial and include
strengthening collaborations with Ethiopian scholars, providing research
experiences to U.S. undergraduates, who will accompany the PIs to the field, and
providing information to policymakers and officials in organizations that
utilize volunteer labor. This project was supported by the Cultural Anthropology
Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering's Global Venture
Fund.