* 1153402
* NSF Workshop: Building Communities for Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Jay Alameda, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Katz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 54,851.00

The workshop for "Building Communities for Software Infrastructure for Sustained
Innovation" brings together the practitioners of software sustainability,
including NSF SI2 participants, to discuss issues and challenges of common
interest, to formulate responses benefitting the software enterprise as a whole,
and working to build a community of software developers, maintainers,
supporters, and users. This workshop also builds concrete affiliations between
SI2 projects and other NSF CIF21 projects to help these programs function as
coherent providers of cyberinfrastructure in the service of science and
engineering research.

This workshop addresses numerous challenges to success with software; for
instance, sustaining a community of developers, building a community of users,
fostering innovation and transforming innovation into a reliable, high quality
component of software, building liaisons/affiliations with other efforts,
developing and maintaining software requirements, managing change against an
unstable software substrate, targeting innovative new software and hardware
platforms; developing mechanisms to train new users and educate the next
generations in ways to use software in scientific and engineering discovery, as
well as to be developers of the next set of software capabilities, etc. The
workshop will cultivate the software sustainability community, in order to bring
innovative, useable, sustainable software to the user community, as diverse as
they are, and to foster even more innovation, both in science and engineering
research, as well as in the development of new software to enable better
utilization of a comprehensive cyberinfrastructure.