* 1153317
* EAGER: Upper-plate Response to a Great Eathquake: Integrating Deformation from Seismic to Geologic Timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Eric Kirby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 09/30/2014
* USD 102,167.00

As was clearly demonstrated in the 2011 Mw 9.0 Tohoku (Japan) earthquake and
tsunami, earthquakes that occur along subduction zone plate boundaries can be
both among the largest and most devastating natural events on Earth. One key to
anticipating what regions of subduction zones are most vulnerable to these mega-
thrust events is to estimate the magnitude and location of un-released plate
motion that accumulates prior to a major earthquake. Current subduction zone
models assume a relatively simple link between observed deformation on the upper
plate above the subduction interface and this slip deficit on the plate
interface; however it is becoming clear that the actual distribution of co-
seismic slip on the plate interface and the resulting upper plate response is
substantially more complex. In order to map the accumulation of unreleased
seismic moment, it is necessary to better understand how to map the observations
of pre-, co- and post-earthquake deformation (made on land away from the plate
interface) to the actual processes of slip accumulation and release on the plate
boundary fault itself. This project will utilize a very rich data set of
observed crustal deformation (GPS, geologic mapping, seismicity), observed on
time scales ranging from geologic (millions of years) to earthquake cycle
(hundreds-to-thousands of years) to earthquake rupture (minutes-to-seconds) in
the vicinity of the Tohoku event. By combining geologic time-scale and seismic
cycle time-scale observations conceptual models of subduction zone strain
evolution can be improved. With a better understanding of how the upper plate in
a subduction zone acts as a deformational filter, using observations of upper
plate deformation the research team will be able to develop substantially
improved estimates of plate boundary slip deficits, post-seismic loading of
active structures on the upper plate (which may becomes seismically activated in
response the main earthquake), and a better sense of seismic potential of
subduction boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an attempt to bridge
a substantial gap in current subduction science - the gap between tectonic
observations on geologic time-scales and current geophysical/geodetic
observations of deformation through the earthquake cycle. Outcomes from this
research will move subduction science toward better informed estimates of
earthquake potential, maximum magnitudes that could be expected, and improved
estimates of locations of maximum energy (moment) release during major
earthquakes - all key components in reducing human vulnerability to major
subduction zone earthquake hazards.