* 1153951
* 2012 Stochastic Networks Conference; Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Cambridge, Massachusetts; June 18-22, 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* John Tsitsiklis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sheldon Jacobson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 25,000.00

The objective of this grant is to support the 2012 Stochastic Networks
Conference (the tenth international conference on stochastic networks), to be
held on June 18-22, 2012, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. This week-long event continues a tradition that was
started in 1987 and that has now become a biennial event. Its aim is to bring
together leading researchers who share an interest in stochastic network models,
to survey recent developments, and chart future research directions. As in the
past, the meeting will be structured in a workshop format, with approximately
twenty hour-long invited talks, and ample free time, so as to maximize
interactions between speakers and participants. In addition, there will be a
poster session for contributed papers. Stochastic networks is a multifaceted
area of research dealing with the modeling, stability, control, performance,
approximation, and design of stochastic networks. It gives rise to challenging
and subtle mathematical problems, whose solution often requires a combination of
ideas and techniques from several branches of mathematics. Research in this area
is strongly motivated by applications in diverse domains, ranging from the
traditional areas of telecommunications and manufacturing to service operations,
biological and social networks, revenue management, and health care.

Like its predecessors, the 2012 Stochastic Networks Conference will emphasize
new model structures and new mathematical problems that are motivated by
contemporary developments in various application domains, as well as new
mathematical methods for stochastic network analysis. It is intended to provide
intellectual guidance to the large community of researchers in the field of
stochastic networks, by highlighting the most recent and active research
directions. The field of stochastic networks has direct impact on multiple
fields of science (both social and physical), engineering, and management. Thus,
this conference is aimed at fostering important advances that can affect
practice in multiple application areas.