* 1153639
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Financial Traders, Information Technologies and The State in Kazahstan
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Douglas Rogers, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

Yale University doctoral candidate Ainur Begim, supervised by Dr. Douglas
Rogers, will undertake research on the practices and technologies of financial
traders in Kazakhstan's burgeoning financial sphere. This project -- informed by
recent developments in science and technology studies, social studies of
finance, postsocialist studies, and the anthropology of the state -- examines
traders' ambitions, goals, and routines in Kazakhstan, where the state plays an
active role in promoting the development of financial markets. Ethnographic data
will be collected through a variety of methods, including participant
observation, semi-structured and unstructured interviews, life and technology
histories, focus groups, targeted archival research, and newspaper analysis.
These data will be analyzed with the goal of testing four major hypotheses
concerning the sustainability of financial markets; the role of information
technology in their development; the relevance of Kazakhstan's recent political
developments; and the values and culture of Kazakhstan's
traders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will be among the first to approach
emerging financial markets ethnographically in the Central Asian context. It
will shed light on the relevance of the different political experiences for
contemporary financial practices as well as offer new insights into the nature
and role of the state in the development of financial markets. This project
presents a unique opportunity to question taken-for-granted understandings of
markets as sites for calculating economic actors and high technologies devoid of
the state. Through detailed descriptions of the ways in which economic and
political institutions are organized and interlinked, the proposed study will
not only supplement economic analyses of interest rates, inflation, and credit
but enable a richer and deeper understanding of finance and suggest ways for
better regulation of financial flows.