* 1153538
* EAGER: A Prototype Network Architecture for Advanced Manufacturing Built with ManufacturingHUB.org and US Ignite!
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) provides funding for
the identification of the fundamental barriers to the realization and adoption
of an open innovation manufacturing network. The architecture for the system
will be based on the open source HUBzero platform for computation and
collaboration developed at Purdue University. The investigators will combine
their HUBzero-derived expertise in information technology and Web 2.0 with
locally available knowledge of design, manufacturing, and Indiana manufacturers
to explore and test alternatives of the vision with small- to medium-size
manufacturing enterprises (SMEs) and the original equipment manufacturers (OEMs)
for which SMEs comprise the supply chain. In particular, the following areas
will be investigated to identify barriers: the current internet architecture and
bandwidth, access to and interoperability of simulation and analysis tools,
information sharing in a competitive environment, and business
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will
help to enable the realization of a more powerful architecture for web-based
manufacturing and prescribe next steps towards it implementation. An important
metric of success will be the degree and extent of endorsement of the proposed
architecture by its potential Small/Medium-sized Enterprises (SME) and original
Equipment manufacturer (OEM) users. Another key metric will be the guidance
provided by the architecture for the design of future HUBzero and internet
capabilities. It is also expected that the architecture will suggest new ways
for customers to interact with manufacturing enterprises. If implemented, the
architecture should contribute to the transformation of current supply chains
into much more nimble, innovative, yet integrated systems of systems.