* 1153778
* Science Scholarship Program at Lyman Briggs College Phase 2
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Richard Shipman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 12/31/2016
* USD 599,834.00

This project is awarding a set of three-year scholarships for at least 29
talented and financially needy students at Lyman Briggs College (LBC), a
residential science college at Michigan State University (MSU). Half the
recipients are recruited from the incoming class students who plan to pursue a
natural sciences degree. The other half are recruited from within the MSU
undeclared majors. This project uses scholarship money to foster a greater
respect and desire to pursue science careers within this cadre of students. The
scholars participate in seminar courses that focus on helping students
understand the entire scientific enterprise spanning basic research, to
dissemination, to graduate school options. Because LCB is a residence college,
scholarship recipients develop into a cohesive cohort by living together and
taking these seminar courses. Further, scholars are encouraged to complete
undergraduate research as a portion of their program and to become learning
assistants which may encourage them to pursue a career in science education. In
addition, the project involves the LCB alumni base to develop internship
opportunities for scholarship recipients. The intellectual value of this program
is the creation of a series of seminar courses designed to recruit students into
the sciences and explicitly highlight the breadth of possibilities in science.