* 1153387
* WORKSHOP: Workshop on the Science of Voting Technology: Research and Education
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Charles Stewart, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2014
* USD 30,470.00

This workshop takes stock of the current status of the science of voting
technology and election administration. The two major outcomes will be a (1) a
conference proceeding, in written and video form, and (2) a blueprint for
graduate education aimed at training a new generation of scholars who can engage
in innovative research, working in a diverse, multidimensional field.

With regards to intellectual merit, the nascent science of election
administration and policy operates at the intersection of several fields of
science and engineering, including computer science, design, economics,
electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, operations research, political
science, and statistics. A few institutional efforts have combined these
perspectives into a single research program. Still, a consensus has yet to
develop about the core knowledge necessary to support a scientific approach to
election administration and policy. The workshop will articulate an intellectual
core and a framework in which professional knowledge might be accumulated,
disseminated, and applied to practical problems associated with voting.

With regards to broader impacts, the workshop will foster two major types of
broader impacts. The first is to develop closer links between the research
conducted by established scientists and engineers in the field - most of whom
have research profiles in more traditional fields - and graduate education in
traditional STEM disciplines. The second is to encourage a more coherent
interaction between researchers in universities and research centers, on the one
hand, and public officials, including election administrators, on the other.