* 1153997
* Step-Up to Physical Science and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Yesem Kurt, Randolph College
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,427.00

This project provides scholarships to able and financially needy students
majoring in physics, chemistry, environmental science, engineering, mathematics,
and computer science. The project is implementing five new, sustainable support
programs and services, and taking advantage of existing services to recruit,
retain, and find jobs for more STEM majors. It is offering S-STEM scholarships
of up to $6000 to each of two cohorts for their four years in college. A total
of 25 students are benefiting from the scholarships, and many more students
continue to benefit indefinitely from the added
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The academic programs into
which the students go are strong, and there are academic support activities. The
programs are further transforming the college and its students. The project is
studying the impact of these programs, and adjusting them to enhance what works
and move away from what does not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
project is increasing the number and diversity of students who complete a STEM
major and go on to work in the field or to further education. This project not
only impacts the 25 scholars, but benefits all current and future STEM majors.
Results are being disseminated through a website dedicated to the program,
reported at national conferences, and published in national journals. This study
benefits other colleges with aspirations to create more STEM majors, and
strengthens the country's STEM infrastructure.