* 1153566
* Being Aware of Our Beginnings (Llargaklluku Llucillerpet Cummi)
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Patricia Partnow, Chugachmiut
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2014
* USD 268,882.00

This EAGER Project is the first phase in a multi-stage, multi-year project to
explore Chugach artifacts in museums all over the world. The ultimate goal is to
create a larger project will create a complete digital archive of Chugach
material culture worldwide; build a temporary exhibition that can travel both
within and beyond the Chugach Region local exhibits in rural communities in the
Chugach region ; and establish a group of committed and trained youth and Elders
who will curate their local exhibits and share the information they contain in
future years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the goals of this project is to
provide an avenue for the people of the region to see artifacts from their
heritage and learn about the cultural significance of those artifacts through
Augmented Reality technology. Although the artifacts will be on loan to the
project, the exhibit will represent a vast array of cultural knowledge not
currently accessible in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, the model the
project will create for studying and displaying historical information about all
indigenous peoples using augmented reality technology will be examined for its
utility to museums and cultural organizations in other times and places. The
project will explore critical research questions of interest to scientists and
community members alike, such as: How were traditional values and worldview
expressed through objects produced within the culture? What is the value to
people today of knowledge about their cultural heritage? What connections can
the people of the region make between the traditional knowledge exhibited and
their worldview? These questions are particularly relevant in the context of the
Alutiiq culture that has already undergone massive changes since the objects
were produced and a region where people are striving to regain a culture they
fear has been lost. The guiding questions will provide a pathway towards
regaining the cultural knowledge that has undergone many generations of changes.
The traditional knowledge exhibited by the artifacts will be researched and
documented to retain the knowledge for future generations to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research is potentially transformative on
numerous levels:&lt;br/&gt;1) Youth &amp; Elders: Interaction between Youth
&amp; Elders will bring a natural teaching and learning experience that was once
a part of the Sugpiaq culture as they work together identifying artifacts and
documenting the significance of the artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;2) Material &amp;
Social Culture: The objects will be described to the Youth by the Elders on how
the Sugpiaq made, used, and preserved the artifacts. How they were used in their
everyday lives and the artifacts social significance will be
documented.&lt;br/&gt;3) Technology &amp; Exhibits: Augmented reality technology
will be used for display and interaction with the artifacts. An online archiving
system will be used to document the culturally significant artifacts.
&lt;br/&gt;Each of these aspects of the project will produce a model of
community and science partnerships for researching and preserving knowledge and
artifacts of great cultural and community significance.