* 1153786
* Towards a unified theory of microsaccadic and saccadic function:  determining the significance of microsaccades for perception, cognition, and oculomotor control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Susana Martinez-Conde, St Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* catherine arrington
* 08/31/2015
* USD 200,760.00

Saccadic eye movements -- the eye movements that shift our gaze during
exploration of a visual scene --play multiple roles that are critical to visual
perception. They bring high-interest targets to the center of our vision, they
search and integrate general information about the environment to stitch
together each visual scene, they correct gaze errors, and they are a primary
mechanism to direct our attention. When we fixate our gaze between saccades, our
eyes nevertheless move constantly, producing so called fixational eye movements.
There is disagreement about the impact of fixational eye movements on visibility
during fixation, their accuracy in correcting fixation errors, and their
relationship with attention and other cognitive processes. Most of these
controversies focus on the main roles historically attributed to microsaccades
-the largest and fastest fixational eye movement-, such as the prevention and
restoration of vision loss during fixation and the correction of fixation
errors. The investigators will conduct eye movement experiments and analyses in
human observers so as to determine the effects of microsaccades on the
visibility of a large range of stimuli and on the correction of oculomotor error
during fixation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We fixate our gaze about 80% of the time
during visual exploration, and so understanding the perceptual effects of
fixational eye movements is critical to understanding vision. The project aims
to widen the scope of microsaccades from having a single or primary function to
playing multiple non-exclusive roles in vision, in the same fashion as large
saccades do. As such, the investigators will set out to determine whether
microsaccades restore the visibility of all faded stimuli -or only that of a
narrow range of stimuli- and to elucidate the role of microsaccades in the
correction of fixation error. Understanding how microsaccades affect visibility
as a function of stimulus characteristics will moreover improve the
interpretation of visual studies, most of which are conducted under fixation
conditions. Finally, determining that microsaccades re-target fixation after
gaze position errors may help engineers to account for these effects in the
design of displays and procedures to improve accuracy when operating equipment.