* 1153572
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobility Monitor: An autonomous intelligent system developed to quantitatively determine mobility.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Ralph Reinhold, Kaliber Imaging, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/2012
* USD 149,882.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is developing an
integrated computer vision system to objectively measures a person's gait, range
of motion and balance and other mobility static and dynamic factors, targeted at
fall risk in the elderly. This compact system is cost-effective and easy to use.
It tracks people's mobility, identifies problems to correct losses, and provides
feedback to motivate the patient to follow their prescribed treatment. The
initial focus is the rapidly growing older adult population, who are living
longer through advances in medicine, and yet, there are gaps in modern
healthcare technologies that prevent elderly people from living independent
lives. The project will result in an autonomous intelligent system developed to
assess the elderly and others with potential limitations in mobility, to provide
comparisons with norms, and to archive test outcomes to allow the subject to see
their progress or regress and allow for clinical intervention. The product uses
state-of-the-art developments in hardware and software, including existing
motion analysis, aerospace technology, mobile telephones and the computer game
industry, resulting in a system equipped to follow the motion of a person at a
constant scale and quantitatively determine that motion.

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is in the analysis,
rehabilitation and monitoring of mobility issues. The project succinctly
responds to priority areas of robotics technology development in the following
ways: (1) leveraging improvements in core technologies and algorithms to
innovatively yet cost efficiently develop a highly intelligent system capable of
making objective, quantitative, "real time" measurements of mobility to replace
current subjective testing or time-consuming clinical gait analysis; and (2)
using this technology to support and enhance independent living and improve
health service delivery to elders and the disabled allowing for more effective
treatment protocol. The above broad aims are proven feasible through focused
Phase I objectives: (1) connecting the tracking data to articulated human
skeletal movement and (2) evaluating key, high-risk components and algorithms
using a test article and computer simulation. Phase I will clear barriers to
development of an advanced prototype in Phase II--resulting in additional
refinements, testing in clinical trials and partnering with a manufacturer in
transition to commercialization. The growth plan includes home care applications
with the capacity to telemonitor and report to practitioners.