* 1153441
* Borrowed Power: War Finance and the Resort to Arms
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2014,08/31/2016
* Branislav Slantchev, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2016
* USD 342,713.00

When Louis XII contemplated the invasion of Milan in 1499, the exile Trivulzio
pointed that out for success in war, "three things are necessary: money; more
money; and still more money." If that statement was true then, it is even more
the case in modern times with the extraordinarily, expensive upkeep of a capable
military. The method of war finance affects when and how wars are fought, and on
what terms they are settled. Yet most theories of international conflict are
oddly divorced from this. The most widespread explanations assume that the
distribution of power - the very thing that is affected by finance - is fixed or
that its dynamics are outside the control of the actors. Even recent theorites
that do allow actors to alter the distribution of power do not examine how their
efforts are funded. This project is one of the first to examine how the form of
finance can affect the initiation, duration, and outcome of war. As shown in
preliminary work, features specific to sovereign debt cobine to change the
dynamics of bargaining over peace terms in a way that wars, once begun, can last
longer and be harder to settle. War finance is not an innocuous aspect of war,
but should be regarded as an important cause of both settlement and protracted
conflict. This project aims to generalize a game-theoretic model that can be
used to study interactions between resource-poor actors with access to foreign
financial markets, the effects of financial and political systems that determine
the costs of government debt, and the methods of attracting lendors, both
domestic and foreign. Hypotheses derived from this model will then be used to to
test hypotheses concerning the factors mentioned above. Besides generating the
model and its implications, a data set will be created concerning debt financing
for countries from 1815 to the present. This dataset will be used to test the
model and will also be made available to other scholars who might be studying
similar topics. The reuslts of this research will aslo be made available to
policy makers who are interested in issues of national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of war finance, especially of how
governments raise revenue to fund their military expenses and how this affects
their military efforts, is likely to be of interest to political scientists in
general, but also to economists and sociologists who have been interested in how
war shapes the political economy of a state but rarely raised the questions
addressed in this project. The projects is also the next step in the development
of modern theories of war which have endogenized the distribution of power. The
impact of the project is potentially transformative because the project suggests
the causation mechanism can not be studied in isolation from financial
structures.