* 1153817
* Understanding of Magnetopause Reconnection Through Recent Advances in Observations and Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Homayoun Karimabadi, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 01/31/2016
* USD 481,652.00

This project will use a combination of spacecraft observations from the POLAR
spacecraft (one of the missions that was part of NASA's International Solar
Terrestrial Physics program) in conjunction with kinetic, 3-D simulations to
examine the physical dynamics of collisionless magnetic reconnection. Earth's
magnetopause provides an ideal laboratory for testing the validating the results
that have been obtained by kinetic simulations of reconnection. Part of the
research will involve the creation of a database of events from the POLAR
spacecraft where the satellite crossed the reconnection separatrix and electron
diffusion region. The spacecraft data will then be compared to the kinetic
simulations. Specifically the project will examine three issues related to the
physics of magnetic reconnection: (1) How the electron diffusion region evolves
during the process, which leads to secondary islands and temporal fluctuations
in the reconnection rate; (2) How the electron layers interact to generate
turbulent reconnection; and (3) How the reconnection process leads to electric
fields parallel to the ambient magnetic field and how these structures grow to
macroscopic scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic reconnection plays a critical
role in the process of converting energy stored in a magnetic field to kinetic
energy of electrons and ions. In particular, collisionless reconnection is the
primary mechanism by which energy is transferred from the solar wind into
Earth's magnetosphere. Magnetic reconnection also plays a critical role in the
generation of magnetic substorms and storms. These processes are important to
our understanding of space weather. The database of reconnection events and the
results from the simulations will both be made available to the space science
community.