* 1153537
* Lake Towuti Workshop:  Paleoenvironments, Biological Evolution, and Geomicrobiology of an ultramafic, Tropical Pacific Lake;  The Lake Towuti Drilling Project
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2012
* James Russell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 10/31/2012
* USD 18,900.00

This proposal award provides funding to support the travel costs of six U.S.
researchers to participate in a workshop in Bandung, Indonesia, in January 2012.
The workshop is intended to develop a strategic plan for a new continental
drilling project in Lake Towuti, Sulawesi, Indonesia, and will involve
researchers from Indonesia, Canada, and Europe as well as the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The geological record at Lake Towuti provides a
unique opportunity to reconstruct climate change over multiple glacial-
interglacial cycles in the Western Pacific, at the origin of the El Nino-
Southern Oscillation. Drilling in Lake Towuti will identify the age and origin
of the lake, the environmental and climatic context that shaped the evolution of
its ecosystem, and changes in its geomicrobiology in response to climate
variations over the past 60,000 years. This workshop will lay the groundwork for
a major international research study that will yield important information about
the atmospheric convection over Central Indonesia, which influences strongly the
global atmospheric heat and water balances. The major costs of the workshop will
be covered by the International Continental Drilling Program, which is based in
Germany.&lt;br/&gt;Participation in this workshop by the U.S. researchers will
ensure their access to the planned research and catalyze new intellectual
collaborations of American faculty and students with their Indonesian
counterparts by developing jointly the first scientific drilling project in the
Western Pacific. Data generated by this program will contribute to a better
understanding of global climate change over the centuries.