* 1153417
* Functional Consequences of Modulation of CPG Feedback to Descending Projection Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/08/2011,08/31/2016
* Dawn Blitz, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2016
* USD 332,932.00

The neural circuits, called central pattern generators (CPGs), underlying
rhythmic behaviors (e.g., walking, breathing, chewing) are functionally
flexible, producing multiple versions of a particular behavior (e.g., walking,
running, swimming). A central goal in neuroscience is to determine how the
output of a behaviorally-appropriate circuit is selected from such
multifunctional circuits. Projection neurons are a major source for altering
circuit output and, like most neural circuits, CPG circuits provide feedback to
their projection neuron inputs. However, little is known regarding the function
and modifiability of this feedback. Thus, this proposal aims to determine
whether the strength of CPG feedback to projection neurons is modifiable and, if
so, how such modulation alters projection neuron activity and the resulting CPG
output pattern. To this end, multiple electrophysiological techniques will be
utilized at the level of the projection neuron, CPG and muscle. It is
anticipated that this project will provide the first demonstration of long-term
modulation of CPG feedback and a cellular-level analysis of its functional
consequences. It will also emphasize the under-appreciated concept that neural
systems do not operate via a unidirectional flow of information, but require
bidirectional communication between so called hierarchical levels. Both general
principles and specific circuit mechanisms determined in the crustacean
stomatogastric nervous system used in this proposal have effectively translated
to other systems, including the mammalian CNS. The demonstration that circuit
feedback is modifiable would open a new line of research in other systems, where
feedback was not previously considered as a site of plasticity in determining
CPG output. This project will provide training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, comprising cellular- to systems-level experimentation
and analysis, including comprehensive training in electrophysiology, an
experimental area in which women and other groups are particularly
underrepresented. Students will have opportunities to present their work and
interact with colleagues at local, national and international meetings each
year.