* 1153081
* Synthesis of and Charge Transfer Dynamics in Type II Nanorod Heterostructures
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Moonsub Shim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sarah L. Stoll
* 03/31/2016
* USD 360,000.00

This award by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program supports work by Professor Moonsub Shim at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign to develop multi-component nanoscale semiconductor materials
that are efficient at separating and directing photogenerated charges. These two
processes involving charges generated from photons are the first and the most
important steps in photovoltaics, photocatalysts, photodetectors and many other
devices involving light harvesting/detection. By varying size, composition and
structure/topology in these multi-component nanoscale semiconductors, this
research will allow exploitation of quantum mechanical and mechanical strain
effects to control how photogenerated charges are manipulated. Charge separation
processes will be examined by transient spectroscopic techniques using sub-
picosecond laser pulses to follow spatial distribution and energy dissipation of
charge carriers created by photons. These studies extended to multi-component
nanomaterials embedded in optically transparent and electrically conducting
media such as conducting/semiconducting polymers and oxides will provide new
insights on how photogenerated charges may be efficiently extracted to do useful
electrical work.

The success of this program will lead to new materials and device concepts
useful for next-generation photovoltaics. The ability to rationally design and
to synthesize multi-component semiconducting materials with precise size,
composition and topology along with the understanding of photoinduced charge
separation processes in these materials will in general be beneficial for
developing a wide variety of solar energy conversion and optoelectronic
applications. The program will also provide ample educational and training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in emerging
interdisciplinary fields. Students involved in this project will be trained on
state-of-the-art facilities both at the University of Illinois and at Argonne
National Laboratory. This project will also generate information and
demonstration materials that can be directly used to promote both classroom
teaching and general public's interest in nanoscience and clean energy
technologies.