* 1153590
* EAGER: Constitutive Relations in Amorphous Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Mo Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2012
* USD 100,000.00

The research objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms and constitutive
relations in amorphous metals. Amorphous or metallic glass is a structurally
disordered solid without the long-range translational order. This topological
disorder leads to some of the most remarkable mechanical properties for this
class of materials. In the past decade, extensive research and development have
been done to harvest the properties, especially the mechanical properties, which
led to several constitutive relations. However, these relations suffer from both
conceptual difficulties and lack of critical experimental support. In
particular, two constitutive models are going to be tested: one is based on
Drucker-Prager criterion and transition state theory; and the second, a new
theory for plasticity, is the free energy-based approach. Both FEM and atomistic
modeling are planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this research
is to establish the constitutive relations among stress, strain, strain rate,
temperature, and various physical, structural properties and compositional
changes for amorphous solids, which is one of the remaining frontiers in
mechanics of materials where no working constitutive model exists to date. This
exercise will not only help the scientific community to get closer to more
physically justified and working constitutive models for metallic glasses, but
will also bring the field a step further toward formulation of deformation in
topologically disordered solids in general. Thus this effort is expected to
contribute to advancements in the area of mechanics of solids. Associated
educational plans will be synergistically integrated with the proposed
work.&lt;br/&gt;