* 1153164
* Integrated Data Management System for Critical Zone Observatories
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Mark Williams, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,503,590.00

The objective of the project is to develop a comprehensive, integrated data
management system for the NSF-funded Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) program,
called CZOData. The overall goal for CZOData is to support, empower, and broaden
the impact of CZO science and maximize the return on investment of the CZO
program by transforming capabilities to easily share, integrate, analyze and
preserve the wide range of multi-disciplinary data generated within and across
CZOs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CZOData design is based on the experience of the
collaborative project team in building the current CZOData prototype and on
other foundational cyber-infrastructure systems. The principal investigators at
the University of Boulder and the Stroud Water Research Center are Earth surface
scientists who provided high-level oversight of the CZOData prototype and
provide a direct link to the scientific community collecting and using CZO data.
Team members at San Diego Supercomputing Center (SDSC) and Utah State University
(USU) are primary developers of the Hydrological Information System (HIS)
developed by the Consortium for the Advancement of Hydrological Sciences, Inc.
(CUAHSI). Team members at Columbia University developed and lead the Integrated
Earth Data Applications (IEDA), Geoinformatics for Geochemistry (GfG), EarthChem
and the System for Earth Sample Registration (SESAR) projects. Team members at
the Applied Physics Laboratory at the University of Washington developed and
maintain the Northwest Association for Ocean Observing Systems (NANOOS)
Visualization System (NVS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines state-
of-the-art computer science and cyber-infrastructure technologies and
international metadata standards with a strong effort to engage the science
community in the process of developing and testing the CZOData system. This
collaborative, community-based approach to developing scientific cyber-
infrastructure has been actively encouraged by the NSF-supported EarthCube
initiative and thus complements those goals (http://www.nsf.gov/geo/earthcube/).
The approach with CZOData is based on integrating site-based data with system
capabilities' such as consistent data publication, cataloguing, discovery and
access infrastructure. These new capabilities will strongly leverage other CI
efforts described above. The resulting system will support new CZO research that
was not possible before while easing the data management burden on CZO
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision is that the proposed CZOData will
serve as a model for the greater Earth surface science community. The CZOData
project is a collaborative, community-guided cyber-infrastructure project for
integrating multi-disciplinary data and providing interoperability with other
systems. Thus, CZOData will inform the development of other large geoinformatics
initiatives, such a the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), Long-Term
Environmental Research (LTER) observatories, DataOne, OpenTopography, the
Implementing Organization of the International Geosample Number (IGSN e.v.), and
the Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS). Also, by incorporating system
research and development with graduate education, we will move towards
cultivating a new generation of researchers skilled in both different facets of
environmental research and in advanced information management and computing.