* 1153660
* CAREER: Evaporation-Driven Self-Assembly of Hierarchically Ordered Structures from Confined Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2014
* Zhiqun Lin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 05/31/2014
* USD 269,440.00

0844084 Z. Lin

The goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop a simple, yet robust, one-step
method via evaporation for creating nanostructured materials with hierarchical
order in a precisely controllable manner, dispensing with the need for
lithographic techniques and external fields. To achieve this goal, two specific
objectives are proposed: (1) create hierarchically ordered structures via the
synergy of evaporation-driven self-assembly at the microscopic scale and
spontaneous self-assembly at the nanoscopic scale; and (2) develop theoretical
models to understand the mechanisms of structure formation. We intend to design
hierarchical structures consisting of either diblock copolymers or quantum dots
(QDs) self-assembled at the nanoscale that can serve as multifunctional
materials for potential applications in optical, electronic, optoelectronic, and
sensing materials and devices. Hierarchically ordered structures are produced by
combining two or more self-assembling processes on different length scales,
i.e., dynamic self-assembly via irreversible solvent evaporation in restricted
geometries (i.e., curve-on-flat geometries) at the microscopic scale and
spontaneous self-assembly of diblock copolymers or QDs at the nanoscale. This
approach utilizes concurrent self-assemblies as a means to precisely organize
unique nanomaterials into spatially ordered structures. The research findings
will be treated within the broader context of nanomaterials science and utilized
for nanoscience and nanotechnology education. Integrated educational activities
will be developed to expose a wide range of audiences, including K-12 students,
to this new nanoscience and nanotechnology knowledge, thereby promoting general
awareness of its importance.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research is manifested in the innovative
studies of exploiting restricted geometries (i.e., curve-on-flat geometries) as
unique environments for controlling flow within an evaporating droplet, which,
in turn, regulates the well-ordered structure formation in one step. The
proposed CAREER project is significant because it will lead to a new paradigm
for creating hierarchically ordered structures on surfaces in a simple,
controllable, and cost-effective manner (i.e., potentially transformative
research) for potential applications in photonics, electronics, optoelectronics,
biosensors, nanotechnology, and biotechnology. The outcomes from the research
are thus expected to make significant contributions to the advancement of
nanomaterials science.

The broader impact of the proposed work includes stronger nanoscience and
nanotechnology education across several levels. A new course on Nanostructured
Polymeric Materials for senior undergraduate and junior graduate students will
be developed. Female undergraduate students will be recruited for summer
nanomaterials research from Iowa State University's Program for Women in Science
and Engineering (PWSE), thus strengthening the involvement of an
underrepresented group in the project. Summer workshops will be created for K-12
teachers who, in turn, will share the new information with their students. Web-
based lesson plans on polymeric nanomaterials and nanocrystals will be developed
by female high school interns for 5th-8th graders nationwide. This activity will
ultimately expose elementary and middle school students to the nano-world.
Knowledge generated by this CAREER project may lead to the creation of novel
devices and materials that exhibit unique functions due to hierarchical
arrangement of nanoscopic building blocks, thereby transitioning fundamental
scientific discoveries into useful technologies that benefit society.