* 1153355
* RAPID: Capturing Ongoing Volcanic Inflation at Santorini Caldera, Greece
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Andrew Newman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2012
* USD 37,088.00

Santorini Caldera, in the southern Aegean, is part of a well developed, and very
active volcanic system fueled by subduction along the Hellenic arc that is
responsible for the largest volcanic eruption in human history (~1650 B.C.).
After a long period of approximately 50 years of relative seismic quiescence
within the caldera and years of measuring essentially zero deformation, the
volcano has recently reawakened with an exponentially increasing inflation
signal. This project will deploy a RAPID GPS campaign, upgrade the current
continuous GPS network, and includes installation of 2 new continuous stations
to capture the time-dependence of inflation. This is a RAPID project because the
deformational signal is indeed rapidly evolving, and may continue to proceed
non-linearly in the coming months. This signal is essential for understanding
the rheologic controls, and will not be sufficiently constrained with the
limited continuous data that we currently have. Installation and updating of
equipment is essential before the winter months, as the current remote sites
currently go down for extended periods because of insufficient solar panels for
the dominantly overcast skies. Data obtained through this experiment will be
useful for evaluating the ongoing deformation at the Caldera, and in turn, be
use for identifying the geometry and precise location of the pressure source.
The evolving temporal signature is necessary for identifying how the system
develops. As well, it will give a window into the rheologic structure that
reacts to the source, and ultimately dictates the likelihood of eruption. The
information is invaluable for improving our understanding of eruption dynamics,
and is some of the first such information for a very young caldera system This
research has immediate impact beyond the volcano geodesy community as the
continuous GPS data will serve as an indicator, and thus warning tool, useful
for hazard mitigation. Because all continuous data will be immediately available
to the public through UNAVCO, other groups will have access to utilizing it for
independent scientific, hazard, or educational needs.