* 1153323
* Analyses of Active Region Characteristics Responsible for Solar Eruptive Events on the Basis of Observations with the Aid of Three-Dimensional Magnetohydrodynamic Simulation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Gilmer Gary, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/29/2016
* USD 338,979.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) and his research team will analyze magnetic
structures in the solar atmosphere before, during, and after solar eruptive
events to determine the physical conditions that are required for solar active
region eruptions. The PI's team will use solar vector magnetogram observations
from ground-based and space-based platforms, along with a three-dimensional,
data-driven, magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model of active region evolution, to
investigate these sources and drivers of solar eruptive activity. The PI's data-
driven MHD model has been recently improved and enhanced to better impose self-
consistent, time-dependent boundary conditions at the solar surface, in order to
correctly input the observed changing photospheric vector magnetogram
measurements. The effects of sub-photospheric convective zone dynamics are
directly reflected through these surface boundary
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will provide the space
weather modeling community with an improved physics-based solar eruption
initiation model and could potentially lead to better operational space weather
forecasts. Graduate students will be involved throughout this research program,
as well as a summer intern student and an advising professor from Alabama
A&amp;M University (AAMU, a historically black college). The unfunded
collaborating professor at AAMU will actively recruit minority graduate students
to work on this project and will participate in training these students in the
use of the University of Alabama's solar active region evolution model.