* 1153718
* EAGER:  Internet Based Manufacturing: Cause or Cure for Global Imbalance
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Friedrich Prinz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2014
* USD 107,108.00

This EArly-Concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides
funding to create a forum to discuss internet based technologies that may enable
a substantially higher degree of automation in design, manufacturing and
administration. While the emergence of the internet has contributed towards
reducing some of the world's geographic imbalances by increasing access to
knowledge and education, the efficiency of communication that it provides may be
having the opposite effect in other domains, including global manufacturing.
This new ability to request manufacturing bids on a global basis and award
contracts to the lowest bidder in a short period of time may have contributed
towards the uprooting of traditional manufacturing communities which are unable
to compete in a globally efficient market. As a result, countries with low wages
and lax environmental constraints are increasingly successful in attracting
manufacturing jobs. Communities which cannot compete in manufacturing will
ultimately lose knowledge and expertise in product design and realization,
leading to a significant loss in modern economic competitiveness. Uneven
competitiveness threatens long-term growth, stability, and peace. Although
manufacturing is just one factor out of many contributing towards an uneven flow
of goods, services and money between countries, it is felt that because of its
strong relationship with jobs, it is a significant driver and predictor of
economic success. In response to this challenge, this project suggests a plan to
address increasing imbalance in manufacturing using the same technology that
drives it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A higher degree of automation will advance the
decoupling of manufacturing cost from wages, helping to eliminate some of
driving force behind geographic imbalance. It is speculated that a balanced set
of new manufacturing jobs can be created in building the new automation
infrastructure, rather than through its usage. Since it is expected that a
higher degree of manufacturing automation can be achieved through next
generation internet resources, Google and key manufacturers in the Bay Area will
be invited to participate in this dialogue. The forum will work on distilling
ideas and technology suggestions from these discussions and delivering them to
the manufacturing community for development.