* 1153230
* Violence in Urban Communities
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Javier Auyero, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2015
* USD 62,469.00

Violence in Urban Communities&lt;br/&gt;Javier
Auyero&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diverse forms of
criminal and interpersonal violence are ravaging the lives of the urban poor in
contemporary Latin America. Through a combination of multi-sited ethnographic
fieldwork and survey research in a poor working class neighborhood, a squatter
settlement, and a shantytown in metropolitan Buenos Aires (Argentina), this
project seeks to a) examine in real time and space the ways in which diverse
forms of violence (drug-related, criminal, domestic, and sexual) are experienced
by those routinely exposed to them, b) explain the recent increase of daily
violence in poor communities in Argentina by scrutinizing the complex causal
pathways that lead to "chain of violence," and c) dissect the (individual and
collective) strategies that poor residents devise to cope with different kinds
of violence. As such, the project joins the recent call made by social
scientists to examine the ways in which diverse forms of violence form a
continuum and seeks to draw attention to the "peace time crimes" or the "little
violences" that define the everyday life in the communities where the urban poor
dwell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In almost every single country of the Latin American
sub-continent, there is a palpable contradiction between the persistent and
pervasive insecurity and violence that shapes daily life and the peace and
equality that, after years of dictatorship and/or civil war, defined democratic
promise. This project will lend further ethnographic detail to a trend
identified by current scholarship on Latin America: urban violence is besieging
many of the new democracies in the region affecting the most disadvantaged
populations in disproportionate ways. The project seeks not only to describe the
life-threatening effects of different forms of violence currently ravaging daily
life in territories of urban relegation, but also to dissect the causal
mechanisms behind their increase, and to examine the (individual and collective)
strategies poor residents deploy to deal with them. In other words, this project
seeks to address the hows, whys, and whats of violence:How is daily violence
manifested in poor people's experiences? Why has daily violence
grown&lt;br/&gt;over the last two decades? And what do residents, both
individually and collectively, do about it?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will bring together the often dispersed insights that have developed over the
past two decades in the study of urban violence. It will seek to develop into a
single coherent analysis that understands the ways in which neoliberal
transformations, urban poverty, and diverse types of violence are mutually
imbricated. In analyzing the relationship between urban poverty and violence,
this research will seek to create intellectual bridges among several areas of
study that approached police, criminal, sexual, and domestic violence from
different perspectives. This work will seek to enrich the discourse in these
areas by offering a more comprehensive understanding of urban violence, extend
the boundaries of these fields to include relevant dynamics borrowed from the
others, and advance the intellectual integration of these fields.