* 1153820
* The ACCESS Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* David Berube, Loyola Marymount University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 586,600.00

In this S-STEM project, Loyola Marymount University is building upon its strong
infrastructure to support STEM education and achievement by creating a
scholarship component within its ACCESS (A Community Committed to Excellence in
Scientific Scholarship) Program. Established in 2009, ACCESS has been a summer
transition program designed to support incoming freshmen in STEM majors. The
ACCESS Scholarship Program expands this effort by providing up to 36 talented
students in STEM fields with need-based scholarships for four years. Scholarship
recipients are supported to not only obtain a bachelor's degree in a STEM field,
but also have adequate preparation and incentive to matriculate into a graduate
program. ACCESS students are recruited from low-income communities, and
typically are either the first in their families to attend college or from
populations underrepresented in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACCESS
Scholarship Program is designed to leverage existing Loyola Marymount resources
in a coordinated manner so that scholars receive the financial assistance that
they need, coupled with academic support, mentoring and a continuum of
professional development opportunities to enrich their educational experience.
Delivered in the context of a supportive learning community, and with retention
as a primary aim of the program, the ACCESS scholars participate in a three-week
residential summer transitional program in order to form a peer-support
community before their first semester in college. ACCESS scholars then
participate in year-round academic and professional development. Further
enriching the retention plan is an extensive support network designed
specifically for the ACCESS students and consisting of faculty, staff and
students who have pledged to support each of the students within the ACCESS
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This academic-year and summer support is meant
to ensure graduation in four years, equipping scholars with the knowledge and
skills needed to pursue a master's or doctoral degree in a technical discipline.
When ACCESS program scholars earn graduate degrees in technical fields and
become leaders in their respective professions, they will have the opportunity
to affect change in STEM fields through their further studies and professional
work. The ACCESS Scholarship Program is a vehicle for cultivating technical
talent that often goes untapped among groups that comprise an ever-larger
percentage of the Nation's population.