* 1153588
* Nitrate Assimilation and the Ecology of Prochlorococcus:  Features and Implications of Intraspecific Diversity in a Model Marine Phototroph
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Sallie Chisholm, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2018
* USD 803,201.00

First discovered in 1988, Prochlorococcus is now recognized as the most abundant
photosynthetic cell in the oceans and is responsible for a significant fraction
of global primary productivity. Arguably one of the best studied marine
microorganisms to date, Prochlorococcus is well-developed as a model system for
advancing our understanding of microbial ecology. It is comprised of a
collection of genetically and physiologically distinct populations that co-exist
and are differentially distributed along quantifiable gradients of light,
temperature, and inorganic nutrients. Early physiological studies using cultured
isolates indicated that this group of cyanobacteria was unable to assimilate
nitrate, typically the most abundant inorganic nitrogen source in the open
ocean. This observation was supported by the first 12 genome sequences of
Prochlorococcus which all lacked the genes necessary for nitrate assimilation.
The lack of these genes in Prochlorococcus was puzzling given that closely
related, and co-occurring, Synechococcus cells have them, and that nitrogen
availability can be a significant limiting factor for primary production in
marine ecosystems. Our understanding changed in 2009 with the discovery of
nitrate assimilation genes in wild Prochlorococcus genomes and the isolation of
an axenic strain capable of growth on nitrate (unpublished data). This discovery
has lead to the overarching questions that are the subject of this project:

- What subset of the Prochlorococcus meta-population in the wild contains
nitrate assimilation genes and how do the dynamics of this sub-population vary
in time and space? - What features of the environment select for cells with this
functional trait? - Is the phylogeny of Prochlorococcus nitrate assimilation
genes better correlated with the local environment or the overall 16S-23S ITS
phylogeny of Prochlorococcus? - Do the genomes of cells that contain nitrate
assimilation genes share specific features? What do they tell us about what
other environmental variables influence the fitness of nitrate-assimilating
cells? - What are the physiological tradeoffs underlying the loss or gain of
assimilation genes in particular strains?

These questions will be addressed using an integrative cross-scale approach to
characterize nitrate assimilation by Prochlorococcus at the population,
cellular, and genomic levels. Specifically, the distribution and abundance of
nitrate assimilating Prochlorococcus will be measured at two contrasting open
ocean time-series stations (HOT and BATS), and along a longitudinal gradient in
the Atlantic (AMT). The PI will examine the regulation of nitrate assimilation,
the kinetics of growth on nitrate, and the ability of Prochlorococcus to compete
with Synechococcus under nitrogen limiting conditions. Further, they will use a
culture independent single cell genomics approach to assess the phylogenetic
diversity of nitrate assimilation genes within the genomic context of several
ribotypes. These studies will advance our understanding the biogeography of
functional traits in microbes, how it is shaped by selection, and the role of
intra-species functional diversity in the overall population dynamics of
Prochlorococcus.

Broader Impacts: The PIs will take advantage of several avenues available at MIT
to work with under-represented groups. These include: the MIT Summer Research
Program, CONVERGE (a preview weekend); SEED (a Saturday education program); KEYs
(a program for girls), and the MIT Edgerton Center which facilitates visits from
local K-12 classes. The PI is committed to communicating science to broad
audiences. Chisholm, for example, has published a children's book on
photosynthesis (Living Sunlight, Scholastic), and is currently working on the
sequel about ocean food webs. Her work has been featured on NPR, MITWorld, and
MicrobeWorld. Berube has participated with the SEA-IT-LIVE Project in the
filming of a documentary series aimed at educating the general public about
shipboard oceanographic research. Berube will participate in a COMPASS science
communication workshop in Fall 2011. The proposal for this project was designed
and written primarily by the post-doc involved, and the work will play a central
role in his professional development. Data resulting from the project will be
posted on a public web site: Prochlorococcus Portal (http://proportal.mit.edu/).