* 1153893
* Resource Allocation Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Larry Samuelson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2015
* USD 172,405.00

The research funded by this award seeks an understanding of the role and
importance of relationships in allocating
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economists have a good understanding of
competitive markets. The anonymous, frictionless nature of these markets makes
them relatively easy to analyze and makes them an obvious point of departure for
studying resource allocations. Economists have moved beyond this point of
departure to study the effects of various frictions, such as market power,
externalities, and asymmetric information, giving rise to well-established
results in a variety of areas of microeconomics. This project takes the study of
resource allocation in a complementary direction by relaxing the anonymity
assumption and studying the role of relationships in resource allocation.
Relationships arise out of repeated, personalized interactions, allowing
incentives to be created by intertemporal links in behavior. In contrast to the
standard finding that market frictions lead to inefficient outcomes,
relationships may often have salutary efficiency implications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with basic work on repeated games. This
work focuses on characterizing equilibrium behavior rather than payoffs and is
especially concerned with cases in which agents are either constrained to use or
simply choose to use so-called 'simple' strategies. In particular, the theory of
repeated games has given rise to an intuition that some strategies are more
reasonable than others, for a variety of reasons that often touch on concerns
for simplicity. The project develops a formal and precise model of this idea and
studies its implications. The second part of the project turns from the study of
repeated games to examine relationships in more applied market context. The PI
examines several different specific settings, each including a continuing
relationship between two decision makers. These continuing relationships bring
both benefits and costs; the goal is to determine when these relationships
enhance market efficiency. The third part of the project examines the
evolutionary game theory foundations of information processing and belief
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is a better understanding of
how relationships help allocate resources. The research investigates when
relationships complement or even replace prices and markets in allocating
resources, when the result is an improvement in the allocation of resources, and
how we can design markets and economic institutions to make good use of the
power of relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts include stronger
ties between evolutionary game theory work in three different fields --
economics, biology, and psychology. The project also provides a framework for
graduate student research.