* 1153870
* Elemental and Isotopic Systematics in Erosional and   Accretionary Subduction Zones, with Implications for Fluid Sources,   Pathways, and Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2018
* Miriam Kastner, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 01/31/2018
* USD 495,878.00

Tectonic plate boundaries where ocean crust subducts beneath continental crust
are associated not only in the Earth's most active earthquake zones, but also
with the largest concentration of land volcanoes. Our understanding of these
areas (also called subduction zones) and the processes that cause associated
seismic and volcanic hazards is therefore needed for us to be able to better
protect coastal communities and prepare effective land use and hazard mitigation
strategies. Because both volcanism and earthquakes are affected by, and many
times triggered by, fluids and the dehydration of minerals exposed to increasing
temperatures and pressures as subduction occurs, our knowledge of how subduction
zone fluids change with space, time, and composition across and between
subduction zones is critical to our understanding of how these important areas
behave and evolve over time. This research completes the geochemical data sets
of subduction zones off the northwestern US, Japan, South and Central America,
and the Caribbean. It also compiles all relevant laboratory experimental data,
pore fluid, and deep sea bore hole fluid data with a focus on synthesizing this
voluminous dataset and seeking new insights into how the geochemistry of fluids
can reveal processes occurring at depth in the subduction process. Where
identified, gaps in the geochemical record of these fluids will be completed,
including creating an isotopic dataset for oxygen, deuterium, strontium,
lithium, boron. The collective data will be used to examine mass balances of
elements, the contribution of subduction fluids to the make-up of present day
seawater, the role of compaction and dehydration/hydration reaction on fluid
chemistry, and insights on the evolution of pore fluid pressures. Broader
impacts of the work include support of a more than 15 year NSF investment in
subduction zone characterization and dynamics and support of a PI whose gender
is under-represented in the sciences.