* 1153446
* SBIR Phase I: Integration of Custom, Printable Batteries in Robotic Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Christine Ho, Imprint Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 12/31/2012
* USD 179,864.00

This Small Business Innovation Research(SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
the feasibility of printing and integrating custom, unconventional form factor
batteries utilizing a zinc-metal oxide battery chemistry with a novel ionic
liquid gel electrolyte into next generation robotic systems. Conventional
batteries have been unable to address the inherently challenging power system
needs of robots: light and mobile, inherently safe, composed of cheap and
sustainable materials, easily integrateable into non-planar formats, and able to
survive extreme environments. As the field of robotics advances, what is being
demanded of its batteries is a fundamental evolution in its materials,
engineering, and architecture. Solution-based print manufacturing is used
because the fabrication method is dynamic and enables batteries to be
manufactured in a variety of form factors and on planar and non-planar
substrates. In robotic devices, batteries can be incorporated into structural
materials, conformably coated onto surfaces, or integrated within the electronic
circuit boards to enable greater power performance that will increase the run-
life and functionality of the robot. The aims of this project are to benchmark
its battery technology's cycle life and extreme environmental stability
capabilities, demonstrate the printing of custom series and parallel battery
system configurations, and showcase its unique flexibility properties.

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this project are the establishment
of a new battery technology and manufacturing paradigm which can be disruptive
to markets requiring novel device functionality and form factors. The
significant reduction of the cost and environmental impact of batteries offer an
opportunity to key segments such as robotics the opportunity to repurpose and
revitalize the printing industry to manufacture next generation batteries.
Success in this project will showcase this battery technology's feature set and
manufacturing methodology to further differentiate itself from its competitors,
increase customer interest, secure early customer development funding or
partnerships, and meet specifications needed to scale towards producing
commercial products. Past approaches to battery miniaturization have been met
with significant barriers that have limited market acceptance and restrained
development of a variety of burgeoning fields requiring portable power. A prime
example is the robotics market and more specifically the wireless and wearable
technologies sectors, which could be revolutionized by the battery technology
and manufacturing approach presented in this project.