* 1153514
* EAGER: New p-i-n Structures for Creating and Retaining Dipole Orientation in Organic Electro-Optic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Xingzhong Yan, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 01/31/2013
* USD 21,541.00

Technical Description: The rapid development of photonic technologies for high-
speed communication has created a strong demand for high-performance electro-
optic materials and devices. Although organic electro-optic materials have
emerged as strong candidates, their stability is compromised by decay of the
acentric order of the chromophores. This project explores a new method to create
and preserve the acentric order in organic electro-optic materials, with the
goal of fabricating a device that achieves high electro-optic response and
stability. The research carefully investigates poling behavior and related
optical nonlinearity. New electro-optic devices are fabricated by sandwiching
organic electro-optic materials between p- and n-type transparent semiconductor
layers. A strong built-in field, originating from the difference between the
Fermi levels of the semiconductor layers, performs contact electrode poling to
create and maintain an acentric order in the organic electro-optic materials.
The optical performance of the materials and devices is tested by using second
harmonic generation and two-beam coupling experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical Description: This project addresses a fundamental science issue on
stability in organic electro-optic materials. Successful fabrication of stable
materials and devices can generate new high-performance electro-optic components
necessary for the continued development of advanced optical technologies. Stable
electro-optic devices are in high demand for light modulation, information
processing, and optical communication technologies. By initiating research in
nonlinear optical materials and related technologies, this project helps
encourage interdisciplinary research in materials science, optics, physics,
chemistry, and electronics at South Dakota State University.