* 1153763
* Success for Hispanic Students in the Computer and Information Sciences Field
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Enrique Rijos, E D P University Of PR Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 08/31/2016
* USD 580,980.00

The S-STEM Scholarship Program at EDP College of Puerto Rico supports 27
eligible, under-represented, low-income, and talented students at the
undergraduate level on its two campuses and 7 graduate students on its main
campus. Scholarships for Information System students amount to $5,000 per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives are: 1) Increase the number of
recipients who complete their academic degree providing STEM scholarships and
support services by at least 5% per year; 2) Increase retention rate to degree
achievement throughout the project duration by at least 5% annually 3) Increase
job placement rate of recipients by at least 10% every
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is modeled after the successful
institutional retention approach known as VIDA, which has focused on first year
students since 2009. The VIDA student support services component is continued
and strengthened throughout the S-STEM Project. It also provides an opportunity
for talented students to enroll in programmatic bridges that allow moving from
baccalaureate to the masters level through a fixed curriculum for this purpose.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project enhances student support services at EDP
College by broadening the participation of Hispanics in STEM fields. These
student support services and retention strategies can serve as a model to other
Hispanic Serving Institutions. Disseminating the project outcomes advances the
understanding of successful recruiting and retaining strategies, ensuring
academic success for under-represented groups in technology careers, thus
contributing to the economy and the professional resources within our society.