* 1153115
* Faunal Resource Depression and Intensification in the North American Southwest: Digital Data and Regional Synthesis
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Tiffany Clark, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 156,465.00

With National Science Foundation Support, Dr. Katherine Spielmann will lead an
interdisciplinary team of archaeologists and software developers in the analysis
of the factors that led to the over-hunting of large game (principally antelope
and deer) in the American Southwest between A.D. 1200 and 1500. This period of
time is characterized by large-scale migrations, and aggregation of people into
towns of 500-1000 residents. During this time some archaeological animal bone
assemblages indicate a decline in the availability of large game. There is
currently no regional-scale understanding of the factors that promoted over-
hunting in some areas but not in others. The two primary factors to be
investigated are 1) population size, concentration, and persistence on the
landscape, and 2) environmental variation. The team will then investigate the
contexts in which people chose to intensify turkey husbandry in response to
declining access to meat from wild game. Although domesticated turkeys are known
from the Southwest by A.D. 500, until the 1100s they were largely raised for
feathers. After that time some populations intensified turkey production for
consumption, while others did not. Why this variation existed is a target of the
project. From this perspective the project is important because it will provide
insight into long term interactions between a society at a relatively "simple"
level of social and subsistence organization and the environment within which it
existed. The results will be generalizable to many other cultures and regions of
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is innovative in the scale at which
animal bone data from a diversity of prehistoric village sites across the
Southwestern US will be integrated to address the issue of human impacts on the
environment. Although in the past researchers have undertaken synthetic analyses
at smaller scales, these have generally used animal bone data presented in
summary form in the published literature. Rather than depend on published data,
these syntheses will rely on analyses of an integrated composite of original
faunal datasets. The PI's approach to synthesis using the original datasets is
made possible through use of tDAR (the Digital Archaeological Record;
http://tdar.org), a repository for digital archaeological data. Members of the
project's Southwestern Faunal Working Group are uploading their datasets into
tDAR. The software development team will then work with the Faunal Working Group
to streamline tDAR's groundbreaking analytical tool that allows the integration
of datasets (or spreadsheets) that were recorded by different investigators
using inconsistent analytical protocols. This integration brings the animal bone
data into a single classificatory scheme, thus making it possible to analyze
faunal datasets in a manner that allows the research team to address
anthropological questions in ways that have not heretofore been
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the project lie in
demonstrating the scientific value of large-scale dataset sharing and
integration for addressing a diversity of anthropological questions. The project
will significantly enhance the anthropological understanding of long-term
interaction between people and their environment, and will improve research
using archaeological animal bone data. The broader impacts of the project
include training of undergraduate and graduate students through internships and
research assistantships, and workshops on tDAR for cultural resource management
communities. In addition, scientists in other fields will be able to access
these archaeological data and use this project's tools and protocols to address
broader issues of biodiversity and environmental change.