* 1153656
* Hydrogen production and nitrogen fixation in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2016
* USD 281,421.00

In this project, researchers at the University of Hawaii a Manoa will conduct a
series of field and laboratory studies to develop a quantitative understanding
of dissolved hydrogen (H2) cycling in the oligotrophic North Pacific Ocean.
Dissolved H2 concentrations in the surface ocean typically range from 1-3 nM
which represents 300-900% supersaturation relative to atmospheric
concentrations. This persistent supersaturation of dissolved H2 in the surface
waters of subtropical and tropical oceans makes the oceans a source of
atmospheric H2 and compiled budgets of global H2 sources estimate marine
emissions from 3 to 6 Tg H2 yr-1. The broad objectives of the research are: (1)
to quantify the linkages and stoichiometry between H2 production and N2 fixation
in surface seawater of the open ocean, and (2) to determine the factors that
drive this relationship including the microbial community composition and the
influence of light intensity. The field research will be conducted over a two-
year period at Station ALOHA and will complement the ongoing Hawaii Ocean Time-
series (HOT) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Quantifying the H2
cycling in surface waters of the upper water column will constrain existing
estimates of global marine H2 emissions. Furthermore, an improved understanding
of H2 cycling will help predict potential effects of increasing anthropogenic
emissions of H2 increase or a climate-driven change in the community structure
of marine diazotrophs. These results will be valuable to microbial ecologists,
biogeochemists, and climate change scientists. All resulting oceanographic and
laboratory datasets will be archived in the online HOT and Center for Microbial
Oceanography: Research and Education (C-MORE) data centers and made publicly
available. At least one undergraduate student will be hosted through the C-MORE
scholars program which particularly targets Native Hawaiians and Pacific
Islanders majoring in an ocean or earth science-related field.