* 1153335
* AstroCom NYC: A Partnership between Astronomers at CUNY, AMNH, and Columbia University
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* Mordecai-Mark Mac Low, CUNY York College
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,750,814.00

AstroCom NYC is designed to improve access by urban minority students to
opportunities in astrophysical research by greatly enhancing partnerships
between research astronomers in New York City. The partners are minority serving
institutions of the City University of New York (CUNY), and the astrophysics
research departments of the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) and
Columbia University. This award will create a substantive and sustainable
partnership spanning New York City to provide centralized, personalized
mentoring as well as financial and academic support to CUNY undergraduates
throughout their studies, plus the resources and opportunities to further CUNY
faculty research with students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partners of AstroCom
NYC are uniquely qualified for the task of improving minority access to
astrophysics research because of their strong working relationships, expertise
in mentoring students with diverse backgrounds, and the ready pool of candidates
from within the urban population of New York City. AstroCom NYC will also serve
as a model to urban areas with large and diverse minority populations, and to
this end the partners will widely publish results and present progress reports
at national conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the students, AstroCom NYC
will provide - and prepare them for - research opportunities with structured and
centralized mentoring, personal attention, a rigorous Methods of Scientific
Research course developed specifically to this purpose, a seminar course around
the weekly Columbia colloquia, scholarships and stipends, and regular assessment
for maximum effectiveness. Stipends will in part alleviate the burdens at home
typical for CUNY students so they may concentrate on their academic
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The various student research projects will form
the backbone of AstroCom NYC. Students will participate in projects on galaxy
properties and evolution, nearby and low mass stars, evolved stars, numerical
simulations and modeling, and observational astronomy from the radio to gamma-
rays. AstroCom NYC will facilitate further research by CUNY faculty, resulting
in more contributions to their fields, and enhanced research collaborations
among the program partners, while attracting more diverse students to
astrophysics.