* 1153604
* STEM Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2018
* Robert Driggs, Kirkwood Community College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

The college is continuing its 10-year commitment to encouraging students to
pursue and succeed in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
academic programs. This project is serving as a catalyst to assist 58
academically talented, financially needy students each academic year in their
effort to earn an associate degree either to be prepared for the workplace or to
further their education at a four-year institution. In addition to the direct
financial aid through scholarships, the students benefit though numerous
opportunities such as collaborative learning, mentoring, tutoring, and
recognition as a recipient of this prestigious
designation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to:&lt;br/&gt;A)
Identify and recruit current and prospective students into STEM disciplines and
the STEM Scholars Program,&lt;br/&gt;B) Select qualified students for the STEM
Scholars Program,&lt;br/&gt;C) Engage STEM Scholars Program recipients in a
learning community that improves the motivation and persistence of STEM
scholars, and&lt;br/&gt;D) Evaluate the effectiveness of the STEM Scholars
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: College recruitment resources
(e.g., printed documents, online information, and face-to-face visitations) are
continually updated regarding STEM opportunities. The selection process and a
scoring rubric have been refined based on lessons learned. Students are
supported through diverse Student Support Services and collaboration with area
employers and other supportive partners. The STEM Scholars Program recipients
are responsible for ensuring they successfully complete all components of the
STEM Scholar program; however, they have significant support from college
faculty, staff, and administrators to stay on-track with rigorous requirements,
including through STEM mentors and Student Support Services personnel. As
college staff becomes more familiar with STEM programs, they become more aware
of student needs and successful recruitment techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The STEM Scholars Program is allowing the
college to strengthen academic collaboration among students, faculty, and staff
and to continue to expand and develop STEM initiatives at additional levels
throughout the college. The program entails direct involvement of diverse staff
in various departments, from Admissions to Student Support Services to
Scholarships and Alumni. This integrated approach spreads the message about STEM
careers and opportunities, now and into the future. To further their knowledge
of the career fields and the knowledge of employers about STEM programs,
scholarship recipients are encouraged to participate with professional societies
at meetings or through activities. As a result of the advancement of the program
throughout each of the five years of award, members of the team are sharing
results with their respective formal academic associations. The long-term goal
is to ensure the United States remains well-prepared with adequately trained
STEM professionals to continue to provide the ever-changing workforce with
qualified STEM candidates.