* 1153156
* Koniag Alutiiq (EMS) Orthography Project
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* April Counceller, Alutiiq Heritage Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2012
* USD 40,572.00

The Koniag Alutiiq Orthography project will compile and complete existing,
unpublished research to develop a stable, standardized orthography system for
Kodiak Alutiiq. The PI, Dr. April Counceller of the Alutiiq Museum and
University of Alaska - Kodiak College, will work with renowned Alutiiq Linguist
Jeff Leer, who is recently retired from the Alaska Native Language Center at
UAF. Counceller will compile Leer's previous research notes and articles on the
Alutiiq writing system, collect new data from the few remaining fluent speakers
(less than 50, all elderly and scattered throughout Alaska), and create a
writing system book that will be accessible to heritage speakers. This data will
be of great interest to language scholars developing orthographies for
endangered languages and for comparative linguistics. In addition the project
will create materials that this will assist in the preservation of the Alutiiq
language for future heritage speakers. The project PI correctly states that this
project is appropriate for RAPID funding because many factors have converged to
make this project successful and timely: 1) the availability and willingness of
Dr. Leer to participate; 2) the waning availability of a few fluent first-
language speakers; 3) The Alaska Native Corporation, Chugachmiut's willingness
to support Dr. Counceller through sharing of similar-dialect materials, and 4)
the urgent need in the community for the orthography in order to produce
language revitalization texts.