* 1153863
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Ontogenetic development of postcranial adaptations to bipedalism in the rat
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Adam Foster, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/28/2014
* USD 19,981.00

The evolution of bipedalism in hominins marks the origins of our lineage and
represents a significant shift in locomotor pattern and musculoskeletal
morphology. The evolutionary mechanisms that underpin this locomotor shift are
unclear, however, with competing models suggesting differing selective pressures
were responsible for the generation of bipedal traits. Research by doctoral
student Adam Foster (University of Arizona), under the supervision of Dr. David
Raichlen, will identify patterns in how morphology responds to behavior,
contributing to our understanding of bipedal evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study directly tests for the roles that the amount and
direction of mechanical loads (a shift from quadrupedal to bipedal standing and
locomotion) have in generating adaptive morphology in the postcranial skeleton
during ontogeny and adulthood, using a rat model. The research explores three
main questions: (1) what role do bipedal standing and/or bipedal walking have in
generating adaptive changes in skeletal morphology, (2) what is the role of
ontogeny (i.e., developmental plasticity) in the generation of adaptive bipedal
morphology, and (3) do morphological changes associated with locomotor shifts
during ontogeny impact kinematics and energetics? Rats will be placed in a
custom harness system mounted over a treadmill that allows for comfortable
bipedal locomotion or static loading when the belt is not in motion, and will
exercise or stand for one hour a day, 5 days a week, for 90 days. Skeletal
changes are tracked through micro-CT scans, and kinematics and energetics data
examine potential energy cost reductions associated with morphological changes.
The findings will contribute to identifying how behavior drives morphological
adaptation, and which morphologies may have been the first to evolve in response
to a change in locomotion in the earliest hominins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study enhances research opportunities for undergraduates by directly involving
them in data collection and analysis, and involves outreach to the community.
Results from this study will be used to develop an evolution lab at a local high
school; the lab and scan results will become a permanent resource for students.