* 1153078
* Advanced Workshop on Improving the Quality of Proposals from Minority Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Patrick Carriere, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Chan Hilton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 99,331.00

Smaller universities including Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU), Minority Serving Institutions (MSI), Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI)
and American Indian Serving Engineering Institutions (AISEI) often lack
resources required to prepare faculty for highly competitive and critically
important STEM education research. As a result, many of the faculty are
handicapped when they attempt to acquire funding to investigate and implement
new educational ideas. Furthermore, this makes the adoption of modern pedagogy
and new STEM education ideas difficult at these institutions. Ultimately, it is
the students who suffer because they may not receive the benefits of the newest
STEM education discoveries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is assisting
critical schools to develop their STEM faculty so they are better able to
compete with larger, resource richer institutions. Stronger STEM faculty will
translate to stronger universities and to more and stronger STEM graduates. The
project builds on prior research and incorporates previously successful faculty
development activities. The work is also informed by an elite group of
university deans who provided input to the project design. Outcomes are being
assessed using an external evaluator and will be widely disseminated.