* 1153796
* Financial Aid for Science and Technology students Enhanced with Research
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2019
* Benjamin Surpless, Trinity University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 04/30/2019
* USD 600,000.00

The Financial Aid for Science and Technology students Enhanced by Research
(FASTER) Student Grant Program is awarding an average of $5,000 per year to 26
academically talented students who demonstrate financial need, offsetting a
significant portion of the need-based loan portion of each student's financial
aid package, and is renewable for up to four years (provided the student meets
eligibility requirements as outlined by the program). The average size of the
awards is based on extensive student data. The University is using the FASTER
Student Grant Program primarily as a recruiting tool for prospective students,
by selecting entering students during each of the four years of this grant.
First-generation college students are targeted, with the goal of increasing the
diversity of students majoring in the participating departments. Scholarship
recipients receive targeted student support through this program as well as
existing Trinity services. The FASTER Program provides research opportunities
for scholarship recipients early in their undergraduate career. Twelve
competitive FASTER Program Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships are
available for FASTER scholars. Participating STEM departments are Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering Science, Geosciences, Mathematics, and
Physics & Astronomy.

Intellectual Merit: The university provides a wide range of student support
services, from academic support to career counseling/job placement. Trinity has
a long record of excellence in research with undergraduates, especially in the
STEM fields. Funding for undergraduate research comes from a wide range of
internal and external sources. Due to its strong support system and
undergraduate research, Trinity ranks in the top 50 overall in Baccalaureate
Origins of S&E Doctorate Recipients.

STEM faculty, administration, and staff across the university are providing
effective and efficient management of all aspects of FASTER programming. The
FASTER Program builds directly from experience with the current FAST Student
Grant Program and strong ties with Allies-First Generation, Underrepresented
Students (FGUS), the McNair Scholars Program, Noyce/Upward Bound, the Summer
Research Program, and other Trinity student support services. The Program is
strengthening this current support network to ensure quality advising and
mentoring of undergraduate students in the STEM majors to enhance student
learning, confidence, performance, retention to graduation, and career or higher
education placement.

Broader Impacts: Trinity University's emphasis on recruiting first-generation
students increases the diversity of the participating departments, as well as
the overall student body, because first-generation students are more likely to
have greater financial needs and to come from diverse ethnic and cultural
backgrounds. Non-first generation college students who come from
underrepresented groups are also heavily recruited. Because Trinity has a strong
record of placing students into quality graduate programs, the Program not only
provides first-generation college students and those from underrepresented
groups access to a high quality education, it also increases the likelihood that
these students will pursue post-graduate education. Institutional support
systems are being strengthened through grant activities as various campus
constituents are brought together to promote and support the Program. The high
quality undergraduate research programs in which FASTER students can participate
(many of which are NSF supported) each have their own and varied societal
benefits that are some of the desired outcomes of the research activities.