* 1153059
* Spectroscopic Studies of Hydrogen Bond Structures, Dynamics, and Relaxation Mechanisms at Aqueous Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alexander Benderskii, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 390,000.00

In this award, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Alexander V. Benderskii of the
University of Southern California and his graduate, undergraduate, and
postdoctoral research students will use surface-selective nonlinear optical
spectroscopy techniques to learn about the molecular structure and dynamics at
liquid interfaces, in particular the nature of the hydrogen bonding.
Conceptually, it is the asymmetry of the interfacial environment and the
resulting anisotropic interactions that make interfaces fundamentally different
from bulk liquids. The goal of this research is to understand the dynamic
behavior, and relaxation mechanisms of the aqueous H-bond network of the
interfacial water. To achieve this goal, spectroscopic studies will be performed
using vibrations of the water molecule itself (OH stretch and bend modes) that
report on the dynamics of the H-bonding environment, as well as rotational
relaxation measurements of small probe molecules that report on the local
microscopic friction and the molecular origins of viscosity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of water in the thin interfacial region
underlie important processes such as solvation, hydration, hydrodynamic drag,
wetting, and amphiphilic self-assembly. This has profound implications in
biology, biomedical sciences, bioengineering, where the molecular properties of
the thin layer of 'biological water' critically affect biochemical and
biophysical processes occurring in the interfacial region. The mechanistic
aspect of the relaxation processes and the molecular origins of viscosity have
direct applications in hydrodynamics and microfluidics. The research will
stimulate theoretical developments and lead to better computational models for
aqueous and biological interfaces. Teaching and training students at all levels,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral will be an integral part of this
project. The educational, training, and outreach activities will include
underrepresented minorities in the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, as
well as postdoctoral research student mentoring.