* 1153699
* Controlling Enzyme Structure and Activity with Light Illumination
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* C. Ted Lee, Jr., University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 03/31/2012
* USD 3,260.00

Nanotechnology is implicit in the assembly of proteins into the thousands of
active nanostructures pervasive in the human body. The utility of proteins as
the building blocks of these bionanomachines derives from the fact that proteins
are dynamic entities, responding to molecular interactions in unique and complex
ways, often resulting in conformation changes to various non-native or
associated states. These conformational transitions influence virtually every
biological process. As such, knowledge of both the structure of the non-native
states that form in response to various stimuli along with the dynamics of
rearrangements between these states is required. This necessitates a means to
rapidly induce changes in protein conformation and a method to determine the
structure of non-native states (partially-folded or associated) at relatively
high resolution. C. Ted Lee, Jr. of the University of Southern California plans
to achieve this goal using light-responsive surfactants to induce protein
unfolding or association, which will be detected with small-angle neutron
scattering (SANS). Surfactants generally affect protein conformation by
disrupting intramolecular or intermolecular amino acid contacts, leading to
protein unfolding or the dissociation of protein aggregates, respectively. In
the case of photoresponsive surfactants, however, the surfactant-amino acid
associations can be switched on or off with simple light illumination. This
novel method to photo-control protein conformation will be investigated on
several length scales. Protein tertiary and quaternary structure will be
determined with SANS through shape-reconstruction computational methods to best
fit the scattering data, allowing the in vitro protein structure to be
determined. SANS experiments require allocation of competitive beam time from a
National Laboratory. This proposal requests funds to allow SANS data to be
collected on the bioSANS instrument at Oak Ridge National Laboratory from
October 14 through 17 of this year with the participation of a graduate student
from the Lee Group. These experiments will allow full characterization of the
photo-controlled native-to-intermediate-to-denatured or monomer-to-aggregated
transitions in proteins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;Allowing a graduate student to visit ORNL for three days will provide
an invaluable experience. In fact, one of the previous students of the PI now
currently works at NIST as a result of similar visits. Chemical Engineering
education is faced with a curriculum that has become increasingly disconnected
with faculty research. To close this gap, proposals such as this travel award
will allow a student to work in the atmosphere in the laboratory with ultimate
connectability to features of coursework.