* 1153189
* Relationships with Step-fathers and Child Well-being
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Paul Amato, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2015
* USD 175,000.00

Abstract: Relationships with Step-fathers and Child Well-
being&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research has questioned whether stepfathers
contribute anything positive to children?s well-being. Children in stepfamilies
generally have lower levels of well-being than do children in two-biological
parent households and show little or no advantage over children in single-parent
households. Most studies, however, have implicitly adopted a deficit perspective
and ignored the quality of relationships that children develop with stepfathers.
Indeed, a great deal of variability exists in the quality of stepfather-
stepchild relationships, with some children developing close bonds to
stepfathers and others not. Yet little is known about the factors that promote
strong stepfather-stepchild ties, or how such ties can promote children?s well-
being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project draws on four
waves of data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health?a
nationally representative study of adolescents followed into young adulthood.
The first aim is to identify factors that foster strong stepfather-stepchild
relationships, both during the transition to stepfamily living and in subsequent
years. The study draws on an ecological-contextual theory that emphasizes the
social construction of fatherhood. Specifically, this perspective assumes that
stepfathers have the potential to form positive or negative relationships with
stepchildren, depending on a variety of contextual factors?many of which have
received little or no attention in prior research. For example, the study will
test the hypothesis that positive stepfather involvement with stepchildren (as
reflected in the frequency of shared activities, open communication, and
emotional closeness) is greater when other family relationships (mother-
stepfather, mother-child) also are close. Other family contexts that may
influence stepfather involvement include race and ethnicity, child gender, years
lived with a stepfather, number of prior stepfathers, living in disadvantaged
contexts, and the extent of nonresident biological father involvement. The
second aim is to assess the importance of positive stepfather involvement for
children. A social capital framework suggests the hypothesis that high-quality
stepfather-stepchild relationships are positively associated with multiple forms
of child well-being. The study will examine three core dimensions of well-being:
externalizing problems (e.g., delinquent and antisocial behavior), internalizing
problems (e.g., depression), and academic achievement (grades). The benefits of
stepfather involvement are likely to depend on a variety of contextual factors.
One relevant hypothesis is that stepfathers who enter families in which children
have experienced one or more prior stepfathers have a relatively difficult time
establishing close relationships that translate into positive adolescent
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on adolescence and the
transition to adulthood?critical points in the life course for accomplishing key
developmental tasks and avoiding risky behaviors that can lead to long-term
problems in adulthood. The project will expand the scope of prior research in
the following ways: (1) Contrary to most prior studies, this study will pay
attention to the quality of stepfather involvement, not just whether a
stepfather is present in the household, (2) This study will be the first to
examine how stepfather involvement changes between adolescence and young
adulthood and the implications of these changes for children, (3) The
availability of nationally representative data with minority oversamples will
allow an examination of White, African American, and Latino stepfamilies to a
degree unprecedented in the literature. Understanding how race and ethnicity
moderate processes within stepfamilies is particularly relevant at a time when
the racial-ethnic diversity of the U.S. is increasing rapidly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Findings can aid in the creation of
effective programs and policies to promote positive stepfather-stepchild
relationships and enhance the well-being of children growing up in stepfamilies.
These findings should be especially relevant to federally funded fatherhood
initiatives. In addition, the use of existing national data to provide a broad
portrait of stepfather involvement should place researchers in a stronger
position to develop new instruments for future surveys of stepfathers and
stepfamilies. In addition, the project will facilitate the mentoring, training,
and professional development of graduate students who participate in the
research.