* 1153012
* Rational Design of Selective Hydrodeoxygenation Catalysts for Organic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* John Monnier, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2015
* USD 400,000.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry Division at the National Science
Foundation supports Professor Andreas Heyden and co-PIs Professor John R.
Monnier and Professor Christopher T. Williams from the University of South
Carolina to investigate the underlying science that can lead to the development
of highly selective, catalytic materials for upgrading of bio-oils using fast
pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass. A combined computational and experimental
research approach will (a) obtain fundamental understanding of the reaction
mechanism of the heterogeneous, catalytic hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) of organic
acids on Group VIII transition metal catalysts in both a gas phase and liquid
phase (water and n-butanol) environment and (b) rationally design novel
supported metal catalysts for the selective conversion of organic acids into
alcohols and alkanes. The research approach rigorously integrates (a) state-of-
the-art computational heterogeneous catalysis tools such as plane wave density
functional theory (DFT), implicit continuum solvation models, d-band models,
Br√∏nsted-Evans-Polanyi (BEP) relationships, scaling relations, microkinetic
modeling, Campbell's degree of rate and selectivity control, and multi-
dimensional volcano curves with (b) an experimental program that combines a
novel bimetallic catalyst synthesis methodology (electrode less deposition) with
structural and electronic characterization techniques, in-situ vibrational
spectroscopy, and kinetic evaluation using state of the art single pass flow
reactors and high pressure batch reactors. The computational studies will lead
to hypotheses that motivate new experiments, while experimental observations
will confirm theoretical findings and inspire new computational investigations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conversion of biomass to useful fuels and chemicals is
an essential goal of sustainable chemistry. The fundamental objective of this
project is to establish a scientific basis for the rational design of novel
heterogeneous catalysts with superior activity and selectivity for the HDO of
organic acids relevant for upgrading of bio-oils obtained from lignocellulosic
biomass. The aim is to increase the understanding of HDO reaction mechanisms and
reduce the time and financial resources needed for the design of new
heterogeneous catalysts tailored to meet the changing needs of a world with
limited resources. Finally, the PhD students involved in this project will
become experts in the practice and integration of computational and experimental
catalysis. Graduate students from underrepresented groups will be attracted
through the ongoing Sloan Minority Graduate Fellowship and Southeast Alliance
for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (SEAGEP) programs that are
available within Chemical Engineering at USC. Also, the research results will be
integrated into the joint graduate and undergraduate electives"Multiscale
Modeling: From Electrons to Chemical Reactors" and "Catalysis" and the core
chemical engineering curriculum.