* 1153229
* EAGER: Presence and Navigation in Virtual Reality Rehabilitation Games for Mobility Impaired Persons
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* John Quarles, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 248,676.00

The term presence refers to a user's level of involvement in, or feeling of
actually being part of, an immersive virtual environment (VE), or virtual
reality (VR) as it is commonly called. Although researchers have been
empirically studying presence for over 15 years, they have typically only
focused on persons without disabilities. So whether the findings from these
studies hold true for persons with mobility impairments is unknown. Based in
part on his personal experiences, the PI hypothesizes that in fact many of these
prior results may not be relevant to persons with mobility impairments deriving,
for example, from stroke, Multiple Sclerosis, or Parkinson's disease. Many of
these individuals have sensory deficits (e.g., numbness in the legs and feet),
and use assistive devices (e.g., canes, walkers, or wheelchairs), which impact
the way they navigate through a virtual space. This, in turn, could affect their
experience of presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VR games are intended to enable
users to perform rehabilitation exercises (e.g., to practice walking in good
form) as part of an immersive game. They aim to engage the user's senses with
graphics, audio, and 3D user interfaces, and when properly designed have been
shown to enhance motivation, which is a key factor in successful rehabilitation.
However these games are not yet in widespread use for physical rehabilitation,
most likely due to the many unanswered basic questions about how persons with
mobility impairments navigate within a VE and how this affects their experience
of presence. In this exploratory research the PI seeks to gain a better
understanding of such issues, as well as their potential impact upon the user's
motivation for rehabilitation. To these ends the PI will conduct a series of
empirical studies in collaboration with the Neurology Institute of San Antonio
(NISA). As preliminary work, he is currently studying how alternative navigation
methods such as real walking, virtual walking, and flying impact presence for
people who walk with canes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the preliminary study
is still underway, initial results suggest that people who walk with canes
experience lower presence than persons without mobility impairments. The PI
plans to focus next on a number of fundamental aspects of VR that may affect
navigation and presence, especially avatars (virtual representation of the body
as well as of assistive devices such as a virtual cane) and field of view (the
typical human field of view in the real world is about 120 degrees but it is
much lower in a typical VE, which may complicate navigation for some mobility
impaired persons). Through these studies, the PI will develop a new presence
questionnaire that is tailored to mobility impaired persons and which can be
integrated into existing presence questionnaires. The outcomes of this research
will be potentially transformative, in that the findings will challenge and
potentially disrupt accepted theories and perspectives of presence in the fields
of VR and rehabilitation games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
exploratory research will lay the foundations for a better understanding of
presence in VR for the mobility impaired that may enable more effective
immersive experiences for this underrepresented population, thereby resulting to
higher motivation and more effective VR games for rehabilitation. This, in turn,
could ultimately improve rehabilitation adherence, thereby leading to an
improved quality of life for mobility impaired persons. Moreover, The University
of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) is a minority serving institution. The PI has
initiated a UTSA Game Development Club, which he plans to expand as a gateway
for minority student involvement in VR games research.