* 1153787
* Increasing the Number of Regional Community College Graduates and Active Duty Military Personnel, Veterans and Dependents Enrolling in and Completing a STEM Baccalaureate Degree
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Cindy Taylor, Austin Peay State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 588,800.00

This project partners Austin Peay State University (APSU) with Columbia State
Community College, Volunteer State Community College, Nashville State Community
College, and the APSU Center located on the Fort Campbell Military Base (in Fort
Campbell, KY) in order to increase the number and graduation rates of students
transferring from regional community colleges and from military service to four-
year STEM degrees at APSU. The scholarship program offers 15-30 scholarships per
year, with students receiving support for one to three years.

Objectives of the scholarship program are to: - improve the graduation rate of
students that transfer to APSU after completing an Associate of Science degree
at a community college; - increase the number of community college students
seeking a B.S. in a STEM discipline; - increase the number of Active Duty
Military Personnel, Veterans and Dependents enrolling and completing a B.S. in a
STEM Discipline; and - work with students to identify career paths early and
help them successfully transition to either a job or graduate school immediately
upon completing their B.S.

The project explores the effect that providing financial, academic, career and
social support to community college and military students has on the number of
students entering four-year STEM programs and their success rate in these
programs. Core support structures used to increase success for transfer students
and students with military backgrounds include: a Summer Bridge Program; S-STEM
students living together in a wing of a new dormitory: monthly meetings with an
assigned faculty mentor; encouragement of scholarship students to become peer
mentors; including partner community colleges in APSU STEM events; and seminars
by individuals in STEM disciplines/industry/careers.

In the geographic area served by APSU and the partner institutions, there are
insufficient college students in STEM disciplines to meet the projected needs of
the region. A particular need is due to the recent opening by Hemlock
Semiconductor of a $1.2 billion facility in Clarksville TN (the home of APSU).
It is anticipated that the opening of this large polysilicon producing facility
will attract other high tech industry to the region that will require additional
STEM graduates in the future.