* 1153882
* GSE/DIF: Role Models Matter:  Scaling Up Outreach
* EDU,EES
* 08/03/2011,12/31/2016
* Linda Kekelis, Techbridge
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 12/31/2016
* USD 998,804.00

Intellectual Merit: Techbridge and the Chabot Space and Science Center will
undertake a Scale-Up Diffusion of Research-Based Innovation project called Role
Models Matter. The project will supply customized training, guidance and support
for role models at partner organizations--Society of Women Engineers, Girl Scout
councils, and the National Girls Collaborative Project--to increase and improve
the quality of STEM outreach to girls in K-12 education. The goal is to provide
customized resources, training, support, and follow up for 2,200 role models to
conduct outreach with approximately 87,000 girls over five years. This Scale-up
is based on a proven model and resources that show evidence of increasing and
improving role model outreach in engaging girls' interest in STEM careers. The
project will enhance resources, allow for customization and follow up for deeper
impact within three national organizations that offer STEM programs/outreach for
girls. The project will be run by an experienced team with members from multiple
organizations that bring extensive expertise in working with role models and
girls, professional development, STEM programs, partnership support, business
development, and evaluation. The Partner groups have been carefully selected and
are well-suited to the project's scale-up model to help ensure quality of
delivery and promise of sustainability. In addition, this scale-up project will
follow up with partner organizations to document and evaluate the customization
of its resources on the frequency and impact of the partners' outreach. Finally,
cyberlearning tools will expand the scope and reach of this project to help
scale up and sustain the project's impact nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The Role Models Matter project will have
broad long-term impact through working with national partner groups to help role
models engage, expand, and inspire girls in STEM careers. This coalition of
partnerships will bring together girl-serving organizations with role models to
promote and sustain widespread quality role model outreach. In addition, the
best practices and lessons learned in scaling up and program sustainability will
be disseminated broadly to a national audience of STEM professionals,
corporations, researchers, practitioners and policymakers through publications
and conference presentations. Such visibility will also serve to leverage
community and national support.