* 1153691
* SafeConfig Symposium Student Travel Award
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,03/31/2013
* Ehab Al-Shaer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2013
* USD 14,000.00

It has been widely cited that configuration errors enable 65% of cyber attacks
and cause 62% of infrastructure downtime. This SafeConfig is a 2-day Symposium
on Configuration Analytics and Automation that focuses on addresses challenges
and future solution to develop assurable, measurable and usable security and
network configurations (www.safeconfig.org). The main objective of this project
is to encourage graduate student participation in SafeConfig 2011, which will
bring together the research, industry and government communities to exchange
experiences, discuss challenges and propose research directions. Early faculty
researchers and students will have a unique opportunity to interact with senior
researchers in the field from all three communities. They will greatly benefit
from the collocation with NIST Security Automation Conference by learning about
the state-of-the-art solutions, and connect to industry and government
activities. Today's graduate students will play a central role in shaping the
future of networking and security technologies. They are the future the
administrators, developers, and researchers who will manage, implemented and
create solutions to address our current and future challenges of developing
secure and assurable network and system configuration systems. Attending
specialized and focused event on this area is the most effective way to expose
students to the current challenges and future development of this area. This
project will facilitate the attendance of young researchers and students to
attend SafeConfig 2011 and interact with top researchers from academic, industry
and government.