* 1153158
* EAGER: Centralized Control of Large-Scale Distributed Sensor/Actuator Networks: Self-organizing Amorphous Facades
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Nicolaus Correll, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Satyandra Gupta
* 02/28/2014
* USD 120,000.00

This project, investigating active building facades that proactively contribute
to energy conservation by changing their opacity and air permeability as a
function of environmental and user parameters, promises to contribute strongly
to both the cyber and physical sciences. Often energy is wasted when parts of a
building are heated or cooled, but are not actually used, or when they are
actively cooled if simply opening a window would suffice. The proposed "Self-
Organizing Amorphous Facades" (SOAF) consist of a large number of identical
cells that can each change their opacity and air permeability, sense light,
temperature, and occupancy, and communicate with each other in a distributed
collective. For complex cyber physical systems, this promises to provide a novel
design methodology that is potentially applicable to a large class of systems
and, therefore, will result in foundational knowledge of use to the community at
large. This high-risk, high-reward project integrates ideas from computer
science and engineering, with a little human physiology and environmental
science thrown in, to develop new theoretical foundations for the design,
validation, and improvement of coordination strategies for multi-agent robotic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit lies in novel
algorithms that allow one to take advantage of distributed computation to
drastically reduce the dimensionality of the data coming from the system, and
novel algorithms that turn low-dimensional control data to the system into high-
dimensional control signals. In particular, this research focuses on distributed
algorithms that can identify regions that share similar spatio-temporal data,
distributed algorithms that recognize patterns and gestures in spatio-temporal
data sets, and distributed algorithms that automatically derive distributed
policies for global control signals on temperature and
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The direct impact of this project
will be huge potential reduction in the energy footprint of modern buildings by
active lighting and ventilation control. A related impact is the introduction of
novel ways of using space using truly reconfigurable walls. Due to its
interdisciplinary nature spanning computer science and civil engineering
together with its positive environment implications, this project is likely to
be attractive to students with a broad range of backgrounds and interests. It
will lead to educational modules that let students explore energy, heat transfer
and solar gains in a building using sensors, wireless technologies, and
algorithms, and introduce students to the challenges of complex cyber-physical
systems. The PI proposes outreach to women and minorities and suggests a novel
mechanism of comic distribution via HowToons.com that will make technical
results and environmental impact of CPS accessible to a wide audience.