* 1153231
* International Collaborative Workshop on Research Ethics
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Sung
* 02/28/2013
* USD 35,738.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) will develop a
new and unique resource of its kind, cross-cultural case studies for research
ethics education in U.S. and Chinese universities. This project will support
travel for ten U.S. participants to engage Chinese counterparts in a workshop at
the Zhejiang University in Hangzhou, China, as part of a collaborative project
with the China Association for Science and Technology (CAST). As research
becomes increasingly global, it raises the very real possibilities that the
melding of multiple cultures, regulatory systems, and institutions will create
tensions among the values, norms and legal frameworks represented by
international collaborators. A better understanding of those tensions and the
ethical issues they engender is critical. The proposed workshop uses the case
study method of analysis to develop a new and unique resource of its kind,
cross-cultural case studies for research ethics education in U.S. and Chinese
universities, and it does so in the context of cross-cultural collaboration
between American and Chinese scientists and other
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cases will impact the education of scientists
in both the U.S. and China. American educators, facing the growing number of
Chinese students enrolled in science and engineering courses as well as the
increasing demands of globalization, have a pressing need for research ethics
teaching materials that can bridge the gap between what international students
know or believe, and what they will need to understand regarding the responsible
conduct of research. Hence, the case studies have the potential to reach large
numbers students and scientists in both countries. The cases will be posted on
the Web for others to use as needed (URL:
http://srhrl.aaas.org/projects/research_ethics/china/). While the cases
themselves will add value to research ethics education in both the U.S. and
China, the hands-on collaboration between American and Chinese educators,
researchers and students will also be a model for developing such materials.