* 1153595
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Subtitle Groups as Cultural Translators in China
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Elinor Ochs, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 5,636.00

University of California-Los Angeles doctoral student Chi-hua Hsiao, under the
guidance of Dr. Elinor Ochs, will investigate the phenomenon of cultural
translation in the context of an underground network of internet-based amateur
translators in China. Since the post-economic reform period in the early 1990s,
the growth of the internet in urban areas in China has afforded residents
opportunities to circumvent the state-party monopoly of information. Informal
volunteer subtitling groups emerged in the mid-1990s and began catering to the
younger generation's thirst for U.S. popular culture by adding and distributing
Chinese-language subtitles to TV programs, which they then posted online.
Chinese audiences have embraced this unofficial outlet as an alternative source
of foreign popular culture.

Centered in Beijing, this research adopts a variety of ethnographic methods for
documenting the linguistic and cultural translation processes through which
subtitlers communicate culturally specific concepts in ways that fit the
sociocultural understandings of the younger generation of Chinese audiences.
Focusing on the theme of cultural translation, this linguistic anthropological
study will explore how Chinese volunteer translators' subtitles relate to the
globalization of sociocultural ideologies.

This study will contribute to the understanding of globalization and to the
understanding of socially coordinated uses of information technology by offering
insights into how collaborative Chinese subtitling groups act as cultural
brokers and represent a new paradigm of sacrifice and morality among Chinese
youth and young adults within the virtual community. In addition, this research
will demonstrate how such initiatives influence the younger Chinese generation's
perceptions of foreign popular culture as part of the larger globalized flow of
information. Funding this research also strengthens international scholarly
collaborations with China and supports the education of a graduate student.