* 1153275
* Student Delegate Sponsorhip for tcbiomass2011 Conference, Chicago, IL, September 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2012
* Rod Rinholm, Gas Technology Institute
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 02/29/2012
* USD 5,000.00

The 2011 International Conference on Thermochemical Biomass Conversion Science
(tcbiomass2011) is an academic and industry conference to exchange the latest
research and development data from around the world in thermochemical conversion
of biomass to fuels, chemicals and power. Thermochemical conversion holds great
promise for the production of biomass-derived fuels for renewable, sustainable
energy. Tcbiomass2011 is a global forum that focuses on this important area of
science that will help accelerate the commercial realization of technology
related to clean energy. The conference focuses on bringing experts together,
sharing experiences and advancing solutions for thermochemical bioenergy
production. Foremost experts in the fields of gasification, pretreatment,
pyrolysis, and upgrading will provide a program that will present the latest
research and deployment results. These meaningful collaborations will lead to
increase the contribution of bioenergy to economic and energy growth, security,
and sustainability. Gas Technology Institute is organizing the tcbiomass2011
conference.

The NSF funding would support the reduced student registration rate that is $400
below the delegate registration rate. At this time, 27 graduate students
representing 11 different institutions have registered for the conference, and
more are expected. By exposing students to research presentations and the
opportunity to network with top industry experts, the conference will encourage
more people to choose biomass as an area for study. This is an educational event
that many of these students might not be able to attend without NSF support.