* 1153935
* In Situ Experimentation to Determine the Impact of Sinking Particles on Dentrification and Anammox in Suboxic Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Allan Devol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2016
* USD 674,549.00

Studies have suggested that remineralization of particulate organic matter is
linked to nitrogen loss processes, namely denitrification and anammox, which
together represent the largest uncertainties in the nitrogen cycle of the ocean.
Unfortunately, no direct evidence has been gathered to relate sinking particle
dynamics to nitrogen cycling in suboxic zones. To remedy this oversight,
scientists from the University of Washington plan to carry out in-situ
experiment with a novel drifting trap-incubation system capable of incubating
water with and without sinking particles and simultaneously measure organic
matter remineralization with isotopic pairing experiments to determine nitrogen
cycling. The novel incubators, coupled with the enhanced isotopic labeling
approach, will yield the first in situ rate measurements for these processes in
the Eastern Tropical North and South Pacific. In addition, the researchers plan
to do metabolomic profiling to evaluate the concentrations and turnover of
metabolically important compounds used in the various nitrogen pathways, as well
as proteomic evaluation of the production and abundance of enzymes pertinent to
specific nitrogen pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of the broader
impacts, this study will lead to the development of a new research tool that can
help further our knowledge of the nitrogen cycle. The scientists will work with
the University of Washington's Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence-
Ocean Learning Communities Program and the Society for the Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science Program to create a dual-language
website aimed at explaining the research to be carried out to undergraduates
both in the United States, as well as Mexico and Peru. One graduate student and
two undergraduate students would be supported and trained as part of this
project.