* 1153861
* RUI:  Gas and Aerosol Phase Chemistry of Multi-Generation Isoprene Oxidation Products
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Matthew Elrod, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2017
* USD 355,090.00

The atmospheric oxidation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) influences the
production of tropospheric ozone and secondary organic aerosol (SOA) with
consequences for human health and global climate. Isoprene emitted by vegetation
is the dominant VOC in many environments. However, both the ozone- and SOA-
forming potential of isoprene remains uncertain. Modeled ozone production from
isoprene is highly sensitive to the uncertain mechanistic representation of
nitrogen oxides (NOx). In addition, "bottom-up" calculations based on isoprene
emission data and chemical mechanisms underestimate SOA concentrations in
isoprene-dominated environments. These gaps in understanding constrain the
accuracy of air pollution and climate models. While the initial set of reactions
that follow the OH radical attack on isoprene have been reasonably well
characterized, the subsequent chemical processing of these first generation
products (also known multi-generation steps) have received considerably less
study and many of the key kinetics parameters that are required for quantitative
prediction have not been characterized. This project will investigate the gas-
and particulate-phase chemistry of the multi-generation isoprene oxidation
products. Specifically, it will evaluate (a) the kinetics and products of the OH
radical-initiated reactions of the organic nitrates formed as first-generation
products of OH + isoprene, (b) kinetics and products of the OH radical-initiated
reactions of dihydroxy-epoxides formed from OH + isoprene, (c) products of OH +
methacrolein, including the H-atom abstraction/OH addition branching ratio, and
(d) the esterification kinetics of 2-methylglyceric acid and
2-nitrato-2-methylglyceric acid (previously identified as components of
isoprene-derived secondary organic aerosol), and of the reverse hydrolysis
reaction. The gas-phase experiments will utilize the turbulent flow chemical
ionization mass spectrometry technique, which allows OH and NOx levels to be
controlled independently. The particulate-phase experiments will utilize bulk
solution/NMR and aerosol chamber/aerosol scrubbing/NMR
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of this research effort will help
improve current predictive capabilities for atmospheric chemistry and thereby
facilitate informed public policy decisions regarding mitigation strategies for
regional air pollution and climate change. This project will also contribute
towards the development of the human resources necessary for the nation's
scientific enterprise. The direct involvement of undergraduate students in
original research will help prepare them for future careers in science as well
as contribute to the increasingly interdisciplinary nature of the science
experience at Oberlin College. The project will take place at an institution
that is a national leader in the area of undergraduate science education and
research and that has had an enduring commitment to increasing the number of
underrepresented students in the sciences.