* 1153980
* Cuddy Decay: Observation of Subthermocline Eddy Spindown and Property Exchange
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Charles Eriksen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 897,405.00

This is a project to study the decay of a subthermocline eddy as it travels from
near its generation site in the California Undercurrent (CU) over the
continental slope into offshore waters. The CU, a prominent element of the
California Current System (CCS), transports relatively warm, saline, anoxic
Pacific Equatorial Water north along the North American west coast. Temperature
and salinity generally decrease both poleward and offshore, while dissolved
oxygen increases, as the CU spins off long lived eddies transporting its water
properties away from the CCS into the eastern Pacific. These eddies, nicknamed
cuddies for their origin, have been tracked by solitary floats for many months
and surveyed hydrographically on occasion, but their structural evolution as
they decay has yet to be observed. They take the form of submesoscale coherent
vorticies and are largely invisible to remote sensing techniques due both to
their small size and subsurface intensification. The extent to which cuddies
contribute to broad scale property gradients in the CCS and beyond is tied to
the evolution of their radial-vertical structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will use a pair of extended-range Seagliders to frequently survey a cuddy
over many months as it travels. A cuddy will be identified and located for study
by an ongoing Seaglider repeat transect, separately supported by NOAA and
maintained by University of Washington colleagues. With improvements to
performance efficiency, Seagliders are projected to be capable of operating as
long as a year while transmitting slanting profiles of upper-ocean structure
ashore in near real time. Simultaneous transects at 4-6 km resolution along
nearly perpendicular paths repeated every week or less over the course of ten
months appear feasible, with an additional two months of mission time devoted to
reaching from and returning to the coastal region for launch and recovery. The
sequence of approximately 50 three-dimensional surveys of a cuddy will be used
to observe its decay rate, associated frequency and intensity of fine scale
stratification features, and changes in vertical-radial
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observed structural evolution of a
subsurface eddy will be used to infer the exchange rates of physical, chemical,
and biological properties with the surrounding waters. While cuddies are widely
suspected to be important agents of property exchange in the CCS, the
observations proposed will be the first to describe a cuddy in four dimensions
over an appreciable portion of its lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will contribute to understanding of eddy transport in general and the role of
submesoscale coherent vorticies in particular in transmitting eastern boundary
region properties to the ocean interior. Implications of eddy transport are
important not only to physical distributions in the ocean, but to chemical and
biological ones as well. The project will train a graduate student to be expert
in an emerging observational technique as well as in the role of eddies in ocean
circulation.