* 1154520
* Quantitative Excellence in Science and Technology (QuEST) Scholarship Program to Improve Transfer Success
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Laura Wetzel, Eckerd College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2018
* USD 579,236.00

The Quantitative Excellence in Science and Technology (QuEST) Scholars program
is facilitating the academic success of transfer students who enter the college
intending to major in science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM).
It is designed to (1) create and nurture cohorts of STEM transfer students
through specifically designed and carefully monitored academic and social-
support activities; and (2) create the College Student Tutors and Resources for
Science (C-STARS) peer tutoring program to help students struggling with
quantitative subjects presented in STEM courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholarships of up to $8,000 are being offered to transfer
students from their initial matriculation as sophomores or juniors through
graduation in one of the STEM majors at the college: Biology, Biochemistry,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Geosciences, Marine Science, Mathematics, or
Physics. STEM faculty help select QuEST Scholars based on financial need,
academic potential, and demonstrated dedication to a STEM subject. Seven new
QuEST Scholars are being chosen in three consecutive academic years; continued
funding for each selected Scholar is based on continued financial need, positive
academic performance, and progress towards completing a STEM major.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Four STEM faculty members are teamed
with the Associate Dean for Institutional Effectiveness to implement the QuEST
and C-STARS programs to improve STEM student learning and retention at the
college. In their first year, STEM transfer students participate in a new QuEST
Seminar course, which focuses on the roll that quantitative materials play in
all STEM majors, thereby creating a true cohort over diverse disciplines. In
addition, the seminar explores STEM learning strategies, science ethics,
interdisciplinary research, and career development. To improve academic success
in STEM courses, the project is also creating the C-STARS program, in which
carefully screened and continually trained upper level STEM majors assist
students who are experiencing difficulty with quantitative elements of STEM
courses. C-STARS peer tutors participate in weekly instructional sessions on
successful pedagogical approaches. The faculty team is developing the seminar
course, increasing QuEST Scholar learning through new support services including
study groups, peer mentors, and an intervention network to respond to transfer
student needs, and transforming the STEM learning environment for all students
by creating the C-STARS peer tutoring program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The research-based initiatives, directed by experienced and informed
faculty, are helping to improve the retention of transfer students intending to
major in STEM areas at the college. The project is broadly disseminating
findings from the QuEST Scholars, Seminar, and C-STARS programs to help other
institutions enhance STEM student retention at the undergraduate level.