* 1154324
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Cluster Detection Based on Contiguity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Alan Murray, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2014
* USD 170,455.00

The identification of spatial clusters is an important and critical task in many
scientific fields. Areas which exhibit a raised incidence of some phenomenon
(e.g. disease or crime) are often targeted for increased intervention efforts,
such as additional public health safeguards, increased allocations of human
resources, or modification to existing public policies to deter negative
outcomes. However, the ability to precisely identify significant spatial
clusters continues to be challenging. Problems associated with imperfections in
spatial data, geographic scale, cluster shape and size, and temporal dynamics
often co-mingle to create a somewhat chaotic environment for developing reliable
and robust solution approaches. Therefore, while there is no single "best"
spatial clustering approach for identifying areas of elevated risk, several
techniques, including spatial scan statistics, remain popular and widely used in
geography, epidemiology, and criminology for identifying hot spots. This project
will develop cutting-edge mathematical and statistical approaches combined with
exploratory spatial data analysis techniques to provide a more accurate and
precise framework for identifying irregularly shaped spatial clusters for hot
spot detection. Specifically, this research will develop more rigorous
contiguity and relative contiguity-based spatial cluster detection approaches
for identifying clusters with maximum statistical significance while
quantitatively tracking their geographic structure. In addition, a suite of
innovative diagnostics will be developed to better recognize errors of
misidentification, such as missing high-risk units or including extra non-
significant units in the detected clusters. The goal is to bring these developed
methods to bear on the problem of identifying and assessing spatial clusters
over a wide range of spatial scales and application
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon preliminary research, this team is
poised to develop the next generation of spatial clustering approaches and make
major advancements to the STEM fields of applied mathematics, operations
research, epidemiology, and geographic information science. Further, the
substantive components of this project will generate new empirical evidence to
help inform local and regional public policy and public health issues regarding
alcohol outlets and their relationship to violence and morbidity. Results of
this project also support vulnerable populations and places that are socially
and economically disenfranchised in two major metropolitan areas (Cincinnati, OH
and Philadelphia, PA). Published research and participation in major
international conferences, in combination with websites, forums, and sponsored
activities hosted by both Drexel and ASU will enable effective dissemination of
project results to a wide audience.