* 1154914
* Changes in Family Structure and Economic Well-being in Twenty Nations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* James Raymo, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/2015
* USD 220,000.00

Family Formation and Economic Well-being

The goal of this project is to advance our understanding of relationships
between family behaviors and economic well-being. To this end, we use comparable
data from nearly two dozen industrialized countries to describe socioeconomic
differentials (measured primarily by education) in family behaviors and to
evaluate how particular family transitions are linked to economic well-being. We
assess whether these relationships are primarily due to educational differences
in the prevalence of particular family transitions (i.e., social selection) or
to the consequences of family transitions for economic well-being. We also
consider the extent to which observed differences across countries may depend on
characteristics such as public policies or aggregate economic circumstances.

The primary motivation for this study is evidence that growing socioeconomic
differences in family behavior have contributed to increasing income inequality
in the U.S. For example, the increasing concentration of family behaviors such
as nonmarital childbearing and divorce among those with less education?and
marital childbearing and stable marriages among those with more education?have
been linked to growing differences in family income. These patterns may also
have important implications for the well-being of children and the
intergenerational transmission of advantage and disadvantage, given the
importance of parental income for healthy child development. Despite the
centrality of these issues to current family research and related policy
discussions in the U.S., the lack of related cross-national comparative research
has precluded evaluation of the extent to which increasing socioeconomic
differentials in family behaviors represent a common pattern across
industrialized countries (which may be perpetuating inequality), or whether this
phenomenon is unique to the U.S. and hence represents another form of "American
exceptionalism."

By using data from a large number of industrialized countries covering a wide
range of geographic, economic, political and social contexts (Northern Europe,
Western Europe, Eastern Europe, Southern Europe, East Asia, and Anglo-Saxon
countries), this project will provide a comprehensive evaluation of the
generality of observed patterns of family change and economic wellbeing in the
U.S. Counterfactual analyses and decomposition tools allow for assessment of the
extent to which cross-country differences reflect (a) educational differences in
the prevalence of particular family transitions, and/or (b) differentials in
linkages between specific family transitions and economic well-being. The use of
innovative multilevel modeling techniques also allows for assessment of the
extent to which cross-national differences are related to differences in public
policies, inequality, and other theoretically-relevant factors measured at the
country level. The broader impacts of this study include advancement of
scientific understanding of the relationships between family transitions and
subsequent economic well-being; broad, interdisciplinary dissemination of this
new knowledge; development of international, collaborative research networks;
and the enhancement of pre-doctoral training in comparative research methods.
The cross-national comparative approach employed in this project is critical for
understanding key sources of variation in the economic well-being of families
and for evaluating the role of public policy in reducing inequality. Insights
generated by this project are also important for understanding the generality of
emerging patterns of family change and inequality in the U.S. and for the
development of broader theories of family change and variation.