* 1154165
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cross-Classified, Multiple-Membership Modeling for Multilevel, Nonnested Data
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Wei Pan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 1,500.00

Data collected in many social sciences often are characterized by multilevel or
nested structures in which a lower-level unit belongs to one and only one
higher-level unit; for instance, students attend one and only one school, and
patients are treated by one and only one health care provider. Conventional
multilevel modeling for nested data is now well understood and frequently
applied in different research areas. However, many data structures are
multilevel but do not qualify as nested: Students may attend more than one
school, and patients may be treated by more than one health care provider.
Cross-classified, multiple-membership (CCMM) modeling, a general statistical
framework for modeling multilevel, nonnested data, was set forth by Browne,
Goldstein, and Rasbash (2001). It has a wide range of potential applications in
many research areas, including education, health research and epidemiology,
sociology, and human genetics. Though applications of CCMM modeling have started
to appear in the literature, the statistical aspects of CCMM modeling have not
been investigated extensively, and the practical experiences of model building
are still very limited. This dissertation research will evaluate the estimation
performance of CCMM modeling and investigate the consequences of ignoring
multilevel, nonnested data structures using both real data analyses and Monte
Carlo simulation. CCMM modeling will be applied to the Early Childhood
Longitudinal Study Kindergarten Cohort (ECLS-K) data to model reading and
mathematics growth from kindergarten to fifth grade after incorporating student
mobility. Guided by real data analyses, a comprehensive Monte Carlo simulation
will be conducted to evaluate the estimation performance of CCMM modeling and
consequences of ignoring CCMM data structures under manipulated data conditions
that emulate real data structures. User-friendly computer program codes and
step-by-step tutorials will be written to facilitate the use of CCMM modeling in
applied research.

This research includes not only a state-of-the-art review of advanced
statistical modeling for complex data structures and their applications, but
also the first systematic investigation of the statistical performance of CCMM
modeling for multilevel nonnested data using Bayesian estimation. It will
demonstrate the flexibility of CCMM modeling in analyzing multilevel nonnested
data and lead to advancements of scientific knowledge regarding appropriate
modeling of complex data in real research settings. The real data analyses with
ECLS-K will show the applicability of CCMM modeling in applied research and help
educators and researchers to better understand how student mobility affects
early reading and mathematics development. The Monte Carlo simulation study will
provide evidence regarding the statistical performance of CCMM modeling and
methodological instructions on CCMM model building for the research community,
which eventually will facilitate translating innovative quantitative research
methods into rigorous applied research in the social sciences and beyond. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is provided to enable
a promising student to establish a strong, independent research career.