* 1154071
* Test Between Thermal and Tectonic Hypotheses for North Atlantic Seafloor Spreading Geometry Reorganization
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Armann Hoskuldsson, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2017
* USD 450,191.00

There is a massive ongoing reorganization of North Atlantic seafloor spreading
geometry occurring at present south of Iceland. The previous orthogonal
ridge/transform staircase geometry typical of slow-spreading ridge systems is
being progressively changed to the present non-segmented oblique spreading
geometry on the Reykjanes Ridge as transform faults are successively eliminated.
This reorganization is presently interpreted as a thermal phenomenon, with a
pulse of warmer mantle expanding away from the Iceland plume causing a
progressive change in subaxial mantle rheology from brittle to ductile, so that
transform faults can no longer be maintained. This explanation is nearly
universally assumed to be true &amp; is used to infer important conclusions
about deep Earth &amp; lithospheric geodynamics that are also nearly universally
assumed to be true.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will undertake a month-long marine
geophysical expedition to collect the multibeam, magnetics &amp; gravity data
that would provide a definitive test between the fundamentally different thermal
&amp; tectonic hypotheses for exactly how the Iceland plume (or whatever form of
mantle convection or heterogeneity creates Iceland) caused the reorganization of
the Mid-Atlantic Ridge south of Iceland. An important result of this test will
be that modelers will either be confident that their thermal Reykjanes Ridge
reorganization models are providing accurate information about Earth's behavior,
or that they can confidently begin to model the correct mechanism instead. An
additional benefit of this project will be the first accurate map of the Bight
transform fault/fracture zone complex, known to be an important pathway for
westward flow of North Atlantic mid-water circulation across the Reykjanes Ridge
boundary, an important control on global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Education and Human
Resources&lt;br/&gt;Resolving the origin of this large-scale plate boundary
reorganization has important implications beyond testing a long-held fundamental
assumption of Iceland mantle plume geodynamics. Thermal plume pulses have been
interpreted as leading to regional uplift/subsidence events that modulate ocean
currents and affect climate and sedimentation patterns throughout the North
Atlantic. The proposed study will examine alternative tectonic explanations
related to the mechanism and timing of the sequential elimination of transform
faults in this area and thus has implications for inferred links among these
phenomena. The proposed work will involve significant international
collaboration with Icelandic scientists, as has our previous work in the area.
The project will support a graduate student who will work on the survey data as
a primary part of his/her thesis. As in our previous cruise we plan to mentor
several undergraduate students at sea through the NSF-funded Marine Advanced
Technology Education (MATE) Internship program and thus further NSF education
and human resource development goals. Results will be integrated into classroom
teaching by the P.I.s, and thus disseminated to a fairly wide audience including
many underrepresented minority groups in Hawaii, enhancing scientific
infrastructure. We think that improved understanding of this obviously important
plate boundary reorganization will form an invaluable tool for further research
and teaching, and we will make these data sets available on a project website.
We think a movie of Reykjanes Ridge evolution projected onto a sphere could
ultimately be a valuable teaching aid and museum display.