* 1154606
* Addressing the Gulf Coast Region's Graduation Rate Crisis in Mathematics and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2019
* Lawrence Osborne, Lamar University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 583,096.00

Addressing the Gulf Coast Region's Graduation Rate Crisis - ASCENT in
Mathematics and Computer Science is a collaboration between the Department of
Mathematics and Department of Computer Science at Lamar University. The main
goal of ASCENT is the graduation of outstanding mathematicians and computer
scientists by providing scholarships to community college students who transfer
to Lamar University and to current upper level students to complete bachelor's
degrees in these two disciplines. Each student receives a scholarship of $10,000
annually for two years. In particular, three cohorts of eight ASCENT Scholars
each are served in this five year project. The awarding of these scholarships is
complemented by extensive academic support including a Summer Bridge and
Enrichment program, undergraduate research, multi-level mentoring, and post-
graduation placement. ASCENT is designed to address not only the intrinsic
difficulties of degree completion when faced with financial instability, but
also the well-known difficulties that transfer students experience as they
transition to four-year college life. ASCENT is contributing to the human
capital needed for STEM-based industrial growth in Southeast Texas and the
Greater Houston Area. In addition, the cohort building aspects of this project
can be extended to other student groups. ASCENT is contributing to increase the
number of well-educated and skilled employees from diverse backgrounds,
including minority and first-generation college students, by helping them
graduate in a timely manner.