* 1154661
* The Continous Plankton Recorder (CPR) Survery: Monitoring the Plankton of the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2017
* USD 774,877.00

The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) survey (1931 to present) is the only
long-term and ocean basin wide operational survey of plankton in the world. This
project will provide a continuation of USA support for a further five years,
2011-2016. A continuation of funding by the USA will help maintain core
monitoring by the CPR routes in the western Atlantic from Iceland down to the
eastern margin of the USA. There is a growing awareness that the quality of
marine ecosystems is subject to a wide range of impacts from climate change,
acidification, eutrophication, loss of biodiversity to over fishing. Long-term
observations like the CPR survey are critical in evaluating and quantifying the
scale and effects of such issues as well as providing a macroscale "backbone" to
an ecosystem approach to environmental management. As a long-term program the
main objective of the CPR survey is to maintain the spatial and temporal
integrity of the survey and to continue to add further years to the time series.
Other objectives include: facilitating innovative marine ecological research,
data provision and model validation, contributing to international and
integrated observing systems and to knowledge/policy
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The project will help monitor
and describe the long-term, pelagic variability and diversity in the NW
Atlantic. The data collected during this program will help scientists to
interpret marine biological changes and begin to distinguish between
anthropogenic, climatically forced and natural plankton variability. More
specifically scientific research will be directed along four science themes: (i)
Macroecology and climate change impacts including ocean acidification; (ii)
Biodiversity and changes to ecosystem functionality including monitoring
invasive species; (iii) Sustainable use of marine bioresources; (iv)
Environment, pollution and ecosystem health including monitoring microplastics.
All these four themes are crucial to increasing our scientific understanding of
our changing oceans and are highly relevant USA marine policy requirements.
Throughout the duration of the project it is envisaged that the data collected
will provide invaluable information in addressing these highly topical themes
and understanding these impacts on the marine ecosystems of the NW
Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The broader impact of this
proposed project will be wide and will not only contribute to addressing U.S
marine issues but will also significantly contribute to international programs
such as IGBP/SCOR international programs as well as the Global Ocean Observing
System (GOOS) and Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS). New
technologies have allowed CPR samples to be analyzed using molecular techniques
and collect additional oceanographic information. Products from the survey are
also being used to construct and validate a new generation of ecosystem, fishery
and climate models. Securing the long-term maintenance of the CPR sample archive
as well as the new microbial and metazoan archive will maximize its use by the
wider scientific community by making it available for molecular, biogeochemical
and other studies. SAHFOS has an Associated Researcher Program and education
program and continuously disseminates KT policy with the production of a website
www.sahfos.ac.uk, Annual Reports and Annual Ecological Status Reports.