* 1154940
* Symposium KK: Biomaterials for Tissue Regeneration; Boston, MA; November 28 - December 2, 2011
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Mei Wei, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 09/30/2012
* USD 4,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1154940 PI: Wolf, Sandra ORG: Materials Research
Society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Support for Fall 2011 MRS Symposium
Biomaterials for Tissue Regeneration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT:
Tissue engineering is an emerging field, which has major potential to improve
human health by repairing and maintaining existing organs or regenerating new
ones. This potential can be realized through a combination of a scaffold matrix,
progenitor cells, and/or bioactive agents to form a tissue engineering construct
to promote organ repair. Biomaterials play a crucial role in tissue
regeneration. Although technical advances have been made, success to date has
been limited due to current lack of understanding of the regenerative process in
native tissues, the complexity of the 3D environment, and our ability to
identify and recapitulate the appropriate cues that promote functional cellular
and tissue growth. Understanding and utilization of tissue engineering
scaffolds, scaffold-biomaterials interactions, and in vivo scaffold performance
are central to tissue engineering and regenerative medicine and are closely
related to the scientific interests in the Biomaterials Program (DMR) at the
National Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The aim of
this symposium is to collect and present a broad range of areas in biomaterials
developments for regenerative medicine and to stimulate innovative research
ideas among scientists and researchers from different disciplines.