* 1154420
* CCES, 2012 Panel Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Brian Schaffner, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2015
* USD 510,145.00

This project supports a 2012 pre-and post-election survey that re-interviews
18,000 citizens nationwide who were originally surveyed during the 2010
election. Ultimately, this will result in one of the largest multi-year election
panel surveys ever produced. This panel design provides a way for researchers to
better understand how public opinion, political attitudes, and electoral
behavior change from one election to the next. The large panel provides
sufficient statistical power to measure the dynamics of opinion change within
groups, such as ethnic, economic, or partisan groups or within particular areas
of the country. As a result, the power of this panel provides new insights on a
wide range of research questions. For example, how does the composition of the
electorate change from midterm elections to presidential elections? What is the
impact of redistricting on voter engagement? How does the electorate hold the
government accountable for the economy? And what role do deployments or
casualties play in affecting support for U.S. involvement in foreign conflicts?
The answers to these questions will contribute to our understanding of how to
sustain an informed and engaged citizenry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The panel
dataset produced by this project will be made available to the scholarly
community and will be an important resource for scholars interested in a wide
variety of questions ranging including how attitudes change over time, the
impact of redistricting, and the administration of elections, and will
additionally contribute to the advancement of survey research methods. We
anticipate that the results here will be highly useful in assessing the effects
of shifts in district and precincts on election administration. The PIs will
communicate these results to administrators, especially through the Caltech/MIT
Voting Technology Project and associated activities. Finally, this project
fosters education. This grant supports the production of educational materials
related to the survey, so that faculty can readily integrate this and other
panel studies into their courses and students can use this survey for thesis and
other research.