* 1154493
* The MassBay Scholarship for Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (MSTEM) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Chitra Javdekar, Massachusetts Bay Community College
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 05/31/2018
* USD 347,050.00

The MassBay Scholarship for Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (MSTEM)
program at MassBay Community College supports ten full-time, rising sophomore
STEM scholars that as freshmen maintained a 3.25 science and cumulative GPA;
exhibited strong research and/or engineering skills; demonstrated a passion for
science and/or engineering and a commitment to an industry career and/or
baccalaureate STEM degree; as well as financial need. MSTEM Scholars are
receiving scholarships covering tuition, fees and books; Career Mentoring and
Academic Bridging Workshops; opportunities to secure a summer research
internship relevant to their STEM interest; and intensive and continuous
mentoring that persists after their MSTEM experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program includes a highly replicable, national model that increases
participation by nontraditional scholars who are underrepresented in STEM
academia and careers. MSTEM uses a proven project-based learning model that
engages scholars in authentic research and builds upon established mentoring and
retention processes that foster and sustain nontraditional undergraduate
scholars into STEM careers in ways that expand the pipeline of nontraditional
individuals into the American technology workforce. A major component of the
MSTEM is its partnerships between industry, colleges and universities that
converge to assure the success of scholars.