* 1154855
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding the Role of Trust in Cooperating with Natural Resource Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Alan Tomkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 14,974.00

Natural resource issues are among the most important challenges facing the world
today. In the United States, the U. S. Departments of Interior and Agriculture
and state natural resources authorities are critical in addressing issues like
water shortages and loss of biodiversity. Importantly, these institutions often
lack the resources or legal jurisdiction necessary to require the public to act
in more natural resource friendly ways, especially when private land is
involved. In situations like these, it becomes essential that institutions
develop the public trust necessary to encourage cooperation with their efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers have identified six major reasons for this
trust in natural resources institutions (e.g., trust in others generally,
previous experiences with the institution, etc.); however, these reasons for
trust in natural resource institutions have rarely been directly compared to
identify which are most important for encouraging cooperation. Additionally,
most research fails to test which reasons are most important for which "kinds"
of people (e.g., people who know a lot about the issues or are particularly
concerned about the environment, etc.). The current research will test the
relationships between trust and intention to cooperate or actual cooperation
behaviors in two samples of land owners. The first sample will involve a large
representative sample of land owners with more than 20 acres of rural land in
Nebraska who will be asked about their willingness to cooperate with a Nebraska
natural resources effort by granting access to their land for conservation. The
second sample will include Nebraska land owners who are being asked specifically
to cooperate with a Nebraska prairie restoration effort and who will then be
followed to identify whether they actually do cooperate. The results of these
surveys will help improve the interaction of institutions and the public in
meeting natural resource challenges.