* 1154321
* Collaborative Research: Ecological Genomics of Stress Response in an Intertidal Copepod
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Suzanne Edmands, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* scott santos
* 04/30/2017
* USD 307,162.00

A major goal of marine biological research is to understand the distribution and
abundance of organisms in light of their adaptations to the environment. Such an
understanding is critical to predicting how environmental changes will alter
oceanic productivity and ecosystem services. Tolerance of physical extremes
plays a major role in determining species distributions. Although the
physiological tolerances of many marine animals have been well studied, the
extent to which these tolerances can be adjusted by evolutionary change remains
essentially unknown. Consequently, we often have knowledge of how individual
organisms respond to environmental stresses but little understanding of whether
existing genetic variation within species will permit rapid evolutionary
responses to stressors such as global warming or ocean
acidification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Copepods are small crustaceans that are
among the most numerous animals on the planet and are key components of marine
and freshwater food webs. Despite their ecological importance, only limited
genetic data are available for any copepod species. In order to understand how
these organisms can adapt to changes in their environment over both long and
short time periods, this project will focus on obtaining genome sequences for
the tidepool copepod, Tigriopus californicus, and then will use this genomic
information to understand how the species responds to environmental change. The
study has three major scientific components. First, the genome will be sequenced
from four geographically isolated populations to allow comparison of genome-wide
population differences. Target populations will be selected to provide contrasts
in population responses to two key environmental stresses, thermal stress and
salinity stress. The second component will be to examine which genes respond to
these environmental stresses to help determine the mechanisms used to survive
these two stresses. Finally, the third component will use laboratory crosses and
genetic mapping approaches to look at what regions of the genome confer
tolerance to salinity and temperature stress. By integrating across all three
aspects, this study will yield insights into how this species (and likely other
organisms) respond to basic environmental stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a
broader level, the decoding of a complete copepod genome will provide a key
resource for understanding the basic biology of other species of this
ecologically important group, with sequence data made available through standard
databases and a newly-developed website
(http://sio.ucsd.edu/Research/copepod_genomics/). This project includes
extensive outreach and will bring a public window into how modern marine science
is conducted through programs for elementary school children and exhibits for
visitors to public aquaria. Outreach will also be extended to the broader marine
sciences community to help show how genomics can be used to study fundamental
questions in marine systems that traditionally have not utilized genetic
techniques. Finally, the research will directly train a number of young
scientists in this exciting combination of marine science, physiology, and
genomics.