* 1154030
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Responses to Local Resource Extraction
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Mary Anglin, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2013
* USD 16,715.00

University of Kentucky doctoral student Julie Shepherd-Powell, with the guidance
of Dr. Mary Anglin, will conduct ethnographic research on variability in
community responses to local natural resource extraction. The primary research
questions are: (1) In this context, how do residents conceptualize and
understand the meaning of "environment;" (2) How do residents articulate and
respond to environmental concerns? Preliminary research suggests that many
residents position themselves somewhere between the two sides of the debate, a
situation whose causes and consequences are not well understood. Findings from
this research will have broad application that will extend beyond the particular
case to be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in the
central Appalachian region of the United States. This is a good site to study
response diversity because for many people living in this region, coal
extraction falls into a grey area. Mountaintop removal creates local pollution
and other environmental challenges, but it also provides some of the only
living-wage jobs in an economically depressed area. The researcher will conduct
12 months of fieldwork in a community in southwest Virginia. The community is
the site of both mountaintop removal mining and underground coal mining, so
comparative data can be collection. The researcher will collect data by focusing
on responses to a grassroots campaign to reduce resource extraction pollution.
She will employ a range of social science research methods including semi-
structured interviews with community residents and organizers, participant
observation at community events, and archival research at state environmental
and mining regulatory agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this
research will advance scientific understanding of complex socio-environmental
issues and elucidate some of the economic, social, and cultural contexts that
can produce diverse responses and make environmental problems hard to resolve. A
particular contribution of this project will be to learn more about the space of
public discussion and understanding that may develop between straight opposition
and support of environmental issues. Funding this research also supports the
education of a social scientist.