* 1154920
* WORKSHOP: The American Constitution: A Conference on the 225th Anniversary of the Ratification
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Peter Hoffer, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 03/31/2013
* USD 22,963.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The American Constitution: A Conference on the 225th
Anniversary of the Ratification &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The
birth of the American republic has been studied by scholars in history, law,
political science, and economics. Despite over two centuries of popular and
scholarly study of the Founding Era, the integration of theory and data is just
beginning. This project supports a two a two-day conference that examines
whether established theory and data analysis might improve research on the
American Founding. Coinciding with the 225th anniversary of the ratification of
the Constitution, the conference will host a number of political scientists and
economists who use statistical and spatial scaling techniques as well as
historians, law professors and experts in early American political thought who
understand the history and legal traditions behind the event. The goal will be
to attain a more scientific understanding of the American Founding that is well
informed by history and law. Participating scholars will discuss the best ways
to test conjectures about the American Founding, what data is needed for the
next generation of studies, and the viability of applying quantitative methods
to an event over two hundred years old. The conference will also disseminate an
extensive data set on delegate votes at the Constitutional Convention gathered
with support from the National Science Foundation (Dougherty and Heckelman
2010). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;To assure that the
conference attains the broadest possible impact, expert presentations will be
made available via webcasts, faculty from traditionally under represented
institutions will be recruited through an open call for papers, graduate
students from the host and other universities will be among the full
participants, and undergraduates will have an opportunity to present their
research in an undergraduate poster session. This will allow students to learn
directly from the experts and to get feedback on their own ideas about the
American Founding. All sessions will be open to the public, which will be
advertised throughout the region.