* 1154827
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Under the radar or under arrest: How does contact with the juvenile justice system impact delinquency and academic achievement?
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Jordan Bechtold, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 07/31/2014
* USD 15,000.00

With over two million youth arrested annually, it is critical to understand how
contact with the juvenile justice system impacts development. Though prior
studies have found that contact with the system - typically measured as an
arrest or a court appearance - might be related to undesirable outcomes (e.g.,
high school dropout, adult unemployment, adult crime), methodological
limitations (e.g., biased sampling, the use of existing retrospective panel and
cross-sectional datasets) in prior studies render the interpretations of these
findings tentative. Furthermore, prior studies have yet to demonstrate how or
why this contact precedes undesirable outcomes and whether the impact of contact
varies developmentally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although youth who violate the law
are typically processed by the juvenile justice system, many youth who engage in
the same illegal behaviors go undetected by law enforcement. As such, this study
builds on the limitations in prior studies by recruiting and comparing two
groups of similarly delinquent youth: (1) youth who are processed by the
juvenile justice system; and (2) youth who evade law enforcement. In particular,
this study follows these youth for 6 months and investigates: (1) whether
contact is, in fact, related to subsequent delinquency and academic achievement;
(2) whether contact is more detrimental for younger youth compared with older
youth; and (3) how this contact is related to subsequent delinquency and
academic outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this study can be used to
target two potential loci for change: the juvenile offenders and the justice
systems that serve them. In so doing, these data have the potential to inform
public policies that might deflect at-risk youth from the revolving door of the
juvenile justice system.