* 1154161
* Bridge Expansion Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Susanna Wei, St Joseph's University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2016
* USD 595,887.00

The Pathways to Careers in Mathematics and Computer Science (PACMACS) Bridge
Expansion Program is a comprehensive package of financial, academic, and social
support offered to undergraduates pursuing baccalaureate degrees in mathematics,
actuarial science and/or computer science. Students are recruited from
participants in pre-college programs at the college and incoming students. Once
admitted to the university, students obtain financial support through the
University Financial Aid Office and S-STEM funding. 18 students in three cohorts
of 6 students are being provided annual awards of $10,000 each. Academic support
includes faculty mentors, upper level undergraduate student mentors, tutoring
services, problem solving workshops, and individualized attention in small
classes. Social support includes seminars on college life and cultural diversity
and peer support groups. Career support includes seminars on relevant careers,
panel discussions with recent alumni, summer internships in local industry and
the resources of the University Career Development Center. All support services
and scholarships are being continued by the college after the award period to
insure that all participants complete their degrees. By participating in this
program, students are able to successfully transition from high school to
rigorous undergraduate baccalaureate programs in the targeted areas; obtain
degrees in these disciplines; pursue careers in science and technology; and
hopefully, remain in the Philadelphia metropolitan area and become role models
in their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Although there
are many pre-college programs designed to strengthen mathematical skills and
raise student interest in mathematics and computer science, there is little
support to assist students to transition into rigorous academic programs in
these disciplines. This transition is especially difficult for students from
public urban high schools with large minority populations. Many of the students
are first generation college students and lack role models and family support
systems. This program builds on the foundation laid by the pre-college programs
and continues the academic and social support necessary for successful retention
of this cohort of students. The leadership group has extensive experience with a
pre-college program in mathematics and computer science, a program that targets
women, and summer research programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project allows students from diverse backgrounds with limited educational and
financial means to acquire the necessary skills to become a part of the
challenging and rapidly evolving fields of mathematical and computer sciences.
The students targeted for scholarships may otherwise not receive a college
education and their talent may be lost to society and themselves. Successful
graduates have the education and training to pursue careers in these
disciplines, serve as role models to their peers, and thus increase
participation by underrepresented groups in the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The program serves as a model
for other colleges to strengthen the connection between their pre-college and
undergraduate programs.