* 1154423
* S-STEM at SUU
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Jana Lunt, Southern Utah University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2017
* USD 580,000.00

Through this S-STEM project, Southern Utah University (SUU) is recruiting and
sustaining a cohort of financially needy and academically talented students in
the STEM disciplines. SUU is a public university in the Utah Higher Education
System with a student body of approximately 8,000 students. Located in a high
desert valley at the junction of the Mohave, the Colorado Plateau and the Rocky
Mountains, the SUU service area largely consists of isolated rural communities,
Native American Reservation land, and National and State Park land. The S-STEM
at SUU program targets first-generation college students, Title I school
graduates, and students from minority populations and is awarding 20
scholarships to students majoring in mathematics, engineering, biology, geology,
chemistry, or technology. Ultimately, S-STEM at SUU is enabling scholarship
recipients to pursue their degree in a STEM discipline, and then attend graduate
school or be placed in a career within their discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S-STEM at SUU program is attracting and recruiting
students who are committed to a STEM field and have demonstrated intellectual
promise, but come from populations of students who historically struggle at the
university without additional financial and academic support. Beyond the
scholarships, the cohort of scholarship recipients is registered for a one-
credit university course that meets periodically throughout each semester.
Through their meetings, the cohort facilitates community building through
career-related and academic seminars. Examples of seminar topics include
training in responsible conduct of research, mentoring and tutoring, workshops
for the Graduate Record Examinations, résumé writing, and mock interviews.
Student scholars also have the opportunity to participate in undergraduate
research and are able to share their research in these forums. Mentoring is
provided by SUU professors in the scholars' respective disciplines through
academic advising, aiding in such things as undergraduate research and
assistance with internships. Also, senior students who are members of the cohort
are encouraged to engage in mentoring junior members through tutoring,
conducting seminars, or serving as a Teaching Assistant for university credit or
additional financial remuneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S-STEM at SUU
program augments STEM workforce and scientific skills in rural and isolated
areas of Southern Utah. In particular, SUU actively secures internships for
science, engineering, and mathematics students through the Intergovernmental
Internship Cooperative (IIC) and the local Alliance for Education. The IIC gives
students an opportunity to do internships as undergraduates with the government,
helping them to learn more about state and federal natural resource and land
management agencies in southern Utah and northern Arizona. The Alliance for
Education is a partnership with the national parks in the area. This formal
memorandum of understanding with Bryce Canyon National Park and the Zion Group
(Zion National Park, Cedar Breaks National Monument and Pipe Spring National
Monument) provides a world-class education and research venue for SUU faculty
and students.