* 1154978
* Tracking Sea-level Source Contributions: A Hemispheric Approach to High Resolution Sea-level Variation Over the Last Two Millennia
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 05/31/2015
* USD 252,601.00

Accurate estimates of sea-level rise in the pre-satellite era are needed to
provide appropriate context for 21st century projections and to validate
geophysical and climate models. Exploring geographic trends in sea level are
critical for this because sea-level changes are not globally uniform and involve
isostatic deformation of the solid Earth along with gravitational and rotational
changes driven by the exchange of mass between oceans and ice sheets. The aim of
the study is to produce high-resolution reconstructions of sea-level change for
the past two millennia along the Atlantic coasts of South Africa and Argentina.
Relative sea levels along these coastlines are influenced by melting of both the
Greenland and Western Antarctic Ice Sheets (GIS and WAIS). Four hypothetical
hypotheses related to the timing and magnitude of sea-level changes: (1) The
magnitude of sea-level rise since AD ~1850 is greater in Argentina and South
Africa than New England which may indicate more ice-melt contribution from the
GIS; (2) The magnitude of the deceleration in relative sea-level rise associated
with the Little Ice Age (c. AD 1500-1850) is greater in New England then in
South Africa or Argentina; (3) The magnitude of relative sea-level rise during
the Medieval Climate Anomaly (c. AD 1000-1500) increased more in New England
then in South Africa and Argentina; and (4) The magnitude of relative sea-level
change prior to AD 1000 was slower than that since AD 1000 to present. New
microfossil-based transfer functions approach to sea-level reconstruction in
salt-marsh sediments will be used ot develop a high-resolution record. This
approach combined with a suite of complementary dating methods affords the
ability to precisely constrain the chronology (decadal to centennial age
resolution) of subtle changes in sea level. In this project, high-resolution
relative sea-level reconstructions spanning the past 2000 years will be obtained
from South Africa and Argentina. And compared to existing records from
&lt;br/&gt;New England after they have been corrected for glacial isostatic
adjustment (GIA) and steric influences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
lead to an increased understanding of the driving mechanisms of sea-level change
and could enhance predictions of 21st century sea-level rise and thus has
important societal relevance. The project will support an early career PI and
graduate students.