* 1154923
* Collaborative Research: Origin, Dynamics and Transport Characteristics of the Large-Scale Eddy-Driven Patterns
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Igor Kamenkovich, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2016
* USD 348,599.00

One of the principal consequences of mesoscale variability in the ocean is the
spontaneous generation of coherent, slowly evolving patterns on spatial scales
significantly exceeding the dominant scale of primary baroclinic instability.
These Large-Scale Eddy-Driven Patterns (LEDPs) are generated and maintained by
mesoscale eddies and preliminary results indicate that LEDPs represent a
substantial fraction of variability in the oceans. Furthermore, LEDPs can play
an important role in the transport of heat, salinity, bio-geo-chemical tracers,
and momentum. Thus, it is vital to improve our understanding of these indirect
eddy effects, especially in light of the need for the increased accuracy of
future climate projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analytical models for the
interaction between primary (mesoscale) and secondary (LEDP) structures will be
developed using multi-scale techniques. Multi-scale methods are ideally suited
to this task due to their transparency and ability to represent interactions
between phenomena operating on distinct spatial and temporal scales. The novelty
of our approach lies in the application of multi-scale methods to the primary
eddy patterns realized in typical oceanic flows. This will make it possible to
offer a realistic description of LEDPs, directly applicable to, and testable by,
observations and comprehensive models. Theoretical models will be guided and
validated by a hierarchy of numerical simulations with an increasing degree of
realism, which will also focus on the properties and dynamics of LEDPs.
Analytical studies, in turn, will be used extensively for interpretation of the
numerical results. The combination of these approaches will reveal the complex
interplay between mesoscale eddies and LEDPs, not possible through numerical
simulation alone, and describe the eddy transport characteristics induced by the
action of LEDPs. Specific research tasks include the analysis of: the formation
mechanisms of LEDPs; the anisotropic dispersion of tracers induced by these
structures; and the effects of the background state on LEDP
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanic variability plays an important, but
poorly understood role in climate dynamics. Lateral eddy transfer is a
fundamental component of the oceanic transport heat, nutrients, pollutants and
other tracers. Thus, advances in the understanding of eddy-induced transport and
low frequency variability in the oceans are needed to improve climate prediction
capabilities, ultimately leading to societal benefits. Inferences from the
theory and model runs will aid in the interpretation of observational data sets
and in the planning of future observational strategies aimed at explaining large
scale flow variability. In addition to its oceanographic importance, this study
will have significant implications for fundamental fluid mechanics, geophysics
and climate science. During this project, one Ph.D. student at RSMAS and a
postdoctoral associate at NPS will participate in the planned research
activities and develop expertise in eddying ocean dynamics. In addition, two
graduate (MS) Navy students will perform their thesis research at NPS on topics
related to this proposal at no cost to the project.