* 1154738
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Culture, Change & Chronic Stress in Lowland Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Clarence Gravlee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 19,684.00

University of Florida doctoral candidate, Alan Schultz, supervised by Dr.
Clarence Gravlee, will undertake research on the relationship between stress and
socio-cultural change. The research will be carried out among a group of
foraging-farmers, the Tsimane' of lowland Bolivia, who are at an early stage of
exposure to markets and non-traditional cultures. The researcher will try to
solve the puzzle of why Tsimane' have some of the lowest known rates of short-
term stress biomarkers and related adverse health outcomes despite two decades
of increasing market exposure, which is usually associated with increased stress
and worsening health.

The study will take up these topics using a variety of social science methods,
including long-term participant observation focused on local experiences and
interpretations of market exposure and social stratification. Key points of
focus are the psychosocial stress pathway and culture's role in shifts of the
balance between stressors and resistive resources. Structured ethnography will
be used to isolate cultural models of social status, social relations and
material lifestyle. The project culminates in an epidemiologic survey that tests
individual beliefs and behavior against shared ideals linking these to the
stress process and outcomes such as blood pressure and a retrospective stress
biomarker, hair cortisol. The project also includes an innovative investigation
of the impact of local ontology on the effects of market integration and an
examination of the impacts of the local research economy that has resulted from
the fact that as one of the world's last relatively isolated populations, the
Tsimane' have hosted researchers for decades.

The research is innovative because it links culture and meaning to individual
biological and health outcomes in a population that has so far remained
resistant to chronic stress and related poor health. More generally, isolation
of the roles that culture and meaning have played in limiting chronic stress
during market exposure will suggest alternative areas of inquiry on chronic
stress in other populations. Supporting the research also supports the education
of a graduate student.