* 1154305
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Integrating construal level theory into risk communication
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Robyn Wilson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2014
* USD 10,947.00

Individuals can perceive the same risk in different ways, construing it either
more abstractly or concretely. It is currently not known how one's level of
construal affects behavioral response to risks in the real world. The objective
of this project is to test if the effects of construal level on decision making
found in the laboratory can be replicated with personally relevant risks and
environmental problems. Specifically, we are studying if presenting an abstract
risk more concretely increases behavioral change and risk perception by
presenting the risk of radon in the home in a message frame that reduces
psychological distance. Additionally, we are examining if putting the decision
maker into an abstract construal level increases behavioral change and risk
perception by including a construal level manipulation prior to the risk message
to ensure that the risk is being presented on a congruent level of abstraction.
Finally, the research is determining which is more effective at bringing about
behavioral change by focusing on the risk or the mitigating behavior required by
testing two different message frames in an experimental survey. The research
demonstrates the most effective way to use construal levels in risk
communication to increase their effectiveness and paint a fuller, more nuanced
picture of the role of construal levels in real world decision making.

This research is producing real and meaningful benefits to both public and
environmental health. The general framework tested here (encouraging individuals
to incur a short term cost in exchange for a greater long term gain) is the same
for a myriad of other health risks such as smoking, HIV testing, and sun
exposure. An improved method of communicating these risks may result in an
increase in the adoption of healthier behaviors, leading to more lives saved and
healthier lives lived.