* 1154082
* The influence of plant functional traits on ecosystem responses to altered rainfall
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Elsa Cleland, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2018
* USD 465,856.00

In the coming decades, ecological communities will experience numerous
environmental changes, including shifting climates and invasion by exotic
species. Plant and microbial communities may exhibit non-linear responses to
these environmental changes as species encounter physiological thresholds that
constrain their growth and reproduction. Ultimately, ecosystem responses to
environmental change will depend both on short-term shifts in species physiology
or growth, and long-term shifts in species composition. This project will help
develop the understanding of ecosystem responses to environmental change that
will be needed for sustainable long term management of chaparral
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental, observational, and modeling
approaches will be used to quantify chaparral ecosystem responses to altered
rainfall regimes. Rainout shelters will be used to produce a gradient of
rainfall quantity, and initial species composition of the experimental plots
will be controlled by removing invasive annual grasses. Short-term physiological
measurements will be taken on focal species, which will also be monitored over
the course of the experiment to measure growth and survival. To complement these
experiments, similar measurements will be taken on dominant plant species along
a natural rainfall gradient across Southern California. Results from these
experiments and surveys will be used to parameterize a Dynamic Global Vegetation
Model to predict how predicted shifts in rainfall regimes will influence plant
species composition and, ultimately, influence regional ecosystem
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to undergraduate,
graduate, and public education, it will provide data to the broader scientific
community, and it will inform land-management agencies. The experiment will
provide research opportunities both for undergraduate and graduate students.
Further, the research will evaluate how invasion influences ecosystem responses
to global change, and whether interannual variation in rainfall may create
opportunities for native shrub restoration. Communicating these findings with
relevant conservation and land-management organizations will be one of the most
important outcomes from this experiment. Finally, the project will make all of
the data available and support communication about the ecological impacts of
global change through evening lectures in public venues.