* 1154498
* IDBR: High-Throughput Instrumentation for Lipid Bilayers and Patch-clamp
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2011,06/30/2014
* Eugenio Culurciello, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Sanford
* 06/30/2014
* USD 679,268.00

Award Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1063347 Proposal Title: IDBR: High
throughput instrumentation for lipid bilayers and single-channel patch-clamp
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project that will develop
integrated micro-chip instrumentation used for recording the minute currents
across biological cell membranes. The goal is an improvement of the sensitivity
and the throughput of electrophysiology instruments for the study of membrane
proteins, including functional analysis of ion channels and DNA identification
using special channels with nano-scale pores. This project will also advance the
sensitivity of patch-clamp recording systems and will allow inspection of the
opening and closing of individual ion-channels whose conductance has previously
been too low to examine. The proposed instrument will increase the number of
recording channels by several hundred times. The research will advance the
design of ultra-low noise instruments that maintain a small footprint and can be
manufactured with standard and cheap microchip technologies. We will design,
instrument and test integrated circuitry to increase the density of recording
sites and miniaturize the recording equipment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
measurements are used throughout biomedical instruments and thus the work
proposed here will have large applicability in medicine and engineering. The
amplifier we will develop can be used in instruments for cellular biology and
physiology, DNA sequencing with nanopores, low-power circuit for cellular
interfaces, nano-sensors and biomedical nano- devices, low-noise acquisition of
bio-signals. The societal impacts of the technology and ion-channel research are
in the prevention of diseases, and in many other scientific fields that rely on
cheap recording of genetic material, such as forensics, biology, anthropology.
Low-cost high-throughput electrophysiology devices also improve drug development
and delivery, both for disease prevention, gene therapy, as well as for
personalized medicine. The principal investigators are involved in the Science
Saturdays program for under-represented minority and women students. Within this
acclaimed program, the PIs are working with children and teachers from K to 12,
to promote practical science projects and to develop interest, abilities and
communication skills. The investigators excite students interest with
presentations in local schools, participation to the New Haven Science Fair,
organizing laboratory tours and weekend science projects.