* 1154839
* Calcium and strontium isotopes as indicators of recrystallization rates in marine carbonates:  Implications for geochemical proxies
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Matthew Fantle, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2016
* USD 159,923.00

Researchers from Penn State University will test the hypothesis that
recrystallization rates in "young" (i.e, less that one million years old)
nannofossil ooze carbonates are significantly faster, and alteration of
geochemical proxies much greater, than previously thought. This work will
conduct calcium and strontium isotope measurements on marine carbonates and pore
fluids and use a numerical diagenetic model to constrain carbonate
recrystallization rates in marine systems. The work will extend such
measurements from a few Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) sites previously measured,
approximately doubling the number of sites examined. The goal is to ascertain if
so-called rapid recrystallization extends to other locations in the ocean; if it
does, rapid recrystallization may be considered to be a widespread
e&amp;#64256;ect of global significance. Researchers will collect archived ODP
samples, measure their isotopic composition, and use numerical reactive
transport models to interpret diagenetic rates of recrystallization and,
critically, evaluate alternate hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If rapid
recrystallization is con&amp;#64257;rmed, the proposed work will create a
framework for evaluating diagenetic alteration in a range of proxy systems (such
as boron and magnesium), and suggest methods for correcting records used to
study climate and geochemical evolution on Earth. This work has the potential to
produce more accurate proxy records and increase our understanding of the
uncertainty of geochemical proxy records, as well as to enable more accurate
climate records with which to calibrate climate models used to predict future
climate change. The funded research supports a recently-completed NSF-supported
multiple-collector ICP-MS facility at Penn State University. Funding also
supports education and training of a graduate student, research experiences for
undergraduates, and the generation of outreach materials to be displayed at the
Penn State Earth and Minerals Sciences Museum.