* 1154249
* PRISM Women Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Joanne Snow, St Mary's College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 05/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

The Promote-Retain-Invest in Science and Mathematics (PRISM) Women Scholars
Program is designed to: &lt;br/&gt;(a) Attract current and future students to
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;(b) Improve educational opportunities for undergraduate women
pursuing STEM majors. &lt;br/&gt;(c) Increase retention of STEM majors to degree
achievement. &lt;br/&gt;(d) Improve student support programs for women pursuing
STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is aimed at encouraging high
academic achievement, promoting research and internship opportunities,
encouraging outreach and community service, and preparing recipients for careers
and/or continued studies in STEM-related fields. The program also encourages
recipients to network with their peers, provide and receive peer mentoring
support, and engage in high quality group learning activities. The ultimate goal
is to develop well-rounded and highly-skilled STEM graduates who are prepared to
meet the national need for more American scientists, engineers, and
mathematicians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The program benefits
women who are pursuing majors in biology, chemistry, computational mathematics,
mathematics, and statistics and actuarial mathematics, and/or completing the
requirements for the dual degree program in engineering in conjunction with the
University of Notre Dame. The college is using S-STEM grant funds to provide ten
scholarships in each of two cohorts for students entering their sophomore year.
Scholarship recipients continue to receive support from the program through the
remainder of their undergraduate career, provided they maintain academic and
social good standing and make acceptable progress toward the completion of their
degree. For the 20 recipients, the scholarships provide financial support, as
well as opportunities to gain valuable research experience, and to interact with
mentors and other professionals in their field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The program emphasizes the priorities of integrating teaching and
research, promoting diversity, and encouraging scientific understanding that
benefits society. It helps produce students well prepared to succeed in fields
where women have traditionally been underrepresented by helping to develop
individuals capable of meeting the national need for more American scientists
and engineers.