* 1154454
* Bellarmine S-STEM Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Akhtar Mahmood, Bellarmine University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 600,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The purpose of this project is to award up to 20
scholarships each year for 4 years to recruit, retain, and graduate academically
talented and financially needy undergraduate students majoring in Physics,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Computer Engineering, and Mathematics. The
objectives of the S-STEM project are to (a) increase enrollment in the targeted
STEM fields from underrepresented groups (women, ethnic minorities and first-
generation students); (b) increase retention to degree achievement by providing
improved educational opportunities in the targeted STEM fields so that the
S-STEM scholars can achieve their best academic performance; (c) support these
scholars through degree completion with a variety of structured institutional
support programs, high quality enrichment activities, and partnering with
potential employers to facilitate student career placement in the STEM
workforce; and (d) prepare well-educated skilled STEM graduates and increase the
number of STEM graduates who enter and remain in the workforce in a STEM-related
professional job or enter graduate school in a STEM discipline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The University is located in a region with
a sizable low-income economically disadvantaged African-American inner-city
population. The S-STEM leadership team is recruiting students from the local and
regional high schools and from low-income families residing in both urban and
rural areas, including the distressed counties as designated by the Appalachian
Regional Commission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific support services that
are available for these S-STEM scholars to ensure that they excel academically
are: an S-STEM scholar orientation program, peer tutoring, faculty mentoring,
professional development, and S-STEM living and learning community (which
provides an opportunity for S-STEM scholars to live together). S-STEM scholars
also have the opportunity to acquire valuable research skills by taking part in
faculty-mentored research projects in their respective STEM disciplines, leading
to presentations at professional conferences.