* 1154785
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Managing Marriage: Kinship and Bureaucracy in Contemporary Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Geoffrey Hughes, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2012
* USD 13,300.00

University of Michigan doctoral student Geoffrey Hughes, supervised by Dr.
Andrew Shryock, will undertake research on the contemporary construction and
maintenance of kinship relationships in a world increasingly defined by ethnic
and religious differences, bureaucratic social engineering, and material
limitations, including the availability of suitable housing. Hughes will carry
out his research in Jordan where social engineering projects seek to transform
Jordanian families from far-flung juridical, economic and political bodies into
more circumscribed and isolated units centered on spouses and their children.
Hughes hypothesizes that projects designed to make Jordanian families "modern"
are often co-opted by the very kin networks they are meant to break up and
reorganize. This will make the underlying issues more visible for social science
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based in the village of 'Areesh, which is
located between the city of Madaba and the capital of Amman, Hughes will study
the diversity of marriage practices and the relationships surrounding them. He
will collect data employing a range of social science research methods including
archival research, semi-structured interviews, and participant observation in
both the patrilocal settlement of 'Areesh and the urban institutions seeking to
transform marriage in Jordan. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By studying the
entanglement of kinship and bureaucracy and attempting to reconcile these
putatively distinct domains through a simultaneiously material and semiotic
approach, this study will contribute to the growing body of social science
literature that seeks to understand the surprisingly persistant importance of
kinship relations in the modern world. Funding this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.