* 1154235
* EAGER:  Fabrication and Brokering through Information Technology (FABBIT)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Paul Wright, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2013
* USD 100,184.00

This EArly-cConcept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award is to
investigate the creation of a web-based, 3D physical manufacturing service,
analogous to the print, photo, and a wide range of other digital media services
that are available on teh Internet. This will be based upon a combination of
low-cost additive manufacturing (AM) prototyping techniques (e.g. fused
deposition modeling) and the ability for users to scale up to small volume
productions using either AM methods (which are expanding in scope almost
monthly) or traditional manufacturing processes. The deliverables will be an
initial service framework and file-format for a web-based national parts-on-
demand prototyping and manufacturing service that will be built on a web-based
platform that enables both novices and professionals to collaborate on the
design of 3D models - this involves sharing, reviewing, and revising designs for
mechanical and electronic manufacturability. The investigators will leverage
modern web development frameworks e.g., Ruby on Rails or Django, to prototype
this web platform for "communal" design and manufacturing. These deliverables
will be developed with the specific objectives of providing universal
accessibility and ease of use.

The societal goal of this web-based manufacturing service is to unleash the
creativity of students, hobbyists, and inventors with the consequent launch of
new start-ups in a wide variety of consumer sectors. The economic goal is to
create virtual marketplace for both experienced designers and a new generation
and community of 3D-artists and inventors thus making a contribution to the new
national Advanced Manufacturing Partnership (AMP) initiative. The resultant
development of this web-based manufacturing service would provide a
collaborative engineering environment suited to both educational and
professional usage and requirements. A universally accessible design environment
could be implemented as a digital classroom, providing a collaborative web-based
educational tool to educators in engineering, robotics, medical, energy, and a
wide range of consumer products and services.