* 1154782
* Student Participation at the 15th Advanced Accelerator Concepts Workshop, held in Austin,TX June 10-15, 2012.
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Downer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven J Gitomer
* 12/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Particle accelerators have become the largest and most expensive of scientific
instruments. Thirty years ago, a biennial Advanced Accelerator Concepts (AAC)
Workshop series began as an effort to bring together U. S. researchers and
selected foreign representatives from diverse technical backgrounds to explore
new ideas for making accelerators leaner and meaner. The PI is now organizing
the 15th AAC workshop, to be held June 10-15, 2012 in Austin, Texas. Student
participation is becoming an increasingly important component of these meetings.
Recent AAC workshops have featured a student poster session, several best poster
student prizes, oral presentations by the winners in the closing plenary
session, and partial student scholarships. The upcoming 15th AAC Workshop will
continue these features, while increasing student participation from 50 to
approximately 60, and for the first time providing a series of tutorials aimed
specifically at student attendees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of the use of the funds is to reduce the cost of U. S. student attendance at the
15th AAC Workshop in Austin, Texas. Funds will be distributed as 20 NSF AAC
student scholarships of $500 each to qualified student participants from U.S.
institutions. Students will be invited to apply for scholarships through an
advertisement on the AAC workshop web site and by email. Recipients will be
selected by a multi-institutional committee of senior workshop participants
based on scientific merit of the students application, letters of
recommendation, and institutional balance. Applications from minorities, women,
and persons with disabilities will be particularly encouraged.