* 1154400
* The CLASS Project: Community of Learners Achieving Science Success 2012-2017
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Tammy Clark, Viterbo University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 03/31/2017
* USD 598,826.00

This project is graduating bachelor-degreed science majors from rural
backgrounds, or as first-generation college graduates, and is especially
welcoming women participants who make up a large fraction of their student body.
Viterbo University is awarding scholarships to two cohorts of 12 students each,
to receive four years of support and is enrolling students who are pursuing
degrees in biochemistry, chemistry, or mathematical physics. The CLASS
(Community of Learners Achieving Science Success) scholars are students with a
high school GPA of at least 3.3, an ACT score of 24 or above, and who have
documented financial need. Using their experience in working with students
underrepresented in the physical sciences, Viterbo is supporting the students
academically so they overcome any deficiencies in preparation and is offering
peer mentoring, undergraduate research opportunities, and social motivation to
enhance the students' retention and success. Viterbo is enabling the CLASS
scholars who elect to conduct undergraduate research to present or publish their
findings in a peer-reviewed forum. The CLASS scholars are part of a Community of
Learners that has interventions in college orientation and study skill
development, as well as aggressive mathematics and science tutoring. The project
is also offering job shadowing, introduction to diverse science careers, active
peer mentoring, and opportunities for science-based service
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is extending findings from a prior
S-STEM award and is being led by a well-qualified team experience in working
with talented but under-prepared students. It continues to add to the knowledge
base of how to enhance the opportunities for success in science education,
particularly for first-generation students from rural
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is leading to increased
participation of underrepresented students in the physical sciences. The project
is on a clear trajectory to contribute to a more diversified pool of STEM
graduate students or to a highly-qualified and diversified STEM workforce, both
of which are addressing national needs.