* 1154070
* Collaborative Research: Using the Rurutu Hotspot to Evaluate Mantle Motion and Absolute Plate Motion Models
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Anthony Koppers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2017
* USD 255,194.00

Linear tracks of submarine volcanoes (i.e., the Hawaiian-Emperor and Louisville
volcanic chains) define the trace of the two longest-lived Pacific hotspots.
These two hotspot tracks have long been used to model tectonic plate motion and
define how the continents have moved over the face of the globe over time. It
has generally been believed that hotspots, which originate deep in the mantle,
are fixed and that, as the plate moves over it, the hot spot punches through the
crust resulting in a linear chain of volcanoes that can be used to show the
speed and direction of plate motion over 10's of millions of years. Mounting
evidence now, however, indicates that hotspots may not actually be fixed with
respect to the mantle or each other. To test the hypothesis of a moving hotspot
reference frame, this research will define a third, long-lived, Pacific hotspot
track, the Rurutu hotspot, and compare it with the Hawaiian-Emperor and
Louisville chains. Twenty submarine volcanoes near the Samoa Islands in the
western Pacific Ocean will be sampled and geochemical analyses of the lavas will
be collected. Argon, produced from radioactive decay, will be used to determine
the ages of the volcanoes. The chemisty of the lavas, especially the elemental
abundances and the Sr, Ne, Pb, and Hf isotopes signatures, will be used to (1)
distinguish Rurutu volcanoes from unrelated ones and (2) determine the
geochemical fingerprint and evolution of the hotspot. Samples dredged from the
seafloor will be described and analyzed on the ship by Laser Induced Breakdown
Spectroscopy. Mapping and marine geophysical data will be collected and used to
guide potential dredging targets. Broader impacts include a strong and large
student training component in which three graduate students and 10
undergraduates will go to sea and be intimately involved in the project. This
will help build a more diverse scientific workforce by recruiting students from
a Hispanic Serving Institution in Texas and training them in state-of-the-art
geochemical analysis and data interpretation. This research will foster inter-
institutional collaboration between three institutions and will support two
early career investigators.