* 1154355
* Children's Understanding of Functions in Grades K-2
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2014
* Maria Blanton, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 07/31/2014
* USD 415,222.00

The researchers in the Children's Understanding of Functions project are
studying how young children in grades K-2 understand mathematical concepts that
are foundational for developing algebraic thinking. Researchers at University of
Massachusetts at Dartmouth and Tufts University are contributing to an ongoing
effort to develop a learning trajectory that describes how algebraic concepts
are developed. Most research has focused on student development at the upper
elementary and middle school levels, but this project will add information about
early elementary learners. The project's research methodology uses teaching
experiments which allow researchers to talk directly to students as they explore
algebraic ideas. They explore how students think about and develop concepts
related to covariation, representations of functions, relationships among
variable, and generalization. Researchers have designed tasks that help students
explain their thinking and solve problems where some quantities vary and others
are constant. They are analyzing videos and students' written work as they build
case studies about the development of algebraic thinking. External evaluation of
this exploratory project is one of the responsibilities of its advisory board.

This project is connecting the algebraic thinking of younger children to what
has been documented for older children. This process enables them to build an
evidence-based learning trajectory about students' development of algebraic
thinking. The products of this research can be used to build curricula and
lessons that are aligned with what students know and can learn at various points
in their development. Project findings, tasks and videos are being disseminated
not only to researchers, but also to practitioners through professional
publications and the DRK-12 Resource Network.