* 1154447
* Doctoral Disseration Research: Population Structure and Large-Scale Cooperation in Pohang, South Korea
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Junhong Kim, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 14,761.00

University of Washington doctoral student Jun-Hong Kim, under the supervision of
Dr. Darryl J. Holman, will undertake research to examine the structure of large-
scale cooperation and to test the hypotheses derived from cultural group
selection theory. In order to explain cooperation beyond household members and
explain the creation of public goods, the peculiarities unique to human culture
must be explored. Humans uphold cultural norms and have developed sanctions for
those who do not follow them, or for those who take advantage of altruistic
behaviors in others. Cultural group selection theory incorporates these "moral
sentiments" in explaining between-group differences of social norms and
cooperativeness. The research is important both to cultural evolutionary theory
and to more general understandings of how human beings
cooperate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kim's research will be carried out in Pohang,
South Korea among high school students. The project has four aims: (1) test
whether social support (from family, school and so on) is important to
adolescents' motivation for helping others; (2) test whether prosocial
individuals preferentially tend to befriend other prosocial individuals; (3)
test whether an individual's prosociality and preferential association are
linked with neighborhood quality; and (4) test whether a neighborhood with high
"social" qualities contains more individuals who will sanction norm violators.
Kim will collect data using mixed methods, including surveys, semi-structured
interviews, ethnographic observations and experimental games. Insights from this
study can potentially be applied to neighborhood projects that enhance the
quality of life for children and adolescents. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.