* 1154904
* Wavelet Analysis of High Spatial Resolution Imagery for Urban Mapping Using Infinite Scale Decomposition Techniques
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Soe Win Myint, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2015
* USD 125,000.00

The importance of dynamic and complex interactions among urban land use, land-
cover change, and global environmental change is well recognized. Despite
significant advances in geographic information science and technology, however,
effectively categorizing digital remote sensing data into detailed urban land
categories remains a challenge. This research project aims to develop a
frequency-based, multi-scale classification algorithm using overcomplete wavelet
transforms that can generate higher-level spatial arrangements of objects and
features for detailed urban land categorization. The investigator will seek to
enhance spatial modeling and concepts that describe spatial association, spatial
pattern, spatial regression, and segregation by adding decomposition procedures
that can extract spatial features in different directions at infinite scale.
Selected wavelet transforms to be used in the project include a series of
Daubechies and Coiflets. The project's multi-faceted approach will permit the
new algorithm to be used for any level of scale, from large-scale air photos to
coarse-resolution MODIS and AVHRR data. Five distinct normalization procedures
will be used to prevent large-range features from dominating the distance
measure. The performance of a minimum distance classifier will be evaluated for
texture classification using the computed texture feature value of the sub-
images. In addition, the Mahalanobis distance rule will be employed to account
for the variability of classes. Finally, three classification decision rules
will be developed. The project is expected to result in a new wavelet-based
framework that provides scientific evidence for the role of spatial properties
and frequencies of geo-objects in different directions at infinite scale. This
framework and algorithm will be made publicly available for performing image
classification effectively in remotely sensed imagery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will enable researchers, modelers, and analysts to differentiate among
urban land-cover and land-use types and to categorize detailed urban land data.
It is expected to generate maps that are more accurate, thereby improving
mapping and analysis procedures. The new geospatial frequency-based framework
and methods will help improve semi-automated and automated analysis procedures.
The tools from this project will be versatile and can be applied to a wide
variety of other land cover, land-use types (i.e., agriculture, rangeland,
forest, wetlands, and coastal zones) and conditions (i.e., drought, fire fuel
concentrations, desertification, flood risk, and coastal erosion), thereby
making it very useful for more than just urban planning. Furthermore, it will
advance geographic information science by building a foundation for
methodological innovations in the field.