* 1154368
* Supporting a New Generation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Henry Kurtz, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 574,848.00

This project provides scholarships to able and financially needy upper-division
students majoring in all STEM fields. The project emphasizes supporting students
from groups that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines. A primary goal is to
ensure such students graduate in five years with a minimum of student debt. This
is done through a combination of individual counseling, tutoring, group
seminars, internships, and research experiences. All this takes place within
strong cohorts of students with similar experiences and goals. Additional goals
include improving student placement after graduation and increasing the number
of students going to graduate school in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The academic programs into which the
students go are strong, and there are academic support activities. The project
emphasizes placing students within local industry and in retaining contact with
these students. These goals are pursued though a combination of industry
presentations, internships, seminars on applying to graduate programs, and
comprehensive, convenient exit surveys. The S-STEM project has considerable
support within local industry. It also exploits the natural cohorts that have
been formed under the aegis of the MemphiSTEP
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The project is increasing the
number and diversity of students who complete a STEM major and go on to work in
the field or to further education. It specifically targets students from
populations underrepresented in science and first-generation college students.
The project emphasizes employing local talent that serves to enrich both the
individual students and the local community.