* 1154289
* On RAMP to STEM
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Margaret Latimer, Montgomery College
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,999.00

This project provides scholarships to able and financially needy students
majoring in biotechnology, biology, and mathematics who transfer to four-year
institutions or enter the workforce in life-science industries with a solid
understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of biology and mathematics.
Building on a record of successfully fostering STEM students by creating a
learning community and providing intensive academic support, one-on-one
mentoring, internships and research opportunities, the project is awarding
approximately 125 scholarships and supporting four cohorts of scholars.

High school students with demonstrated academic potential and veterans are being
recruited. Currently enrolled part-time students may be selected. An Advisory
Board including faculty, administrators, students, government, and industry
representatives advises the project management team. The project emphasizes
supporting students through seminars, social media, student-faculty interaction,
field trips to research labs and companies, and informal student interactions.

Intellectual Merit: The academic programs into which the students go are strong,
and there are academic support activities. On-RAMP participants develop core
competencies highlighted in 2010 AAAS "Vision and Change," including the ability
to use quantitative reasoning, modeling and simulation, and an understanding of
the interdisciplinary nature of science. By developing students' fluency in
mathematics and introducing the quantitative tools applied to life sciences, On-
RAMP is taking advantage of opportunities created by the convergence of
biotechnology, biology, and mathematics.

Broader Impact: On-RAMP addresses local industry and government agency demand
for biotechnology and life-science employees who have quantitative or
computational biology skills. Changing demographics dictate that the rich
resources of the county's increasing ethnic and economic diversity be tapped.
On-RAMP is increasing the number and diversity of students from underrepresented
groups in biotechnology and mathematics. Seminar topics augment existing
curricula, creating better alignment with that of four-year receiving
institutions, and fostering the development of bioengineering, biology-based
calculus, and biostatistics courses.