* 1154008
* Conference: 2nd BMES-SPRBM Conference on Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering, San Juan, Puerto Rico, January 3 - 7, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Yi-Xian Qin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kaiming Ye
* 10/31/2012
* USD 15,651.00

The objective of this application is to seek NSF support for the 2nd inaugural
joint Biomedical&lt;br/&gt;Engineering Society (BMES) and the Society for
Physical Regulation in Biology and Medicine&lt;br/&gt;(SPRBM) Conference on
Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) (30th SPRBM
Annual&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Conference) (short: 2nd BMES-SPRBM Conference on
CMBE). The first joint conference&lt;br/&gt;(2011) on the specific theme of
Molecular Imaging and Mechanotransduction was extremely&lt;br/&gt;successful.
This joint CMBE conference (2012) will expand the scope and be focused the theme
of&lt;br/&gt;Cell Motility, Matrix, Mechanobiology and Regeneration. As a rising
science field the cellular and&lt;br/&gt;molecular bioengineering became
possible to culture and engineer cells outside the body, and&lt;br/&gt;provide
intrinsic insights for their role in regeneration. In the mean time, the
elucidation of the&lt;br/&gt;cellular and molecular basis of life became one of
the great achievements of the twentieth century,&lt;br/&gt;culminating in the
complete sequencing of the human genome. Today we stand in the midst of
an&lt;br/&gt;amazing convergence, which has created a nexus for bioengineers.
Both the BMES and the&lt;br/&gt;SPRBM realized that research at this remarkable
nexus, Now, the inaugural joint BMES-SPRBM&lt;br/&gt;Conference on CBME is the
beginning of a new focus of the promising subfield in
biomedical&lt;br/&gt;engineering and much needed forum for this exciting
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The explosions of cellular
motility, cellular/molecular functional matrix and the&lt;br/&gt;role of
mechanobiology and regeneration such as extracellular matrix and the
manipulations in vitro&lt;br/&gt;and in vivo enables new fundamental
regeneration at the cellular and molecular level, as well as&lt;br/&gt;providing
new monitoring modalities in vivo. Therefore, these lead to the exciting theme
of the&lt;br/&gt;inaugural BMES-SPRBM joint Conference on CMBE. This application
will be first is to provide&lt;br/&gt;support to young and junior researchers,
postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students whose&lt;br/&gt;submitted papers
have been selected for podium presentation on the basis of scientific merits,
and&lt;br/&gt;promote minority and women scientists in the field; and second to
foster the emergence and growth&lt;br/&gt;of the exciting sub-filed of CMBE. The
abstracts will be published in a Conference Proceeding, and&lt;br/&gt;selected
full length papers will be published in a special issue of Cellular and
Molecular&lt;br/&gt;Bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of
this meeting are: (1) delineate the current status of cellular and
molecular&lt;br/&gt;motility, matrix, mechanobiology and regeneration, in which
leaders from the CMBE fields will give&lt;br/&gt;an overview of cellular
molecular motility, functional matrix concepts and review the current state
of&lt;br/&gt;mechanobiology and adaptation, as well as their research in
molecular/cellular/tissue/ functions and&lt;br/&gt;tissue/organ regeneration;
(2) brainstorm the emerging field of CMBE with a focus on the role
of&lt;br/&gt;cellular/molecular mechanics, motility, functional matrix and
mechanotransduction with regeneration&lt;br/&gt;potentials, which the outcome
will be published in a special issue of CMBE; (3) provide
training&lt;br/&gt;workshop for junior faculty, investigators, and students on
grant writing and opportunities; and (4)&lt;br/&gt;environment setting. The
conference program will include Podium Sessions with invited
Keynote&lt;br/&gt;speakers and other invited speakers. Graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, and junior&lt;br/&gt;investigators will also be encouraged
to submit abstracts. These abstracts will be organized into a&lt;br/&gt;poster
session with cheese/wine receptions. Nine graduate students/postdoctoral fellows
will be&lt;br/&gt;selected by the organizing committee to present short talks
and six-eight junior investigators will be&lt;br/&gt;selected for a Young and
Rising Star session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad impacts: The rise of engineering
in the twentieth century led to profound change for&lt;br/&gt;humankind. The
advances in biology are equally amazing. It became possible to culture
and&lt;br/&gt;engineer cells outside the body, and provide intrinsic insights
for their role in regeneration. The role&lt;br/&gt;of mechanical modulation of
cell functions has been an intensive focus in modern biology
and&lt;br/&gt;bioengineering. The explosions of cellular motility,
cellular/molecular functional matrix and the role&lt;br/&gt;of mechanobiology
and regeneration enables new fundamental regeneration at the cellular
and&lt;br/&gt;molecular level, as well as providing new monitoring modalities in
vivo and in patients.&lt;br/&gt;