* 1154506
* The BioExcellence Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Edmund Stellwag, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2017
* USD 599,945.00

This comprehensive program supports strong academic skill building for
scholarship recipients with activities and structures that enhance the living
experience on campus in the first year, and career-building activities in the
following three years. The overall objectives of the program are to increase
achievement, retention, and interest in careers in the
biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshmen and sophomores are required to live
on campus in the Bio Living-Learning Community. In their fall semester freshmen
year, students take a college success course taught by a Biology faculty member.
In their second semester freshmen year, students take Careers in Biology, which
is co-taught by a career counselor and a biology faculty member. Both courses
are open to other students. Scholars benefit from block scheduling into science
and mathematics courses for two years. In addition, tutors from the Pirate
Tutoring Center at the college are being hired to attend courses with students
and provide note-taking training and tutoring sessions as requested. A common
academic advisor advises students until they declare their major in their
sophomore year, after which they will be advised by the principal investigators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sophomores help recruit students for the next class. As
upperclassmen, students are being guided and encouraged to undertake
undergraduate research projects and/or internships. The academic performance of
students is being assessed by their grades. Interviews and questionnaires given
at the end of each academic year allow formative assessment of the program. A
final questionnaire and follow-up assessment for two years after graduation is
being used to collect data regarding future career plans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program with its combination of social, academic, and
financial support is changing the culture of the university experience for these
students and ensuring their success in bio-related careers and/or post-graduate
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The overall goal of the
BioExcellence Scholarship program is to support academic achievement, so that
recipients complete BS Biology or BS Biochemistry degrees in four years, leading
to a career in the biosciences. Students with 3.0 or higher GPAs who are
interested in majoring in Biology or Biochemistry are being supported in their
coursework by intervention programs including peer tutoring, career information,
and block scheduling for the first two years, followed by undergraduate research
mentoring and internships in the biosciences to help guide students in career
decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The program benefits 24
financially deserving students, primarily from eastern North Carolina. This
region has a high poverty rate, low higher education achievement, and a large
minority population. This student group can often struggle financially and
academically. The program lends support structures to help them attain their
goal of a university degree and career in the biosciences. Students enter a
study to assess success of the interventions, and results are being disseminated
to regional and national science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education conferences.