* 1154137
* Increasing Science, Mathematics, and Computer Science Opportunities for Low-Income Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* John Grew, New Jersey City University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 07/31/2017
* USD 599,720.00

The S-STEM project at New Jersey City University (NJCU) encourages low-income,
academically talented students to major in the natural sciences, mathematics and
computer science, and provides them with the support that they need to succeed
in their academic programs. As a publicly supported university located in urban
northeastern New Jersey and as the only public, four-year institution in New
Jersey that has been federally designated as a Hispanic-serving institution,
NJCU provides a path of upward mobility for thousands of minorities, immigrants
and economically and/or educationally disadvantaged individuals. In keeping with
NJCU's role as an urban undergraduate institution, many of its students are
products of urban school systems facing considerable economic pressures while
seeking to advance through higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of the S-STEM project is to increase the number of low-income, academically
talented students who enroll and persist in STEM disciplines. Together with
strategic activities, the project accomplishes this goal by providing a total of
105 scholarships distributed over a 5-year period to students in NJCU's biology,
chemistry, geoscience, mathematics, physics, and computer science programs.
Incremental objectives of the NJCU S-STEM project are to:&lt;br/&gt; - Increase
the number of students who complete lower level science, mathematics and
computer science courses and proceed to more advanced study in these
disciplines, particularly among underrepresented groups in STEM
disciplines;&lt;br/&gt; - Increase enrollment and retention in science,
mathematics and computer science programs, with the programs maintaining a
predominately female and minority student population;&lt;br/&gt; - Improve the
performance of students in gatekeeper STEM courses by providing a strong system
of supplemental instruction and faculty mentoring;&lt;br/&gt; - Develop a
feeling of community among STEM students by organizing a regular schedule of
community-building activities; and &lt;br/&gt; - Increase the number of students
who pursue graduate study and/or careers in STEM disciplines by providing them
with graduate program and career information, as well as opportunities for
undergraduate research and internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its
aspirations, the S-STEM project has four major project components: (1)
recruitment of students into STEM disciplines; (2) an organized system of
supplemental instruction and faculty mentoring; (3) full utilization of the Web-
based Student Early Alert System (SEAS) to maximize the impact of faculty
advising; and (4) regularly scheduled community-building activities for STEM
students. Through the array of strategies, this project provides an effective
model for reducing attrition and increasing the graduation rate of economically
disadvantaged students, in particular of underrepresented minorities in STEM
programs in public urban institutions.