* 1154315
* St Mary's College of Maryland STEM Navigators
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2018
* Samantha Elliott, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 12/31/2018
* USD 598,000.00

St. Mary's College of Maryland's STEM Navigator project is supporting 30
academically talented individuals who demonstrate financial need, with
scholarships during their pursuit of STEM degrees. Ten scholars, in two
5-scholar cohorts, are receiving four consecutive years of support, beginning
with their first year. Twenty scholars, in four 5-scholar cohorts, are receiving
two consecutive years of support following their transfer as rising juniors from
the College of Southern Maryland, the local community
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable all of the Navigators to experience
success, St. Mary's College of Maryland is building upon a largely pre-existing
system of support structures, all designed to help students navigate with
confidence, their transition from high school or community college to the
academic culture of the host institution. These academic programs include
Tresiman-style Emerging Scholars Programs (ESPs, based on the UC-Berkeley
Calculus workshop model), customized Navigator seminars (facilitated discussions
that support academic and social goals of the Navigators), enhanced summer
research opportunities, and the matching of students to key personnel for
coordination of mentoring, advising, learning plan development, and the tracking
of progress. The initial St. Mary's ESP in mathematics has drastically improved
the performance of historically underserved students in Calculus, and similar
success is being found in the newer ESPs. The Navigator project is adding ESPs
in Chemistry and in Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To contribute to the
diversification of the STEM workforce, St. Mary's College of Maryland is using
previously developed ties with Cardozo High School of Washington, D.C., the
Baltimore City Public Schools, and the College of Southern Maryland to encourage
and enable previously underserved populations in the pursuit of high-quality
STEM degrees. An articulation agreement with the College of Southern Maryland,
already in place for computer science, is being expanded to include all STEM
disciplines. The agreement allows students to apply for dual enrollment at the
time of application for entrance to College of Southern Maryland and to complete
their BA degrees in STEM disciplines at St. Mary's College of Maryland.