* 1154666
* STEM A-PLUS Scholarships (Action, Persistence, Leadership, Understanding and Success)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Wayne Cooper, Bakersfield College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 07/31/2018
* USD 552,000.00

The Action + Persistence + Leadership + Understanding = Success (A-PLUS)
Scholarship Program is selecting forty academically talented, financially needy
community college students working to transfer to baccalaureate degree programs
in engineering, the sciences, or mathematics. Scholars are being supported by
academic and professional development programming; a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) service learning course; faculty mentors;
and transfer advisement. Scholars are being recruited through local events,
faculty outreach, student services, and electronic
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The college is a Hispanic-Serving
Institution educating a significant number of women, minority, low-income, and
first-generation college students. The objective of this project is to increase
persistence, success, timely transfer, and professional skills, especially among
underrepresented STEM students. Scholarships reduce the hours students must work
to financially support themselves or their families, allowing them to complete
their studies within three years, transfer to earn a baccalaureate degree, and
enter the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The project is
founded upon best practices in engagement and persistence, specifically tailored
to the local student population. The project is achieving its goals by using
faculty mentors who lead student cohorts, success programing and industry
visits, dedicated support from student services, and a STEM centered service
learning course. The service learning course is based on a substantial
literature base on the positive effects of service learning on underrepresented
students. The project team is academically well-qualified and experienced to
implement the project, representing all STEM disciplines plus student services.
In addition, industry and community partners are actively involved in the
project and have committed support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project is creating a replicable model scholarship program that utilizes
transfer and industry partners to help STEM students succeed, especially
underrepresented groups. Findings are being disseminated locally and nationally
via webinars, a college hosted workshop, and the web. The project is to increase
the number of underrepresented minorities and women achieving STEM degrees and
entering the workforce, thus bolstering the competitiveness of the United States
in a global economy.