* 1154422
* Scholarships for Broadening Participation in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Andrea Case, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2018
* USD 599,999.00

This project is providing scholarships to academically promising undergraduate
students in biology (excluding pre-medicine), chemistry, computer science,
geology, mathematics, and physics. This project builds on an S-STEM project that
has a record of accomplishment in preparing students for science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers. Scholarship recipients have
included first generation college students, students from low-income/working
class families, from rural communities in Appalachia, from underrepresented
minorities, female students, and students who transferred from community
colleges. This doctoral research university serves a student population that is
mostly low- or middle-income, with 43% first generation college students. It is
a unique educational setting where low- and middle-income students have the
opportunity to study and participate in high quality research under the
supervision of research scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
This project provides a comprehensive approach to mentoring STEM undergraduates.
Prior successful activities include a high rate of participation in research
experiences, matriculation to graduate study, and progress to STEM careers.
Expanded mentoring and advising services build on the success of the Science
Learning Community (SLC), which offers academic support and enrichment programs
and a supportive residential setting for incoming freshmen STEM majors. The
project continues the successful series of research talks and informal mentoring
sessions for S-STEM Scholars. Support also includes providing qualified S-STEM
Scholars with financial assistance to subsidize both GRE registration and
graduate application fees for masters and doctoral programs in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project opens opportunities to
students from social groups that historically have had low participation in STEM
careers. Expanded recruiting efforts focus on recruiting minority and female
students and leveraging established community outreach programs, including a
science mentoring program for minority high school students, outreach to STEM
academies School District, Upward Bound programs, and a partnership with the
Girl Scouts of America. Students educated through the S-STEM program promote
economic development through their future contributions to high tech enterprises
and to advances in science and technology. Those who serve as educators play a
crucial role in promoting societal change as role models for their own students.