* 1154889
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: On Negotiating the Role of Computers in Developing Mathematical Proofs
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Peter Galison, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 9,941.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;Digital computing changed mathematics at every level down
to the core of mathematical practice, the search for proofs. This award supports
doctoral dissertation research that traces how computers have been used in the
development of proofs and how their use changed mathematical knowledge and
practice in the United States. The project is motivated historically,
anthropologically, and philosophically to explore the following questions. How
are mathematical ideas related to the technologies with which they are
discovered and explored? How is the cognitive work of mathematics altered by the
introduction of computing? How is human intelligence understood through attempts
to build reasoning machines? The period of interest begins in the mid-1950s with
early Artificial Intelligence, and it concludes with the contemporary work of
Fields medalist Vladimir Voevodksy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project engages the ongoing interest of Science Studies in
knowledge making, especially at the interface between humans and machines. It
will explore mathematical knowledge and its material dimensions, which has until
now been largely unexplored. Using archival materials, interviews, and technical
documents including operations manuals and source code, the doctoral candidate
will explore transformations in the institutional setting, material
constitution, practices, and cognitive landscape of mathematical research that
manifested around the digital computer. The intellectual merit of this project
lies in its synthesizing and intervening in theoretical scholarship from science
studies, history of mathematics, history of technology, and history of science
(often pursued separately). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The significance of computer proof assistance in mathematical
research is intensifying. This project can assist current researchers and
funding agencies in the assessment and pursuit of new projects in light of past
research and historical context. Further, an analysis of the multifarious past
and present strategies for using computing in mathematics can suggest new
possibilities for using computer assistance in other disciplines that may
otherwise be unaware of them.