* 1154572
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Mechanisms for Inhibition of Biofouling on Polymeric Membranes Modified with Polyelectrolyte Multilayers and Antimicrobial Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/08/2011,08/31/2015
* Baoxia Mi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2015
* USD 171,003.00

PIs: Kai Loon Chen / Baoxia Mi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: 1133559 /
1134233&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafiltration (UF) membranes are increasingly
being used in drinking water treatment and wastewater reuse because of their
effectiveness in removing waterborne pathogens and particulate matter. Due to
the ubiquity of microorganisms in influent waters, however, UF processes are
often hindered by biofouling which reduces clean water production, shortens
membrane life, and increases energy demands. Currently, efforts to retard
biofouling have centered on using disinfectants, which can damage the membranes
and result in the formation of disinfection byproducts. To overcome these
limitations, the objective of this research is to investigate the use of
polyelectrolyte multilayers (PEMs) to immobilize antimicrobial nanoparticles
(NPs) onto the surfaces of polysulfone UF membranes to enhance their resistance
to biofouling. Compared to conventional nanocomposite membrane fabrication
methods, the use of PEMs would be advantageous because (1) PEMs can increase
membrane surface charge and/or hydrophilicity and, thus, reduce bacterial
attachment; (2) PEMs ensure that NPs are located on the membrane surface, which
will enhance bacterial inactivation; and (3) the application of PEMs is non-
destructive and the PEM-NP assembly can be regenerated in situ when the membrane
is fouled or the NPs have dissolved. &lt;br/&gt;The experiments are designed to
test the hypothesis that the resistance of membranes modified by PEMs towards
biofouling is controlled by its anti-adhesive and antimicrobial properties. PEM
parameters (e.g., constituent polyelectrolytes and NPs and number of bilayers
within PEMs) will be systematically varied in order to investigate their
influence on the anti-adhesive and antimicrobial properties of the membranes. To
probe the membrane?s anti-adhesive properties, the kinetics of bacterial
deposition on the membrane during filtration, as well as the adhesive forces
between a bacterium and the membrane surface, will be measured. The
antimicrobial properties of the membranes will be studied through the
enumeration of bacterial colonies on the membrane surface and by using a
fluorescent dye technique to detect deposited cells with damaged membranes. The
biofouling resistance of membranes modified by PEMs will be evaluated by
monitoring the permeate flux decline in long-term filtration experiments with
bacteria suspensions. Another component of this research will be to investigate
the effects of the above-mentioned PEM parameters on the rate of unintended NP
leaching. Finally, this research will examine several physical and chemical
methods for the in situ regeneration of PEM-NP assemblies on membrane surfaces
and evaluate the performance of the regenerated membranes. &lt;br/&gt;This study
is novel because it is one of the first to explore the use of PEMs to fabricate
biofouling-resistant nanocomposite membranes. Since the incorporation of NPs
into PEMs is an emerging field, this research will provide a better
understanding of the formation and robustness of PEM-NP assemblies. By
systematically varying the constituent polyelectrolytes and NPs of the
assemblies, this research will identify the key parameters that govern the
membranes? anti-adhesive and antimicrobial properties. The role of the
terminating layer in controlling the anti-adhesive properties of a membrane will
be examined by replacing the top layers in selected PEM-NP assemblies with
layers of PGA-g-PEG, an extremely hydrophilic polyanion. This research will
provide insights into the mechanisms of cytotoxicity of surface-immobilized NPs
and probe the possible enhancement in membrane antimicrobial activity when
antimicrobial chitosan is used as the constituent polycation. &lt;br/&gt;This
research will create exciting opportunities for the development of the next-
generation membrane filtration systems for water purification and potentially
transform the way these processes are operated and maintained. Furthermore, this
study will provide crucial information allowing for the safe-by-design
production of nanocomposite membranes. This work will contribute significantly
to the understanding of material design for biofilm prevention, which is also of
relevance to the fields of material, chemical, and biomedical engineering. In
this study, they will involve undergraduate students in all phases of the
research effort. Research results will be disseminated through publications in
peer-reviewed journals, student presentations at national scientific meetings,
and the organization of a symposium. The broader impact will be further
augmented by the involvement of the PI in organizing scientific activities for
5th grade students in a predominantly African American elementary school in
inner-city Baltimore. Also, lectures on environmental technologies will be
presented at a girls? high school in Washington, DC. The results from this
project will also be integrated into a new environmental nanotechnology course
at George Washington University.