* 1154603
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Diet, Ranging Patterns and Social Behavior of Lar Gibbons at Huai Kha Khaeng, Thailand: Exploring the Limits of Flexibility
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Lydia Overbaugh, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2013
* USD 15,771.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Thad Bartlett, Lydia Overbaugh will explore the degree
of behavioral flexibility in the endangered white-handed gibbon in the Huai Kha
Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuary (HKK), Thailand. White-handed gibbons living at HKK
inhabit an environment that is unique in many ways. First, the forest is
considerably drier than other white-handed gibbon study sites, receiving less
than half the amount of rainfall than elsewhere, making this forest the
ecological extreme of the range of white-handed gibbons. Second, the forest is
part of the largest continuous protected area in Southeast Asia, which has led
to the reduction in anthropogenic stresses while maintaining a largely intact
large mammal community (including elephant, tiger, 8 diurnal primates, two
leopards and two canids). Finally, gibbons at HKK inhabit a mosaic landscape,
including seasonally dry evergreen, hill evergreen, mixed deciduous and
deciduous dipterocarp forest types. This presents a unique opportunity to
examine how white-handed gibbons respond to ecological differences at the
extreme of their range and in a diversity of habitats. To determine how habitat
quality impacts gibbon behavior and ecology, the feeding and ranging behavior of
6 gibbon social groups will be studied over a period of 12 months to test the
following predicitions: first, that gibbons in evergreen forest will (i) have
smaller home ranges and travel less per day, (ii) spend less time foraging, and
(iii) have a higher quality diet; and second, that these differences are a
result of differences in home range quality as indicated by the density of
fruiting trees.

Current hypotheses in human evolution favor an increase in the behavioral and
dietary flexibility of Homo as an explanation for the success of our lineage. By
examining the degree of flexibility present in a more distantly related ape
species, we can better evaluate the assertion that flexibility is a uniquely
human innovation. As many gibbon researchers have described gibbons as being
dependent upon evergreen forest, this study will demonstrate the ways in which
white-handed gibbons cope with ecologically marginal habitats. Furthermore,
gibbons are primarily monogamous, but significant rates of polyandry and
polygyny have been recorded for some populations and these occurrences have been
linked to ecological differences such as seasonal and geographic resource
availability. This project will therefore increase our understanding of the role
of habitat quality in the maintenance of social monogamy in white-handed
gibbons.

The proposed project will assist in graduate student training and increase the
participation of women in scientific research while promoting a minority-serving
institution. Additionally, the establishment of a new field site will provide
opportunities for training Thai field assistants and instructing US
undergraduate students. The most tangible impact of the proposed research is its
applicability to primate conservation. By better understanding the degree of
behavioral flexibility under distinct ecological conditions and at this species'
ecological extreme, this project will inform conservation policies for white-
handed gibbons. This knowledge can also provisionally be used for conservation
purposes in the absence of comprehensive knowledge of other more critically
endangered gibbon species.