* 1154850
* RUI: Photochemical Transformations of Algal Toxins (PbTx-2, PbTx-3 and microcystin-LR) on resuspended sediments in Coastal Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Robert Kieber, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2016
* USD 678,515.00

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are worldwide phenomena caused by microalgae or
phytoplankton reaching extremely high concentrations. Naturally occurring toxins
are often secreted during these blooms, engendering a variety of environmental,
economic and human health impacts that have emphasized these as events of global
concern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a research team at the
University of North Carolina at Wilmington will explore the photochemical
behavior of brevetoxins (PbTx-2, PbTx-3) and microcystin-LR (MLR) on resuspended
coastal sediments in sunlit surface waters. These algal toxins were chosen
because of their widespread distribution, photochemically lability in the
dissolved phase and because a significant fraction of what is produced in
coastal waters is effectively scavenged onto sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The team hypothesizes that photochemical processes will dramatically alter the
lifetime of these sediment-bound toxins producing photoproducts with unknown
toxicities and fate. Their preliminary evidence revealed a 40% increase in
dissolved PbTx-2 concentration when an organic-rich sediment containing the
toxin was resuspended in coastal seawater and exposed to sunlight. Accordingly,
they now want to answer the following specific questions: (1) To what extent do
photochemical processes alter PbTx-2, PbTx-3 and MLR on resuspended sediments
exposed to sunlight and what are the major photoproducts produced? (2) How are
the photoreactivities of these sorbed toxins influenced by the inorganic and
organic composition of the resuspended material, by irradiation wavelength, and
by suspended sediment concentration? (3) How is the photoreactivity of the
sorbed algal toxins affected by the biogeochemical setting and salinity regime
where the resuspended sediments originate? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: These questions address novel, fundamentally important, globally
significant questions regarding the lifetime and fate of algal toxins in coastal
environments. It has been suggested that global change, including increases in
eutrophication, sea surface water temperature, and runoff from changing land use
and population growth, have exacerbated HABs worldwide. The project will support
a post-doctoral researcher, two master's level graduate students, three
undergraduates and one high school student per year. Part of the funding will
also be used to recruit local high school science teachers during the summer.
Previous high school teachers have taken the experience gained in the laboratory
back to the classroom, greatly enhancing their ability to convey the excitement
of scientific discovery. A participant on this project is an assistant professor
at an undergraduate institution who will bring undergraduates to UNCW to work on
the project in the summer and will collaborate in sample collection.