* 1154379
* Renewal of Curation of ODP Legs 150X and 174AX cores: The Rutgers Core Repository
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Kenneth Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 06/30/2015
* USD 204,296.00

BRIEF PROJECT DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs request continued partial support
for the curation, outreach, and data management activities of the Rutgers Core
Repository, which archives cores obtained by Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) Legs
150X and 174AX and Expeditions 303/306 site survey cores. The onshore legs
obtained 4.2 km of core from 14 sites drilled onshore in the New Jersey (NJ) and
Delaware coastal plains as a coordinated effort with Legs 150 (NJ slope), 174A
(NJ slope and outer shelf), and the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP)
Expedition 313 drilling on the NJ shelf. Drilling by Legs 150X and 174AX has
provided an exceptionally well-documented series of continuous cores from the
coastal plain drilled in collaboration with the NSF, ODP, ICDP (International
Continental Drilling Program), USGS, DOSECC (Drilling, Observation, and Sampling
of the Earth?s Continental Crust), and the state geological surveys of New
Jersey and Delaware. These cores continue to provide insights into global sea-
level change, sequence stratigraphy, basin tectonics and sedimentation, climate
change, and major events in Earth History (e.g., Eocene-Oligocene Transition
(EOT), Paleocene/Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM), Cretaceous/Paleogene (K/Pg), and
Cenomanian/Turonian (C/T) boundaries). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University
is providing long-term storage space materials support for archiving these cores
in the newly renovated,14,000 sq ft Rutgers Core Repository. NSF funded the
repository for a five year period (2006-2011) during which they: 1) were
designated an official IODP repository; 2) acquired 5,000 sq ft in additional
space, obtained $1.2M in renovation funds from Rutgers to renovate 14,000 sq ft
of Repository space, bought a new refrigerated core storage van, and built
climate-controlled dedicated core splitting and description laboratories; 3)
developed a website that includes links to metadata, datasets, and other
repositories for ODP Leg 150X and 174AX plus other onshore cores drilled in the
Chesapeake Bay Impact Structure, and the Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plains; 4)
developed exhibits for the new Connecticut Science Center and the Rutgers
Geology Museum; 5) distributed over 4,000 samples from Legs 150X and Leg 174AX
(2006-2011), and over 20,000 samples from KN166-14 cruise that collected
Expedition 303/306 site survey cores; 6) gave outreach talks on Leg 150X/174AX
cores at over 30 universities, over 15 public forums, and numerous international
meetings; 7) provided a core exhibit as part of the DOSECC booth at GSA and AGU
annual meetings; and 8) drilled the Wilson Lake Hole B corehole in 2011 that
will provide international access to PETM and K/Pg sections as part of Leg
174AX. The PIs request three years of funding for partial support of a Curator
and partial funds to continue and enhance these activities. The proposal will
allow the PIs to promulgate information on these cores to the national and
international scientific communities and to encourage the continued use of these
cores for cutting-edge scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
The Rutgers Core Repository has been very successful in providing outreach to
K-12 schools and the public through the Rutgers Geology Museum and the
Connecticut Science Center and over 18 public/governmental presentations since
2006 on sea-level change and the K/Pg boundary. The cores figure prominently in
the Rutgers University curriculum where there are used in numerous undergraduate
and graduate courses. We engage graduate and undergraduate students in drilling
and archiving the cores and drilled Wilson Lake in 2011 using students to staff
all aspects of drilling (including drillers assistants), description, and
archiving. We serve the international scientific community as an IODP
repository.