* 1154990
* Social and Biological Influences on Status Attainment
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Francois Nielsen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 12/31/2013
* USD 78,996.00

SES-1154990&lt;br/&gt;François Nielsen&lt;br/&gt;University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social and
Biological Influences on Status Attainment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines the roles of biological and environmental predictors of educational and
socioeconomic achievement in young adults. Using the Add Health longitudinal
survey the study examines outcomes among sibling pairs, classified according to
degree of biological relatedness. &lt;br/&gt;The study adjudicates between
competing claims regarding the role of biology vs. social ascription in shaping
in intergenerational mobility. To that end, it is grounded in bio-medical as
well as status attainment literatures from different disciplines. Structural
equations models (SEMs) are applied to estimate the extent to which variation in
an outcome measure depends on the shared biological vs. environmental influences
experienced by siblings raised in the same family, or on specific environmental
influences unique to the individual sibling. Analyses also estimate the impact
of interactions among siblings (e.g., emulation or competition) and the effects
of assortative mating among parents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates a biomedical approach with traditional
social-scientific approaches to social stratification and intergenerational
mobility. The project intends to generate findings of interest to an
interdisciplinary set of researchers and the general public. In addition,
findings may shape policy reforms aimed at optimizing outcomes related to
educational attainment and socio-economic mobility.