* 1154074
* Implementation of continuous flow cytometry for high resolution mapping of microbial distributions in surface waters
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* E. Virginia Armbrust, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 05/31/2016
* USD 873,930.00

The PI's request funding to complete the development of instrumentation that
allows continuous high-resolution mapping of microbial (both autotrophic and
heterotrophic) communities in surface waters. With this proposal they propose to
transition SeaFlow into the final development stage where it will be permanently
installed and operated on the R/V Thompson, requiring minimal support of
shipboard marine technicians. This instrument will build upon SeaFlow optics and
fluidics and will be the first instrument to continuously measure the
distribution of heterotrophic microbes in surface waters. They will also develop
a collaborative data processing, management and analysis platform to allow
scalable, interactive analysis of our rapidly expanding data sets both on-vessel
and on-shore, during and after the cruise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful outcome from this proposal could
pioneer the routine use of flow cytometry on ships of opportunity and on
research cruises where a specialist in this technique was not present. The
increased frequency and coverage of sampling, and the proposed ease of access to
the data, is likely to stimulate interest in marine microbial ecology in the
wider oceanographic community. The proposed research will provide great training
opportunities for undergraduates and post doctoral researchers directly and will
presumably include graduate students in some of the real time testing and
feedback. This project is definitely interdisciplinary and pulls in
undergraduates from different disciplines.