* 1154680
* Collaborative: Engaging undergraduates in genomic questions and environmental context: Building a database of complex phenotypes for plant knockout mutants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/20/2011,10/31/2014
* Erin Dolan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2014
* USD 172,130.00

What is the effect of a mutation that "knocks out" a single gene in an
organism's genome? Unsatisfyingly, today's plant geneticists can only say: "It
depends." Only a small minority of mutations are lethal or have a significant
impact. For the vast majority, at most only subtle effects have been detected.
Plant genetics is poised to progress rapidly in remedying this situation, using
a collection of "knockout" mutant strains of the model species Arabidopsis
thaliana. Knockouts, carrying a tiny tagged segment of disruptive DNA in one
targeted gene, are already available for ~67% of the 27,000+ unique genes in
this plant's genome. Inspired by progress in yeast genetics, the project will
grow large subsets of these knockouts in benign and challenging environments,
quantifying ecological performance attributes (e.g., population growth rate,
fruit yield). We predict that, as in yeast, such an approach will reveal
important phenotypic differences between mutant and control lines and possibly
reveal undiscovered genome-wide patterns. The project is a collaboration of
primarily undergraduate institutions and will train young scientists in how
major genomic questions are addressed by networks of researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve screening 7000 available T-DNA
lines to identify those that have mutations at only one gene, providing these
results to the biological community. Traits relevant to plant performance will
be measured in over 3000 single-mutant lines, across multiple environments.
Cyberinfrastructure will be developed to disseminate common protocols and to
archive and index data. Over 50 undergraduate researchers will be involved in
collecting and analyzing data and communicating results. The project also
includes a study of how participating in a distributed research network
influences undergraduates' access to social capital within the scientific
community. Results from this aspect of the work will lay the foundation for a
larger scale, empirical study of the outcomes undergraduates realize by
participating in research networks.