* 1154222
* Leaf Scholars: Growing Success in Science, Informatics and Mathematics For Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2013,02/28/2019
* Daniel Smith, Goshen College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 02/28/2019
* USD 598,000.00

This project provides scholarships to able and financially needy students
majoring in the sciences and mathematics. The project is open to all students
who meet academic and financial eligibility requirements and emphasizes
supporting students, especially first-generation college students and members of
groups underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The academic programs into which the students go are strong, and there
are academic support activities. Students are being attracted to the
scholarships through family-based recruitment practices, collaboration with
local high schools, and partnerships with local nonprofit agencies. Retention
and graduation rates are being increased by a summer bridge program, an
orientation program, supplemental instruction in key STEM courses, intensive
academic advising, and summer research and internship opportunities.
Professional success is encouraged through regular group meetings,
individualized portfolios, and career services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: The project is increasing the number and diversity of students who
complete a STEM major and go on to work in the field or to further education.
Results of this program are being disseminated through professional conferences
and higher education publications and shared with partner high schools.
Successful support structures built for these students are being incorporated
into the college's programs.