* 1154189
* Merit Fellows Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2019
* Gretchen Adams, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 599,518.00

The objective of the Merit Fellows project is to focus on academically talented,
financially disadvantaged STEM students participating in the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) Merit Program for Emerging Scholars. The
Merit Program, established in 1989 at UIUC, is proving to be successful in
recruiting and graduating students in the STEM disciplines. Nineteen (19) full
time majors in Chemistry, Integrative Biology (IB), and Mathematics (recruited
in cohorts) are to be provided with scholarships for their entire undergraduate
experience. The university is committed to financially supporting all students
through graduation. The intellectual merit of the project lies in the project
design that is based on strong evidence that enhanced support services provided
through additional advising, a wide variety of cohort-building activities, and a
mentoring program (peer and faculty) are highly successful in retaining students
in STEM majors. Scholarships for the maximum amount possible reduce the need for
students to work part-time during the academic year. Multiple evaluation efforts
are to be implemented to assess the impact of the extra funds and services on
the students' performance and persistence in STEM majors. The project is to be
directed by expert and experienced PIs.

The broader impacts of the program are in its efforts to retain students from
small rural high schools, females, and underrepresented minorities at higher
rates than has been possible in the past. The evaluation of this project is to
be used to request institutionalization of the Faculty and Peer mentoring
program. Additionally the results of the project are to be incorporated into the
development strategy of each department with the specific goal of securing
corporate and private funding to support continuation and expansion of the
scholarship program. The Merit Fellows Scholarship Program is potentially a
model for dissemination to other institutions to adopt and adapt to their own
context. A website is to be used as a recruitment tool and to record success
stories and quotes from Merit Fellows. A description of the Merit Fellow Program
including evaluation results will be made available in future publications and
presentations by Merit Directors.