* 1154051
* Uncovering the Origins of the Gender Gap in Political Ambition
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Richard Fox, American University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2014
* USD 301,113.00

This project will undertake the first national study of gender and political
ambition among high school and college students. Research on women's candidate
emergence identifies a substantial gender gap in political ambition that is
well-established by the time women and men enter the professions from which
political candidates tend to emerge. More specifically, women are roughly one-
third less likely than men, even when they are matched professionally,
educationally, and politically, ever to have considered running for office.
Conducting surveys of a national random sample of 2,000 male and female high
school students (ages 13 to 17) and 2,000 male and female college students (ages
18 to 25) will provide an opportunity for a broad, systematic study of the
origins of the gender gap in political ambition. Ultimately, the survey data
will help identify the initial causes of the gender gap in political ambition,
which is a prerequisite to closing it.

Intellectual Merit: A striking gender imbalance persists among high-level
elected officials in the United States. Ninety nations surpass the United States
in the percentage of women serving in the national legislature. Political
scientists have come to conclude that the gender gap in political ambition is
one of the most prominent explanations for women's under-representation, and
that gender differences in interest in running for office are set in place prior
to adulthood. Yet no empirical research has examined thoroughly the link between
early socialization and the gender gap in political ambition. Previous work
demonstrates that a politicized upbringing triggers and sustains interest in
running for office throughout potential candidates' lives. But scholars arrive
at this conclusion by relying on individuals' retrospective assessments and
reflections of their formative experiences as children and adolescents. Surveys
of young people link early socialization to political behavior, such as voting,
political interest, and political activism, but stop short of investigating
political ambition.

Our project will take the next step in the study of women's candidate emergence
and representation. Gaining a full understanding of the origins of the gender
gap in political ambition requires surveying individuals at a time that is more
proximate to the experiences and patterns of early socialization that affect
interest in running for office. The study represents the only examination of
political ambition among high school and college students. Beyond this general
advance in the study of political ambition, this project will: 1) shed light on
the degree to which traditional gender socialization permeates the lives of
young citizens; 2) offer an opportunity to examine the extent to which family
life, education and peer group associations, and media exposure contribute to
gender differences in eventual candidate emergence; and 3) allow for a more
accurate prognosis for women's full participation in electoral politics.

Broader Impacts: For normative, theoretical, and practical reasons, it is
critical to understand how the gender gap in political ambition emerges. As the
first in-depth national examination of high school and college students'
political ambition and the gender differences therein, this project has the
potential to exert a substantial impact in academia and beyond. Upon completing
the data analysis for publications, we will make the data available through the
Interuniversity Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR), where it
will serve as a valuable resource for scholars interested in gender politics and
political behavior. Outside of academic circles, the findings will provide
critical information for policymakers and organizations dedicated to increasing
women's participation in electoral politics, as well as those seeking to bolster
civic engagement among youth populations. The data we collect will also allow us
to provide new analysis and shape the dialogue pertaining to campaigns,
elections, and women's representation.