* 1154274
* S-STEM:  Increasing Diversity in Next Generation Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Susan Vrbsky, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2017
* USD 587,000.00

This S-STEM project is Increasing Diversity in Next-Generation Computing (IDNGC)
in two related majors, Computer Science and Management Information Systems.
Students within Computer Science and Management Information Systems share a
close relationship in curriculum and have significant overlap in student
experience, including student organizations, colloquium talks, student tutoring
sessions and alumni mentoring. The program will emphasize participation by
students from underrepresented groups, including women and minority students,
first-generation college students and students from economically challenged
areas of Alabama. The project: 1) recruits qualified students, 2) provides a
support infrastructure to enhance success as students, 3) provides financial
assistance for students who have demonstrated a commitment to their studies in
these fields, and 4) exposes students to new advances in computing. The project
provides scholarships for 24 undergraduates over a four-year time period, with
12 scholarships for the Computer Science Department and 12 for the Management
Information Systems Department. Providing the scholarships alleviates some of
the financial risks for students in these fields. The project establishes a
formal structure for assessing and assisting students during their academic
careers, including faculty, peer and alumni mentoring, and exposure to new
advances in computing, such as cloud computing, security, business intelligence
and robotics. The result is to enhance their professional development and
participation in research, which can increase their future success in a STEM
field in either industry or academia. This project builds on research results
regarding the recruitment, retention and matriculation of students who are
members of underrepresented groups. Incorporating formal assessment cycles as
part of participants' academic careers not only provides for improved retention,
but also provides further insight into the difficulties experienced by these
students and allows for the development of new techniques to enhance student
success. Increasing the students' knowledge and exposure to cutting edge ideas
in the field help them create solutions to future problems. All of the faculty
serving on this project are members of underrepresented groups who serve as role
models for the students, who in turn serve as role models to students at lower
academic levels. Furthermore, emphasis on next generation computing helps to
prepare students in our programs with the knowledge and tools to innovate and
lead in the field.