* 1154500
* Engineering the Future: Pathways to Success for Women and Underrepresented Students in the Engineering Technologies
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Sunghoon Jang, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lidia C. Yoshida
* 06/30/2016
* USD 599,792.00

This Engineering the Future project provides scholarship support for 30
academically promising but financially disadvantaged students in four
engineering technology departments: Computer Engineering Technology (CET),
Computer Systems Technology (CST), Electrical and Telecommunications Engineering
Technology (ETET), and Mechanical Engineering Technology (MET) at New York City
College of Technology of The City University of New York. To close the
significant gender gap that exists in enrollment, retention, and graduation of
female students at the associate and baccalaureate degree levels, this project
focuses on a matrix of enhancements and supports to meet the needs of female
scholarship recipients while providing a rich array of opportunities for all
scholars in the program. These include peer mentoring, tutoring, counseling,
outreach, research and internship opportunities, First-Year Learning
Communities, and peer-led team learning (PLTL) and laboratory-based learning.
The project intends to: increase the number of female students, a severely
underrepresented population in engineering technology programs at City Tech, by
25% over four years; enable 80% of the S-STEM scholars to persist in their
studies to the following year; and graduate 20% more STEM recipients than the
general student population. The project seeks to reduce the significant gender
gap in the targeted engineering technology fields, raise the profile of
successful students in engineering technology programs, and lay solid groundwork
for women and underrepresented students to participate in the technical
workforce.