* 1154201
* Collaborative Research: Using Web Data to Study U.S. Congressional Campaigns and Representation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Michael Parkin, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2015
* USD 36,815.00

Electoral campaigns are a defining feature of democratic polities. Yet studying
electoral campaigns and their effects has been difficult. In recent work, the
investigators have developed a theory of campaign communication and tested
expectations using data from campaigns' and members' official websites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of two collaborative National Science
Foundation grants (SES-0822819, SES-0822782, and SES-1024079, SES-1023291,
SES-1022902), the investigators have amassed a data set consisting of more than
1,500 website codings, from 2002 through 2010. These data offer unprecedented
opportunities to study campaigns and their effects. The investigators will
extend their data collection to include the 2012 campaign and the 2011 and 2013
legislative sessions. They will code sites over the course of the campaign,
archive sites, implement a survey of website designers, and code official member
websites approximately one year after the campaigns. They also will solicit
input on the coding scheme to include features that interest other scholars who
can then use the data for their own research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extending
the data to include the 2012 election (and the 2011 and 2013 legislative
sessions) is critical for various reasons: partisanship differs from what it has
been in past years of the project; the infusion of new members of Congress in
2012 raises intriguing questions about path dependency and the power of parties
in affecting behaviors of those who ran untraditional campaigns; and the
increasingly technological expectations of the public may stimulate an increase
in what has been rudimentary technical usage on websites. In the end, the
investigators will construct a publicly available data set that includes coding
of approximately 1,900 campaign websites and roughly 300 official member
websites, over twelve points in time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
clear intellectual merit. The data will enable scholars to track the evolution
of the Internet over time and test theories of campaigns and representation.
Unlike other unmediated sources of campaign communication, such as television
advertisements and debates, virtually all candidates launch campaign websites
and all representatives have official websites. This allows for analyses on a
representative sample of candidates and members, rather than a biased sample.
Websites also enable politicians to present a holistic picture of their
behaviors rather than short sound bites or selected roll call votes. The project
also produces broader impacts. Insights generated from these data could improve
campaigns and representation. The project will involve students who will learn
how to conduct research and be able to use the data in their own work. In the
end, the project uniquely brings together data on three key components of
democratic polities: campaigns, voting, and representation.