* 1154012
* Integrating and Extending Decisions from Experience Phenomena with Instance-Based Learning Models
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Cleotilde Gonzalez, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 04/30/2016
* USD 519,852.00

In this project the Principal Investigator (PI) will study decision making
phenomena that emerge from situations in which the explicit description of
outcomes and probabilities is not available (i.e., Decisions from Experience,
DFE). The PI will determine how Prospect Theory and other models of choice under
risk may or may not account for human behavior in DFE situations. The PI will
also examine the ability of an Instance-Based Learning model ( IBL) derived from
the ACT-R theory of cognition (Anderson &amp; Lebiere, 1998) to account for
behavior in DFE. The performance of this model will also be examined in two new
domains: First by considering decisions from experience in dynamic environments,
and second by investigating the effects of decisions from experience in
situations involving more than one person.&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader
impacts, this research will expand our knowledge of human behavior in the
naturalistic situations in which we use our experience to make decisions. The
research investigates situations where people have the opportunity to sample
options before making decisions for real and also situations where they are
forced to make consequential decisions without exploring the options. These
types of situations arise frequently in Engineering, Business, and Medicine. The
research will also result in concrete experimental tools and computational
models to be made available to the academic and research community.