* 1154152
* Chem-STEM Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Patrick Owens, Winthrop University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2017
* USD 598,500.00

The Chem-STEM Scholars Program is recruiting 41 academically talented and
financially needy students into chemistry and biochemistry over the five years
of the project. Students share a common curriculum involving degree tracks
meeting American Chemical Society (ACS) guidelines for a professional
undergraduate education. Based on historical matriculation patterns at the
university, both freshmen and sophomore entry points are being used to recruit
students. Entering 2012-2016 freshmen cohorts have $5,000 scholarships
available; all scholars remaining in good standing are supported for four years.
2012-2015 sophomore cohorts, comprised primarily of students from other majors
or transfers, have $5,000 scholarships available; all sophomore scholars
maintaining satisfactory progress are supported for three years. At the end of
the project, the university is sustaining Chem-STEM scholarships for NSF-funded
cohorts who have not yet graduated.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The project is developing the best practices to recruit, engage, and retain
students taking rigorous undergraduate programs. Program goals are to:
&lt;br/&gt;1) provide increased professional educational opportunities in
chemistry for academically talented and financially needy students through
sustainable recruitment and scholarship programs; &lt;br/&gt;2) increase student
retention to degree completion; &lt;br/&gt;3) improve support services through
targeted academic monitoring, community building, seminars, internships, and
mentoring; and&lt;br/&gt;4) matriculate 85% of scholarship students into
teaching, graduate programs, or industrial scientific positions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts include: 1) student completion of academic
programs involving research and internships; 2) participation of students from
underrepresented groups; 3) increased involvement of industry in providing
science internships; 4) dissemination of research activities to high schools;
and 5) availability of Chem-STEM graduates to the state workforce. Findings
achieved by students during research projects are being disseminated through
presentations and publications.