* 1154625
* Academic Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2019
* Anne Hodgkins, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 03/31/2019
* USD 578,236.00

The Academic Scholars Program is awarding 15 annual scholarships that average
$7,000 per academic year to academically talented, but financially needy,
students majoring in Biology, Chemistry, and Mathematics. Outreach efforts focus
on women and minorities underrepresented in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields. Activities are designed and implemented to
support the Academic Scholars Program as a whole, including efforts to expand
and institutionalize this program. Scholarship recipients move through each
phase of their educational programs as a cohort, but also receive personalized
encouragement and support through an ongoing relationship with their Academic
Scholars Mentor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Academic Scholars
program builds upon the framework developed for the prior S-STEM project
(0631133) and incorporates the lessons learned during the successful management
of that project as well as utilizing a comprehensive evaluation process to
improve success. Successful program components include: &lt;br/&gt;(a) The
utilization of Individual Education Plans for each scholarship recipient as well
as an Academic Scholars Mentor who monitors academic progress. &lt;br/&gt;(b)
The creation of a STEM student cohort through the College Success Center.
&lt;br/&gt;(c) The participation of scholarship recipients in field experiences
which offer application-oriented experiences. &lt;br/&gt;(d) Increased
collaboration between faculty and students in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The Academic Scholars Program is critical
in advancing the knowledge and understanding of science, engineering, technology
and mathematics in an Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) campus comprised of
highly diverse, economically disadvantaged, and academically talented students.
This program is broadening opportunities and enabling participation for
underrepresented groups of students to pursue degrees in STEM disciplines. The
outcomes from the program objectives are being broadly disseminated in order
that other colleges may replicate the program.