* 1154874
* RUI: Understanding Youth's Reasoning about Procedural Justice from a Developmental Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Twila Wingrove, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 29,967.00

Procedural justice refers to people's evaluations of how fairly they are treated
during decision-making processes. More than 30 years of research has
demonstrated a strong relationship between perceptions of fair treatment and
decision-related outcomes, including respect for decision-makers (e.g., legal
authorities) and compliance with sanctions. While a few researchers have
extended procedural justice theory to children, none have done so from a
theoretically-grounded developmental perspective. This research examines minors?
sensitivity to procedural treatment from the lens of social-cognitive domain
theory, which holds that children's reasoning about morality differs depending
on which domain that treatment belongs. Specifically, this study addresses the
following questions: 1) How is age related to sensitivity in variations in
procedural treatment?; 2) What kind of reasoning do children use when evaluating
procedural treatment?; 3) What developmental differences exist in children's
reasoning about procedural treatment? To answer these questions, the PI will
employ a vignette design involving a scenario describing a transgression
committed by a child followed by a punishment meted out by an authority (parent,
teacher, or judge). The punishment context allows for the introduction of three
components of procedural treatment: voice, consistency, and
respect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will inform both
legal psychology and developmental psychology. In the field of legal psychology,
the results will expand knowledge of whether procedural justice is highly
relevant to children as it is adults. In the field of developmental psychology,
the results will expand knowledge of domain theory into new territory --
reasoning about procedural treatment as a form of moral behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the research has potentially significant policy
implications. Procedural justice dialogue has been used to advocate for
children's increased in involvement in child custody and child protection
decision-making. This research will begin to answer the question of whether and
when such involvement is appropriate and beneficial.