* 1154093
* Scholarships to Aid Rio Hondo STEM Students
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Vann Priest, Rio Hondo College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 04/30/2017
* USD 599,988.00

With an NSF S-STEM award, Rio Hondo College is annually supporting approximately
21 academically talented and financially needy STEM students through the
"Scholarships to Aid Rio Hondo STEM Students"(STARRS) program. By reducing
financial barriers, the college is augmenting retention and increasing
persistence through several proven techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STARRS
scholars are attending full-time, working less hours at jobs, meeting regularly
with faculty mentors, and participating in the college's Math, Engineering, and
Science Achievement (MESA) and/or TRiO Student Support Services STEM (SSS)
programs. These students have access to the MESA Center and careful advising to
support their personal educational plans. In addition they have priority
registration to implement a clustering into the same sections of mathematics and
science courses, regular contact with the MESA/SSS STEM Director and the
Educational Advisor, financial literacy education, and support for additional
scholarship and internship applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STARRS students
are encouraged to attend Academic Excellence Workshops led by student-peer
facilitators to help them excel in mathematics, physics and chemistry courses,
and they can utilize drop-in tutoring in mathematics, physics, chemistry and
biology in the MESA Center. One-on-one tutoring is freely available for students
who are identified by an early alert system. S-STEM scholars may attend transfer
conferences, tours of four-year colleges, universities, and local industry
employers, and they are eligible to apply for all-expenses-paid travel to
meetings of professional societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program has the
innovative feature that scholarship amounts are determined by the number of
science and mathematics courses in which the student enrolls during the next
academic year. Applicants must show residency, be a STEM major, show financial
need, demonstrate academic merit, and submit an essay describing academic goals
and how the scholarship will enable them to reduce the number of work hours.
Results from these innovative scholarship features are being disseminated
through conferences and the college's website.