* 1154635
* Processing 3D Seismic Reflection Dataset From Offshore Costa Rica Through 3D Pre-Stack Depth Migration
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Eli Silver, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 01/31/2013
* USD 189,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The PI requests funds to help offset the costs of processing
of recently acquired 3D seismic reflection data from the Costa Rica margin.
These data were acquired as part of a project funded by NSF to image the
subduction zone on the Pacific margin of Costa Rica, specifically targeting the
subducting plate interface where regular subduction thrust earthquake occur. The
original plan, outlined in the NSF-Costa Rica 3D proposal that was submitted in
August, 2008, included 3D seismic data processing by the Spanish oil company
Repsol. The agreement with Repsol included a letter of intent for Repsol to
process these data at their expense. However, in the three intervening years
since the agreement with Repsol and submission of the proposal (due to a year
delay in funding and two-year delay in getting time on the R/V Langseth), Repsol
entered into a partnership with CGGVeritas and subsequently changed their
arrangements for processing all of their seismic data. Consequently Repsol was
unable to offer data processing without some compensation to the
Repsol/CGGVeritas partnership. Respol/CGGVeritas requires $150,000 to conduct
this work, a fraction of the costs for doing the processing. With the funds
requested in this proposal, Repsol/CGGVeritas will process the 3D data volume
through an initial time-processing stage followed by a second stage of advanced
3D depth imaging. Repsol/CGGVeritas expects to complete both stages quickly,
within ~12 months.

The Costa Rica 3D seismic project was designed to image the subducting plate
interface from the trench into the seismogenic zone. This is a subduction zone
that regularly produces moderate M 7+ earthquakes. The primary goal of the
project is to image the plate interface across the aseismic-to-seismic
transition and to image the fault and deformational structures of the overriding
plate with great detail and in 3D. The data acquisition on the Marcus Langseth
was a success with the survey covering an 11 x 55 km area with 37.5 m inline and
25 m crossline spacing with nearly complete coverage. The total data volume is
4.5 Terabytes. Preliminary results from conducting quality control during the
acquisition cruise shows the data are of high quality and will produce an
excellent 3D volume. The PI has devised a plan for processing with
Repsol/CGGVeritas and they are ready to begin the job. Repsol is satisfied these
data will produce an excellent product once processed.

Broader impacts: The project will enable the PI to maximize the quality of the
images from these data and assume the greatest impact from this study. These
data will be used by two MS students at the University of Texas and a postdoc at
UC Santa Cruz. These students and the postdoc participated at sea with the data
acquisition on the Langseth and will use the processed data for their thesis and
postdoctoral studies. The processed 3D data volume will support planning and
development of a major international program for drilling, the CRISP project,
through the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program. The overall goals of the project,
further understanding of the fault conditions within the seismogenic zone, will
lead to a better understanding of the earthquake hazard in Costa Rica and will
be directly applicable to subduction zone settings around the world.