* 1154511
* Using DNA Curtains to Reveal the Mechanisms of Target Site Location by DNA Binding Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Eric Greene, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,125,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The project addresses a fundamental problem in biology: How
do site- and structure-specific DNA-binding proteins locate their targets among
a vast excess of nonspecific DNA? This question will be studied using a multi-
disciplinary approach encompassing nanoscale engineering, surface chemistry,
physics and biochemistry. The ability of proteins to locate rare targets is
essential for all aspects of gene expression, DNA replication, chromosome
dynamics and genome maintenance, yet meaningful details of how these processes
occur are typically unavailable. This project will focus on post-replicative
mismatch repair (MMR) as a model system, and experiments will be conducted to
determine precisely how the MMR proteins MutSa and MutLa locate and respond to
their specific DNA targets. Detailed mechanisms of these processes are not yet
available, despite years of intensive investigation, largely due to the inherent
limitations of ensemble-level biochemical measurements. To overcome these
limitations, this project will utilize nanofabricated' DNA Curtains' and apply
total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM) to directly visualize
individual protein complexes as they search for and engage their target sites on
individual molecules of DNA. This unique approach to single-molecule imaging was
pioneered by the PI's laboratory, and enables rapid collection of statistically
relevant information in real time from individual molecules by enabling parallel
imaging of multiple reaction trajectories.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
- The technology developed in Dr. Greene's laboratory provides a 'high-
throughput' approach for real-time, single-molecule analysis of nucleoprotein
complexes. The PI has actively disseminated this technology to the broader
research community, as it has the potential to provide novel insights into
virtually any biological system that involves interactions between protein and
DNA molecules. This interdisciplinary work also provides trainees with a
cutting-edge, broad-based educational experience that will allow them to pursue
significant scientific careers upon completion of their degree requirements. To
promote the understanding of single-molecule approaches to biological science,
these technologies have been integrated into the University's undergraduate and
graduate course curriculum. The PI is engaged in concerted efforts to advance
the scientific training and development of younger students, particularly
through research-oriented educational programs. He serves as an undergraduate
student mentor for Columbia University's Summer Undergraduate Research
Fellowship program (SURF), and as a student mentor for the Harlem Children's
Society. The project will integrate younger students into all aspects of
scientific work performed in the laboratory, thereby providing them with
valuable, real-world research experiences.