* 1154398
* Scholarships for Academically Talented but Economically Disadvantaged Students
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Jayantha Herath, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 06/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

The NSF-S-STEM-Scholars@StCloud program at St. Cloud State University (SCSU)
offers 30 two-year scholarships of up to $9,100 per year to academically
talented and financially needy students who are interested in STEM careers in
Information Systems, Computer Science and Computer Engineering. This program
enhances the ability of these students to complete a high-quality degree
program, thus strengthening the STEM workforce and its leadership. The NSF-S-
STEM-Scholars@StCloud participants are recruited at the junior level, including
transfer students. Full-time faculty mentors provide academic advising and each
scholar has a faculty mentor, a graduate assistant or a senior student peer.
Many of SCSU's first-generation students come from low income families.
Exceptionally talented students who chose low-cost two-year community, tribal
and technical colleges transfer to SCSU to continue their studies. The project
is developing liaisons with STEM departments in nearby colleges. SCSU is well-
positioned to broaden the participation of economically disadvantaged and
talented female and minority students to increase enrollment, recruit, retain
and graduate them in STEM disciplines. NSF-S-STEM-Scholars@StCloud students are
graduating with the strong foundation necessary for them to be successful in
their chosen careers in industry or in graduate school.