* 1154687
* Distributional Politics and Social Protection: the Fourth Module of the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Andre Blais, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2015
* USD 298,983.00

Begun in the 1990s, the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) is an
ongoing international project that examines how peoples' attitudes and behaviors
at election time vary across countries with different types of electoral
arrangements. This is accomplished by conducting surveys of eligible voters in
as many countries as possible, merging the data from all of these sources, and
adding contextual information about the socio-economic and institutional
characteristics of the country and electoral district in which voters find
themselves. This valuable and unique data resource allows researchers to study
how characteristics of individuals and characteristics of the environment
jointly affect attitudes and behavior. In particular, the study focuses on
decisions by eligible voters about whether to vote in an election, how to vote,
and why.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core CSES project involves over 200 scholars
from election studies in over 60 countries. Every five years the CSES project
designs a new common module of questions to ask in all of the participating
election studies. Each participating election study funds and oversees the data
collection in its own country. The CSES project provides coordination,
scientific guidance, questionnaire design, quality control, and other
centralized functions only. This current proposal seeks support to complete the
activities of a fourth module of the CSES, and the planning and design of a
fifth module. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSES project has strong intellectual
merit. It is a unique, public resource that advances the understanding of
elections and vote choice in ways not possible otherwise. The project helps
researchers to better understand: how societal, political, and economic factors
shape beliefs and behaviors; how political and social divisions and alignments
are formed and transformed; and how citizens, living under diverse political
arrangements, evaluate democratic institutions and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project are
significant. CSES receives, cleans, checks, and merges all of the data collected
by the many country teams and makes the information freely and immediately
available to the world via the project website at: http://www.cses.org. The CSES
serves as a public resource for researchers, students, policymakers,
journalists, governments, and other interested parties. A large and growing
number of publications have been based on the project. The output from CSES has
policy implications for the design and implementation of electoral systems
around the world, as well as significant implications for our understanding of
democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSES has many additional benefits, including the
training of students in data use and analysis. CSES is widely used in university
courses, and students regularly serve as research assistants for the project.
CSES also works to improve the quality of the scientific study of elections
generally, in new democracies in particular, by providing collaborative and
networking opportunities, and by encouraging and providing guidance to scholars
studying elections and democracy worldwide.