* 1154096
* AugSTEM Scholarships: Preparing Juniors and Seniors for Careers in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2016
* Rebekah Dupont, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 10/31/2016
* USD 599,977.00

In the AugSTEM program, Augsburg College is awarding 70 scholarships to a cross-
disciplinary cohort of students. The program builds on past successes in
attracting transfer and underrepresented students to Augsburg's small urban
campus and successful retention strategies in introductory STEM sequences.
Approximately 50% of the scholarship recipients began their postsecondary
careers at area community colleges. Students are united by their common
educational stage and a shared objective of graduating and pursuing a STEM
career. Programming encourages students to finish their degrees with strong
academic credentials and clarity of purpose. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of
the AugSTEM program are to:&lt;br/&gt; - Increase the number of transfer
students who obtain a STEM degree by building partnerships and providing
programming tailored to the needs and timelines of such students;&lt;br/&gt; -
Provide financial support for 30 academically talented upper-division STEM
students;&lt;br/&gt; - Retain junior and senior STEM students to graduation by
extending earlier successes in first and second-year programming;&lt;br/&gt; -
Enhance the readiness of STEM students for successful transitions to the
scientific workplace; and &lt;br/&gt; - Develop sustained excellence in
undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AugSTEM program is
increasing the College's efforts to create a diverse campus, especially serving
underrepresented populations who might otherwise leave the STEM pipeline. The
program is also pairing with S-STEM programs at partner community college to
better serve the increasing population of undergraduates who begin their careers
at two-year institutions. Ultimately, the AugSTEM program is increasing the
number and diversity of STEM graduates entering the workforce, fostering
interactions between Augsburg STEM faculty and community college colleagues,
enhancing professional preparedness for students, and providing a foundation for
future growth of a vibrant division of natural sciences and mathematics.