* 1154675
* Collaborative Research: High Precision 40Ar/39Ar Geochronology and Paleomagnetism to Determine the History and Consequences of Louisville Mantle Plume Motion
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Jeffrey Gee, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Janecek
* 03/31/2016
* USD 140,674.00

A major outstanding question in geodynamics is whether primary hotspots in the
Pacific, like the Hawaiian and Louisville hotspots, experienced similar amounts
of plume motion or whether they moved independently. In December 2010 IODP
Expedition 330 to the Louisville seamount trail set out to answer this critical
question. Preliminary shipboard paleomagnetic data (although based upon limited
shipboard sampling) clearly show the Louisville hotspot did not experience the
same large 15Â° shift in paleolatitude as recorded for the Hawaiian hotspot
between 80 and 50 Ma. Critically, these shipboard data neither allow for
estimates of the duration of volcanism at individual sites drilled nor for the
inclination of many cooling units (about half have no data yet or only a single
sample). As importantly, the abundance of (mostly submarine) volcaniclastic
material recovered makes estimating the paleolatitudes less straightforward than
for the sites on the Hawaii-Emperor trail, where a sequence of discrete
(primarilythat might be expected to have random directions, instead have
consistent inclinations that are similar to those of intercalated lava flows and
therefore may provide valuable paleolatitude information. The proponents
therefore propose additional 40 Ar/39 Ar age determinations, paleomagnetic and
rock magnetic studies, and integration of additional shore-based and shipboard
data (e.g. borehole magnetic anomalies) that will allow the to address the
following questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How long did it take to build the
volcanic sequences drilled during Expedition 330 and are these intervals (and
associated quiescence periods) long enough to average out secular
variation?&lt;br/&gt;2. Do Louisville seamounts have post-erosional volcanism
and if so what is its duration?&lt;br/&gt;3. What is the origin of consistent
inclinations in some volcaniclastic units and do these provide a time-averaged
remanence that can improve paleolatitude estimates?&lt;br/&gt;4. Are the
inclination data from the Louisville seamounts sufficiently similar to provide a
robust paleolatitude from pooled data?&lt;br/&gt;5. Can we use the ages and
paleolatitude history of the Louisville hotspot to improve absolute plate motion
models for Pacific plate?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will
allow the proponents to (1) provide the most accurate and precise age framework
for volcanic activity along the Louisville seamount trail, (2) to significantly
reduce on the uncertainties in paleolatitude estimates, and (3) help to improve
absolute plate motion model for the Pacific Plate taking into account the (lack
of) motion of the individual Hawaiian and Louisville
hotspots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact and Educational Outreach: The
proposed project is part of an international collaborative effort in support of
the science objectives of IODP Expedition 330 to the Louisville Seamount Trail.
The proponents are collaborating with eight international researchers from
Japan, UK and Australia, with whom they will generate as complete as possible
and much needed high-precision 40 Ar/39 Ar and paleomagnetic data sets. The
Proponents will coordinate this concerted effort over the two years of our
project, with the ultimate goal to delineate the most accurate paleolatitude and
age history for the Louisville hotspot. They also will organize a series of
outreach activities, including expanding the Expedition 330 website started by
Koppers by adding scientific products and data sets resulting from this project
and by linking these in with the online Seamount Catalog and MagIC. This work
will be part of the Ph.D.thesis of two students at OSU and SIO.