* 1154039
* EAGER: Vectorial Anisotropic Body and Surface Wave Tomography Using USArray Data
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Mark Panning, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 178,331.00

Robust modeling of both strength and orientation of
anisotropic&lt;br/&gt;structure is a tantalizing tool for constraining the
dynamic processes in the lithospheric and&lt;br/&gt;sub-lithospheric mantle
beneath North America, directly meeting the Earthscope goals of
understanding&lt;br/&gt;the active deformation of North America and tying it to
deep Earth structure and&lt;br/&gt;dynamics. The long term goal of this research
is to develop more detailed regional and global&lt;br/&gt;models of seismic
anisotropy that can both illuminate the dynamic processes of the upper
mantle,&lt;br/&gt;as well as allowing for direct comparison with geodynamically
predicted models. The&lt;br/&gt;objective of this EAGER application, which is
the next step towards this long-term goal, is to&lt;br/&gt;develop a new
approach to image dynamic processes in the lithospheric and sub-
lithospheric&lt;br/&gt;mantle beneath North America with a novel technique
combining both body wave and surface&lt;br/&gt;wave observables that allows for
finite-frequency vectorial tomography. The international
collaboration&lt;br/&gt;proposed here is uniquely suited to bring these
approaches the PI and the research&lt;br/&gt;group of SÂ´ebastien Chevrot have
been working on together and take advantage of the incredible&lt;br/&gt;dataset
offered by the USArray transportable array to move towards obtaining an
unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;model of anisotropic structure beneath North America.
The project will develop these models&lt;br/&gt;by pursuing the following
specific aims. 1) Perform synthetic testing of joint inversions
using&lt;br/&gt;this new approach. The inversions will allow us to gain
unprecedented information about both&lt;br/&gt;strength and orientation of
anisotropy. 2) Assemble and process USArray shear splitting
and&lt;br/&gt;surface wave data and merge and improve existing software between
the two research groups.&lt;br/&gt;Dense data coverage of both splitting
intensity and multi-taper fundamental mode phase delay&lt;br/&gt;will be
possible, and since both approaches have been developed from a consistent
elastic parameterization,&lt;br/&gt;merging the software and performing joint
inversions of the data shows great&lt;br/&gt;potential for greatly improving the
capabilities of anisotropic modeling.