* 1154965
* Quantification of the Biotransport Phenomena in Low-Cryoprotectant (CPA) Vitrification of Living Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Xiaoming He, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 275,945.00

1033426

He

Contemporary methods for cell cryopreservation often produce a low yield of
viable cells due to the harmful effects of ice formation or use of a high
concentration of cryoprotectant (CPA). This research seeks to achieve ice-free
cryopreservation (vitrification) of cells using a low, nontoxic concentration of
CPA (low-CPA). A quantitative understanding of the thermally driven, non-
equilibrium phase transition of water in living cells into either a crystalline
or a glassy solid, and its correlation with cell survival during low-CPA
vitrification has not been achieved to date. Therefore, the objective of this
project is to quantify the relevant fundamental phenomena by model development
coupled with experimental verification.

Intellectual Merit: A coupled thermal and phase transition model will be
developed which will facilitate quantitative understanding of the pertinent
biotransport processes during low-CPA vitrification. Optimal low-CPA
vitrification protocols for cryopreserving various living cells will be
determined.

Broader Impacts: The proposed research will assist the advancement of emerging
cell-based medicine of which the eventual success relies upon the capability to
preserve living cells for distribution to end users. Moreover, the proposed
research will be integrated into education through (a) curriculum development,
(b) training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, and (c)
dissemination of the research findings including by a specialized web page.