* 1154443
* SHINE: Differential Emission Measure Determination in Three-Dimension (3D) Using Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA) Data
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Enrico Landi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2015
* USD 308,240.00

The principal investigator (PI) and his team will assess and characterize a
number of key performance metrics of the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA)
instrument on the newly launched Solar Dynamics Observatory spacecraft.
Addressing these technical issues is crucial for the effective interpretation
and analysis of AIA data by the broader scientific community. These issues
include the deconvolution of the instrument's point spread function, the
identification of optically thick lines-of-sight to be excluded from future
analysis, and the refinement of the relevant spectroscopic physics to allow the
interpretation of AIA narrow-band images. The PI's team will then apply this new
knowledge of AIA performance to the use of a technique known as differential
emission measure tomography (DEMT), in order to determine the three-dimensional
structure and thermal properties of the global solar corona. Comparisons between
DEMT reconstructions and state-of-the-art solar wind models can improve the
realism of these models and, ultimately, shed light on longstanding problems of
how the Sun's corona is heated and how the solar wind is energized and
accelerated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will benefit the solar research
community and serve important educational functions. AIA data has the
possibility to dramatically extend and improve the research community's ability
to reconstruct the thermodynamic configuration of global solar corona from
spectroscopic measurements in extreme ultraviolet wavelengths. Also, this work
will be performed at the University of Michigan, where it will support direct
participation of undergraduate and graduate students in the research effort. The
results of this work will be presented at scientific meetings and widely
disseminated to the community through scientific publications.