* 1154734
* Collaborative Research:   Osmoregulation in Marine Dinoflagellates
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Andrea Bourdelais, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* scott santos
* 02/28/2017
* USD 344,838.00

Marine phytoplankton live in a dynamic and variable environment. Changes in
salinity, temperature and nutrients are major factors that control the growth
and distribution of phytoplankton populations. Salinity can vary significantly
in coastal waters, so many coastal phytoplankton species have evolved mechanisms
to quickly regulate their internal water concentration, a process known as
osmoregulation. In response to decreases in salinity, the dinoflagellate,
Karenia brevis, responsible for producing toxic red tides in the Gulf of Mexico,
produces a rapid >10-fold increase in ladder frame polyethers (LFPs), which
include the potent neurotoxins called brevetoxin. The functional role of LFPs in
K. brevis is unknown; however, the production of such large quantities suggests
that there must be a critical cellular role. An interdisciplinary approach
combining physiological experiments, cell imaging, next generation sequencing,
and metabolomic profiling will be used to explore the relationship between gene
transcription and physiological/metabolic responses. To determine if LFP
production is a common mechanism for osmoregulation in dinoflagellates, similar
experiments will be conducted with additional species of dinoflagellates also
known to produce LFPs. Changes in LFP production in response to low salinity may
explain how K. brevis and other toxin-producing dinoflagellates can thrive in
coastal ecosystems. The project's outcome will provide an explanation for toxin
production in 'red tide' dinoflagellates and reveal how toxic dinoflagellates,
with slow growth rates now, may compete successfully in coastal environments
under future conditions.

The project's broader impacts include training and education of a post-doctoral
researcher, three graduate students, and undergraduate students using state-of-
the-art techniques to address questions in evolution and ecology. Results will
also be utilized in a graduate Molecular Ecology course taught at TAMU providing
students with hands-on experience with actual experimental data for training in
this rapidly emerging field.