* 1154338
* REFLECT Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* JoDe Lavine, Bunker Hill Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 05/31/2016
* USD 536,456.00

Bunker Hill Community College (BHCC) in Charlestown, Massachusetts is serving
financial aid eligible and academically capable students through its Rewarding
Excellence For Leaders in Engineering, Computer Science, and Information
Technology (REFLECT) Scholarship program. REFLECT is assisting students in
completing associate and baccalaureate degrees in the selected majors by
awarding scholarships that support students for two years of study. Students may
use both years of scholarships at BHCC, or use the second of the two years at a
four-year school of their choice. REFLECT's significant efforts through the
Boston Area Advanced Technological Education Connections (BATEC) and program
articulation agreements are ensuring that scholarship recipients have
significant opportunities to pursue a four-year degree. REFLECT is also creating
leadership opportunities for students by developing new models of peer support,
including an on-line mentoring community led by scholarship recipients. REFLECT
is employing best practices developed in part through successful ATE- and LSAMP-
funded programs and activities currently offered at BHCC to support students
financially, academically, and socially as they complete their degrees. These
students are being prepared for employment in high demand technical areas. These
models of student support are being documented and assessed for their success in
promoting degree completion among a high-need urban student population.