* 1154279
* RAPID Awardee Workshop to Identify Research Needs Emerging from the 2010 and 2011 New Zealand Earthquakes and the 2011 Japan Earthquake and Tsunami
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Jay Berger, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2012
* USD 49,000.00

The objective of this award is to organize and conduct a workshop for NSF-
supported Rapid Response Research (RAPID) awardees to identify themes and
directions for research programs resulting from their investigations of the 2010
and 2011 New Zealand earthquakes and the 2011 Japan earthquake and tsunami. The
two-day workshop will be held at the National Science Foundation in Arlington,
Virginia, in 2012. Workshop participants will identify major lessons and
opportunities for further research across a range of disciplines, including
topics that are cross-disciplinary in nature. Recommendations from the workshop
will be shared widely with the broader research and practicing earthquake
engineering community in a workshop report disseminated through the Earthquake
Engineering Research Institute (EERI) website (http://www.eeri.org) and EERI's
monthly newsletter. This award is part of the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program (NEHRP), and the workshop report will also be posted on the
NEHRP web site (http://www.nehrp.gov). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Zealand and
Japan earthquakes and tsunami present major learning opportunities for the U.S.
research community. The complex nature of these events and resultant disasters
provide major lessons and research opportunities across many disciplines. These
recent earthquakes and tsunami are among the most significant and relevant
events for the U.S. earthquake engineering community in the last several
decades. Building codes in both countries are similar to those in the United
States for concrete and steel buildings; there are many strong motion records
(especially in Japan) that provide valuable data; the geologic setting and
tsunami vulnerability for Japan are similar to the Pacific Northwest Cascadian
subduction zone; there are similarities and lessons from the transportation,
lifelines, and critical facilities sectors; and there are similar social and
political issues in the response and recovery. This workshop will provide the
mechanism to collect and synthesis observations from the numerous NSF-supported
RAPID field studies to identify research needs for earthquake mitigation,
preparedness, response, and recovery to make the United States better prepared
for future disasters.