* 1154986
* Towards Resolving the Role of Agulhas Leakage in 20th Century Global Climate Change
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Benjamin Kirtman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 740,031.00

Recent studies show that Agulhas leakage may be increasing in response to
anthropogenic climate change, which would act to strengthen the Atlantic
overturning circulation at a time when anthropogenic warming and associated ice
melt are predicted to weaken it. Evidence from paleoceanographic proxies,
theory, and models indicate that the Agulhas leakage may impact the climate
system on a number of time scales. However, coupled climate models, including
the IPCC models, do not resolve the dynamics that control Agulhas leakage and
its impact on the Atlantic overturning circulation, and hence may be flawed in
their ability to predict future climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Agulhas system
and its leakage of warm and salty water from the Indo-Pacific into the Atlantic
represents a choke point in the global thermohaline circulation, feeding the
upper arm of the strong and deep Atlantic overturning cell via a non-linear
exchange of thermocline waters within Agulhas Rings, eddies, and filaments.
Coupled climate models do not simulate leakage correctly, because inertial
mechanisms and Ring formation are not resolved. Climate models also tend to
overestimate the effect of the Southern Hemisphere westerly winds on
overturning, because of unresolved eddies. This means the interplay between
winds, leakage, and the overturning circulation may be flawed in these models.
Finally, almost all coupled climate models exhibit a northward overturning
freshwater transport, while hydrographic observations point to a southward one.
This effects the sensitivity and stability of the overturning circulation in the
models, and is linked to the balance between Agulhas and Antarctic inputs into
the South Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A coupled climate simulation of the
20th century with one tenth degree ocean resolution will be run using the CCSM4.
For the first time, the Agulhas System and how its leakage responds to
anthropogenic forcing in a coupled climate system will be examined. The project
objectives are to: (1) diagnose the sensitivity of Agulhas leakage and the
overturning circulation to changing winds in the presence of eddies versus in
coarser resolution IPCC models; (2) analyze the relationship between Agulhas
Current inertia, leakage strength, subtropical wind stress curl, and the
latitude of the westerly wind maximum to test the constraints on leakage and
whether they are as theoretical models predict; (3) isolate the response of
Atlantic overturning to Agulhas leakage in the absence of a direct wind effect,
and (4) consider the balance of the cold versus warm water routes into the
surface arm of the overturning, its correlation with leakage, and its effect on
the stability of the overturning. One of the broader impacts of this project is
to provide qualitative uncertainty estimates of the predictive capability of
coarse resolution coupled climate models (especially Intergovernmental Panel for
Climate Change models) with respect to overturning strength and sensitivity in
the presence of a resolved Agulhas leakage. This project will also support a
graduate student and a postdoc who will be mentored by both a field-going
oceanographer and a climate modeler. All simulation data will be freely shared
with the community for further analyses.