* 1154621
* Utah Valley University's PRO-STEM Scholarship Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Brent Bargeron, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 587,882.00

This project provides scholarships to able and financially needy students
majoring in Biology, Chemistry, Earth Science, Mathematics, and Physics. The
project emphasizes enrichment opportunities that concentrate on engaged learning
activities that are best suited to the students' studies and aspirations. These
include faculty mentoring, monthly project participant meetings, and optional
engaged learning experiences that include faculty guided or independent
research, internships, and field trips to local industries. Other engagement
activities involve participation in professional organizations, including
attending and presenting at conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: The academic programs into which the students go are strong, and there
are academic support activities. The project focuses on student engagement and
faculty mentorship in the context of an interdisciplinary community of scholars.
This approach is designed to strengthen undergraduate science and mathematics
education, increase retention and persistence to graduation, and better prepare
students for professional careers where the boundaries between academic
disciplines are not clearly drawn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
project is increasing the number and diversity of students who complete a STEM
major and go on to work in the field or to further education. Many of the
interdisciplinary activities are made available to all UVU STEM students, during
and after the funding period. Moreover, the goal of graduating more and better-
prepared students in mathematics and the sciences is not only an institutional
goal, but a community and state goal as well. As such, the college is building
partnerships with business organizations to offer internships and on-site
learning experiences that take the classroom and laboratory education out to the
real world. This facilitates job placement for students as well as enhances the
university's relationship with local industry.