* 1154648
* Consequences of hypoxia on food web linkages in a pelagic marine ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Julie Keister, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,214,569.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Low dissolved oxygen (hypoxia) is one of the most
pronounced, pervasive, and significant disturbances in marine ecosystems. Yet,
our understanding of the ecological impacts of hypoxia on pelagic food webs is
incomplete because of our limited knowledge of how organism responses to hypoxia
affect critical ecosystem processes. In pelagic food webs, distribution shifts
of mesozooplankton and their predators may affect predator-prey overlap and
dictate energy flow up food webs. Similarly, hypoxia may induce shifts in
zooplankton community composition towards species that impede energy flow to
planktivorous fish. However, compensatory responses by species and communities
might negate these effects, maintaining trophic coupling and sustaining
productivity of upper trophic level species. The PIs propose to answer the
question "Does hypoxia affect energy flow from mesozooplankton to pelagic fish?"
They approach this question with a nested framework of hypotheses that considers
two sets of processes alternatively responsible for either changes or
maintenance of pelagic ecosystem energy flows. They will conduct their study in
the Hood Canal, WA. Unlike most hypoxia-impacted estuaries, hypoxic regions of
Hood Canal are in close proximity to sites that are not affected. This makes it
logistically easier to conduct a comparative study and reduces the number of
potential confounding factors when comparing areas that are far
apart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of
how hypoxia impacts marine ecosystems will benefit the practical application of
ecosystem-based management (EBM) in coastal and estuarine ecosystems. Effective
application of EBM requires that the impacts of human activities are well
understood and that ecological effects can be tracked using indicators. This
project will contribute to both of these needs. The PIs will share their
findings on local and national levels with Federal, State, Tribal, and County
biologists. To increase exposure of science to underrepresented groups, the PIs
also will provide Native American youth with opportunities to participate in
field collections and laboratory processing through summer internships. The PIs
will collaborate with the NSF-funded Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation and tribes from the Hood Canal region to recruit and
mentor students for potential careers in marine science. This project will
support several undergraduate researchers, two Ph.D. students, a post-doc, and
two early-career scientists.