* 1154394
* Quantitative and Analytical Sciences for Academic Reinforcement and Success (QuASARS)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Mary Anderson, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Higgins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,863.00

The Quantitative and Analytical Sciences for Academic Reinforcement and Success
(QuASARS) project at Texas Woman's University (TWU) is increasing the STEM
workforce in the United States by providing cross-disciplinary training in
quantitative and analytical science for S-STEM scholars and TWU STEM majors. In
an increasingly technological world, boundaries between traditional STEM fields
are narrowing and many careers require training at their interface. QuASARS
prepares S-STEM undergraduates for these exciting careers. Based in successes of
prior programs, the number of STEM majors at TWU has increased, their
persistence facilitated by a cohort of scholars engaging in hands-on STEM
experiences. The current program fosters development of a cohort of students
united by an interest in quantitative and analytical sciences and obtaining
degrees in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, computer science and mathematics.
The TWU S-STEM program facilitates degree progression and entrance into advanced
degree programs and STEM careers. Each year, the TWU S-STEM program provides
scholarships for approximately 20 academically talented, but financially
challenged students, who also obtain a certificate in Quantitative Sciences. The
certificate is available to all STEM students at TWU and promotes student
cohesiveness and preparedness for STEM professions. The success of the TWU
S-STEM program is assessed by evaluating QuASARS recruiting strategies, the
efficacy of support efforts provided by the program (e.g. tutoring, career
guidance), and the impact of cohort building, intensive mentoring and active
learning on the numbers of TWU STEM majors enrolling in, completing
undergraduate degrees and pursuing advanced degrees and careers in STEM fields.
The goals of the QuASARS program build on excellent academic enhancement
programs on campus (e.g. the Honors Scholars and Bridges to the Baccalaureate
programs) and partnerships with academic and industry programs that provide
internships and enhanced occupational opportunities for S-STEM scholars and TWU
STEM majors, increasing the pool for qualified STEM professionals in Texas and
across the nation. The TWU QuASARS S-STEM program is ideally suited to broadly
impacting STEM professions in Texas and nationally by increasing the
participation of groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM. TWU is the
largest university primarily for women in the US and 50% of the undergraduates
are members of groups underrepresented in STEM fields. As such, TWU provides an
excellent pool of students to increase the representation of these groups in the
professional workforce throughout Texas. Funded S-STEM scholars are encouraged
to engage in research and experiential opportunities, resulting in broad
dissemination of new findings through scholar presentations and publications.
Additionally, the TWU S-STEM scholarship program provides networking with
existing quality education programs on campus and across Texas, thereby
enhancing university and inter-institutional infrastructures.