* 1154320
* Dissolved Organic Matter Composition in the Deep Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Krista Longnecker, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2016
* USD 932,099.00

Transformations of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the deep ocean have
profound impacts on the global carbon cycle due to the sequestration of carbon
dioxide (CO2) away from the atmosphere. Although research has been conducted on
the high molecular weight component of this material, the same cannot be said
for low molecular weight DOM because the needed analytical techniques have not
been available to determine its composition and reactivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, a research team at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution has acquired the necessary analytical capability. As
such, in this project, they will carry out the first systematic survey of deep
ocean DOM in the western Atlantic Ocean to characterize the low molecular weight
fraction of DOM in southward flowing North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW), northward
flowing Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW), and Antarctic Intermediate Water (AAIW).
Using ultrahigh resolution mass spectrometry and multi-stage fragmentation
coupled to liquid chromatography, the scientists will determine the spatial
variability in the composition of DOM along the flow path of the water masses,
as well as assess the source water, transport, and surface processes that
contribute to temporal changes in DOM composition. These results will be
augmented with structural elucidation and quantitative assays of unique marker
compounds for each water mass. Results will provide important insights into the
biogeochemical reactions that govern DOM dynamics in the deep ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts component of the proposal was well
developed. Besides supporting and training one graduate student, as part of
their outreach efforts, the proponents plan to develop and teach a new class on
ultrahigh resolution mass spectrometry for graduate students and postdocs. This
class would provide them with hands-on experience and teach them to run samples
on various mass spectrometers. In addition, the proponents plan to create a fund
to train students and postdocs on the use of multivariate statistical tools for
data processing and interpretation.