* 1154312
* CSBR:  Living Stocks--Interim support for a genetic stock center for Peromyscus
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Paul Vrana, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daphne Fautin
* 11/30/2012
* USD 94,354.00

An award is made to the University of South Carolina in support of The
Peromyscus Genetic Stock Center (PGSC), which has supplied pedigreed, disease-
free animals to the national and international research community since 1985.
Peromyscus (deer mice) are the most widely distributed mammals in North America
and are used in a wide variety of studies PGSC animals are provided to
researchers at educational, industrial, and governmental institutions. The PGSC
also has a goal of improving Peromyscus as a research model. Efforts include
development of a genetic map with ~400 genetic markers placed on all Peromyscus
chromosomes, whole genome DNA sequence of four species (near completion) and
improved reproductive technology. These resources enable efforts to identify the
genetic basis of important characteristics such as habitat adaptation, mating
behavior (e.g. monogamy), genetic changes upon exposure to environmental toxins
and aggression, as well as other traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PGSC supports
undergraduate and graduate research and training at the University of South
Carolina and other institutions. Research using these resources has been
important in discovering genetic basis of altitude adaptation, determining
behavioral effect on offspring of parents exposed to environmental toxins, found
that repetitive movement disorder is mimicked in Peromyscus, and discovered
genes controlling growth and development. This project continues to have broad
significance in supporting the research endeavors of many scientists.