* 1154354
* RWU STILAS- STEM Intercultural Leadership Ambassador Scholars in Biology, Marine Biology and Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Linda Riley, Roger Williams University
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 06/30/2018
* USD 586,500.00

Roger Williams University (RWU) is implementing the STILAS program to attract,
support, graduate, and prepare academically talented STEM students with
significant financial need for future success in vital STEM fields. At least 15
students are receiving an annual renewable scholarship of up to $10,000 over
four years. STILAS builds on: 1) effective recruitment and comprehensive student
support services programs targeting underserved students; 2) university
priorities and strengths emphasizing research and other experiences engaging
students in practical applications of academic learning; and 3) academic and co-
curricular activities that build group identity, enhance learning, and connect
students to services and post-graduation opportunities that promote more
motivated, accomplished and self-directed graduates in STEM fields.

In addition to their coursework, STILAS students participate in on-going STEM-
related activities such as field trips, externships, and competitions as well as
cohort-specific experiences (including a mentoring program, tutoring, brown-bag
discussions and undergraduate research opportunities). Building on the success
of established RWU programs, STILAS participants also receive comprehensive,
personalized services from the advising, student advocacy and academic support
offices. Program recruitment includes outreach to urban science and technology
high schools and a free STEM camp experience to bring promising juniors to
campus. STILAS students participate in these outreach activities as role models
to attract others into the STEM fields. The project increases the academic
grounding and future opportunities for students historically underrepresented in
the STEM fields and supports graduates who are ready to enter industry and/or
further education. STILAS is building, assessing and disseminating a
comprehensive model that can broadly inform STEM outreach to underrepresented
students in the U.S.