* 1154895
* CAREER: Extending the lattice stability framework in ab initio alloy thermodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2011,06/30/2016
* Axel van de Walle, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2016
* USD 425,658.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure
contribute funding to this CAREER award. This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education aimed at improving our ability to predict
phase diagrams of solid state alloys, based upon first-principles quantum
mechanical calculations, without relying on experimental input. This project
provides a firm conceptual framework and associated algorithms to model
phenomena that commonly occur in technologically-relevant alloys, but that the
field of alloy theory is currently poorly equipped to handle. The research has
two thrusts:

1) Lattice instabilities. The well-established CALPHAD and cluster expansion
formalisms are fundamentally based on the assumption that a set of well-defined
lattices (e.g. bcc, fcc, hcp) remain at least metastable at all compositions.
However, in numerous alloy systems (e.g. Ti-Al, Cu-Fe, etc.), some lattices are
not even mechanically stable, thus impeding any attempts at calculating a proper
free energy. This project handles this fundamental conceptual issue by suitably
constraining the domain of integration traditionally employed to calculate free
energies based on rigorous geometrical partitioning techniques, but without
necessitating a full anharmonic treatment.

2) Novel compound prediction. While powerful methods (e.g. the cluster
expansion) exist to model alloy ordering phenomena on a common underlying
lattice, this project devises complementary methods that are applicable when
this assumption is violated (notably, in Lave phases, sigma phases, etc.). The
idea is to decompose the energy of an alloy system as a sum of atom cluster
contributions. The proposed algorithm then attempts to re-assemble the lowest
energy clusters, using combinatorial techniques, in search of low-energy crystal
structures.

The proposed methods will be implemented in the PI's Alloy Theoretic Automated
Toolkit (ATAT), a software package that already has an established user base.
The educational components of this research activity include augmenting ATAT by
a companion educational web site, which will provide tutorials and social
networking tools focusing on thermodynamics and phase diagrams, as well as using
ATAT in undergraduate and graduate classes to give students hands-on experience
with materials design tools of the future. To promote diversity, this project
will build upon the efforts of the MRSEC at Caltech in recruiting minority
undergraduates from California State University, Los Angeles.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Division of Materials Research and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure
contribute funding to this CAREER award. This award supports computational and
theoretical research aimed at improving our ability to predict "phase diagrams".
Phase diagrams are often called the "road maps of materials science", as they
indicate which compounds form as a function of temperature and pressure, when
different chemical elements are alloyed, thus providing crucial guidance in
material design. This project focuses on prediction methods based on quantum
mechanical calculations, without necessitating experimental input, a capability
that is essential to enable the discovery of truly novel materials. The project
provides a firm conceptual framework and associated algorithms to model
phenomena that commonly occur in technologically-relevant alloys, but that the
field of alloy theory is currently poorly equipped to handle.

The proposed methods will be implemented in the PI's Alloy Theoretic Automated
Toolkit (ATAT), a software package that already has an established user base.
The educational components of this research activity include augmenting ATAT by
a companion educational web site, which will provide tutorials and social
networking tools focusing on thermodynamics and phase diagrams, as well as using
ATAT in undergraduate and graduate classes to give students hands-on experience
with materials design tools of the future. To promote diversity, this project
will build upon the efforts of the Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center at Caltech in recruiting minority undergraduates from California State
University, Los Angeles.