* 1154646
* Ethics Hotlines: Investigating Decisions to Report Ethical Violations
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Lisa Ordonez, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 02/28/2015
* USD 120,000.00

This study will address issues in behavioral ethics using a novel multi-method
approach. The availability of confidential ethics hotlines (both telephone and
web-based) increased dramatically with the passage of Sarbanes-Oxley in 2002.
However, apart from statistics on the prevalence of ethics hotlines in corporate
America, little is known about the frequency and types of claims reported. This
study will involve organizing, categorizing, and analyzing data collected by a
large provider of ethics hotline services, a database of more than 1,000,000
cases over a 10-year time frame. The PIs will test the impact of naturally
occurring ethical and outcome primes on hotline reporting behavior. In addition,
they will develop an Ethics Index showing trends in the reporting of various
ethical violations over time. They hypothesize that major business scandals and
related events reported in the media should serve as primes to increase
attention to ethical violations and result in significantly higher rates of
wrongdoing reporting. Additionally, the PIs will survey a sample of working
professionals to explore how the mechanism of counterfactual priming may
increase reporting of unethical actions in organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research should improve
understanding of how organizations can best use ethics hotlines to decrease
unethical behavior. Detailed information will be obtained on the prevalence and
nature of reported wrongdoings, and on the effects of contextual and management
practices on reporting rates. The planned Ethics Index will be useful to
practitioners who need to monitor relative prevalence of ethical behavior. The
survey findings will yield theoretical and practical insight into management
methods that are most likely to increase reporting of ethical violations. In
addition, this project will benefit from a newly developed ethics center through
collaborative relationships developed among researchers, ethical compliance
officers from organizations, and students interested in how to create more
ethical organizations. It is expected that this will enhance the speed of
translation of research findings into effective practice.