* 1154266
* Renewal of the MISO Facility: Deep-Sea Imaging and Instrumentation for Oceanographic Research (Renewal of NSF-OCE-0649621)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Samuel Soule, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2018
* USD 426,186.00

WHOI proposes a five-year renewal that follows support provided under
OCE-0649621, which will end in March 2012. The WHOI TowCams, operated within the
MISO Facility are currently the only routinely available US systems for towed
deep-sea digital imaging and short-term time-lapse imaging. The importance of
digital seafloor photography for multidisciplinary science, including research
that has been conducted at the three Ridge2000 (R2K) Integrated Study Sites
(ISSs), and for general geological, chemical and biological oceanography
supported by core MGG and Biological Oceanography programs at NSF and within
other agencies (e.g., USGS, NOAA), is well
documented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under criterion two, providing infrastructure support
for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support
of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The support of
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers. All users (or the appropriate
funding agencies) share support for basic technical services on the vessel
equally, with NSF paying a share of technical support costs based on fractional
usage of the vessel during the year.