* 1154313
* Processing Orthographic Structure: Associations Between Print and Fingerspelling
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Karen Emmorey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William Badecker
* 11/30/2016
* USD 507,222.00

For over a century educators and researchers have been trying to determine how
profoundly deaf children learn to read. Deaf children are in the unique position
of learning to read and write a language that they do not speak and cannot hear.
Unlike people who can hear, though, deaf people experience English orthography
in two forms: as printed text and as fingerspelling, in which each alphabetic
letter is represented by a distinct hand configuration. This project
investigates whether fingerspelling can be used as an additional code for
retaining English print in memory and whether printed or fingerspelled words are
linked to phonology (speech-based representations). By identifying the
similarities and differences between reading print and "reading" fingerspelling,
one can identify how fingerspelling might be most effectively used in reading
instruction. Another aim of the project is to use data from functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) to identify the brain areas that support the reading of
print and fingerspelling for deaf readers. Specifically, the project will a)
examine whether ASL signs are activated when deaf adults read English words, b)
assess functional connectivity within the reading circuit for deaf signers, and
c) identify the effects of deafness, acquisition of a sign language, and/or
reading skill on brain anatomy. Finally, a parallel aim of the project is to
increase the representation of deaf people in science by including deaf
researchers on the project and by providing an accessible environment for deaf
students to gain research experience.