* 1154490
* Lawrence Technological University STEM Scholarship Program: Be a Nuclear Expert in Southeast Michigan
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Philip Olivier, Lawrence Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Tamara Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 598,000.00

Lawrence Technological University (LTU) is enabling students to complete a
Bachelor of Science degree in electrical engineering with a concentration in
power engineering, and well positioned to be employed by the U.S. nuclear power
industry. Students complete an associate's program at Monroe County Community
College (MCCC) in Nuclear Engineering Technology and then transfer to LTU to
complete the BS degree. Two pre-engineering scholarships are awarded to students
at MCCC each year of the five-year award, and eighteen to LTU students in the
electrical or computer engineering programs.

The project is preparing highly-adaptable energy technicians skilled in the
generation, transmission, and distribution of power, while simultaneously laying
the foundation for continuing education and training necessary to upgrade
workforce personnel skills. To ensure student success, LTU is offering a
comprehensive package of student outreach and support, career exploration, and
job placement services. Scholarship recipients are learning about power
engineering through interdisciplinary courses, guest lecturers, and field trips,
as well as participation in a local chapter of professional organizations. LTU
is leveraging its network of local and regional industry partnerships, including
DTE Energy Corporation, to aid in the recruitment, retention, and job placement
of the S-STEM scholars.

The project is meeting national needs for a highly-skilled, diversified
workforce in the generation, transmission, and distribution of power, and for
highly-qualified candidates for graduate studies. The project is strengthening
the partnership between the two-year and four-year institutions of higher
education, along with local engineering and technology employers. As southeast
Michigan is changing its economic base, the project will benefit a region with
substantial challenges.