* 1154575
* Circulation and Transport in the Hudson Shelf Valley
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Steven Lentz, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2017
* USD 709,692.00

It has long been known that submarine valleys over continental shelves and
submarine canyons over continental slopes provide important pathways for
transporting material such as sediment, nutrients and biological organisms
across continental shelves and slopes. Previous studies have focused almost
exclusively on deeper continental slope canyons. In contrast to slope canyons,
shallower shelf valleys are strongly influenced by surface and bottom forcing,
such as winds and waves, and often subject to large seasonal variations in
stratification. Also in contrast to slope canyons, shelf valleys extend into
shallow water, where sediment transport and biological processes are
particularly active, and can therefore potentially facilitate cross-shelf
transport of sediment and upwelling of nutrients to the near-surface euphotic
zone. Shelf valleys provide a direct connection between the shelf region that is
most strongly impacted by human activity and deep waters of the continental
slope and open ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives are guided by
previous studies of slope canyons and preliminary analysis of observations in
Hudson Shelf Valley, a narrow and long valley that cuts across the continental
shelf of the Middle Atlantic Bight. Along-valley (cross-shelf) flows in Hudson
Shelf Valley are primarily wind-driven and often reach 50 cm/s, an order of
magnitude larger than cross-shelf flows on the adjacent continental shelf,
making it an important conduit for cross-shelf exchange. The goal is a
quantitative understanding of the response of flows in shelf valleys,
particularly the along-valley transport, to wind forcing that will be broadly
relevant to a wide range of shelf valleys. The approach is a sequence of
idealized numerical modeling runs aimed at understanding the dynamics and
quantifying the transport and vertical structure of the flow in shelf valleys in
terms of relevant non-dimensional parameters, and complemented by analysis of
existing observations from Hudson Shelf Valley and more realistic simulations of
Hudson Shelf Valley to evaluate the relevance of the idealized model results to
a realistic shelf valley. Analysis of historical observations and numerical
simulations will be used to address fundamental scientific questions concerning
the circulation and transport in shelf valleys and the contribution of valley
flows to heat, salt and nutrient balances on the
shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Better understanding of the
circulation and transport in shelf valleys, and specifically Hudson Shelf
Valley, will provide the physical background for studies of biological
productivity and contaminant/larval dispersal on the shelf. It will also help
quantify tracer and momentum exchanges between the continental shelf and the
slope sea. The project will have educational impacts through the involvement of
a full-time graduate student and participation by undergraduate students.