* 1154342
* Transitioning the US Military Population to the Civilian Workforce in STEM Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Jugal Kalita, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Sullivan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 556,864.00

This project provides scholarships to academically able and financially needy
students who are military veterans and who are majoring in Biology, Physics,
Chemistry, Mathematics, Geography and Environmental Science, Computer Science,
Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Mechanical and Aerospace
Engineering. The objectives of this project are to: 1) provide academic
scholarships to attain a bachelor's degree within a STEM discipline; 2) expand
upon student support structures (e.g. mentoring, counseling services, student
organizations, etc.) to better accommodate the needs of this growing population,
and 3) assist with employment in the civilian workforce or the pursuit of STEM
graduate programs after graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
academic programs into which the students go are strong. The project emphasizes
supporting students through faculty mentoring, close interaction among groups of
students, and internships. Local industries are supportive and are providing
mentoring and internship opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
project is increasing the number and diversity of students who complete a STEM
major and go on to work in the field or to further education. The project
addresses a national issue and can serve as a model for other institutions to
follow. In addition to assisting an under-served population that makes great
personal sacrifices for our country, this program taps into a pool of hard-
working and motivated individuals and supports efforts to increase the number of
potential employees in STEM industries.