* 1154472
* Expanding Computation for Interdisciplinary Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Randall DeJong, Calvin University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2018
* USD 599,953.00

As scientific research becomes increasingly interdisciplinary, computational
skills are playing a vital role in problem solving within and especially across
disciplines. Building upon the emphasis on interdisciplinary science at the
college and the successes of an interlocking set of initiatives designed to
increase both the number and quality of science graduates equipped with
computational skills required in 21st century science, this project brings
together and coordinates college services to support students interested in
computational and interdisciplinary science. It implements strategies and
programs designed to attract and mentor scholarship students, equipping them for
graduate school or direct entry into the scientific workforce. It is part of
efforts at the college to integrate computational work across the science
disciplines, and to expand interdisciplinary student research opportunities and
internships available to students. S-STEM scholarships provide significant
incentives for academically talented students with financial need to pursue this
program of studies. It aims to increase the number of students with the
scientific and computational skills required to participate in the scientific
discoveries of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Disciplinary
depth and interdisciplinary breadth are required to find solutions to complex,
contemporary scientific problems like global warming, disease pandemics,
environmental toxicology, and the interplay between genetic and environmental
factors in human diseases. The synergy that results from collaborative efforts
to address these problems and the satisfaction that come from making progress
toward their solution are strong motivators for engaging in scientific research.
To be part of the research teams that address such problems, students need an
education that mirrors the interdisciplinary trajectory of science and responds
to national calls to develop research experiences and educational models that
support interdisciplinary science. In particular, there is a growing need for
scientists with substantial computational skills and for computer scientists who
can collaborate with researchers in other science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The NSF
scholarships, together with targeted recruiting and retention efforts and
curricular reforms, are (1) increasing the awareness of the range of
opportunities available in computational science among students, (2) encouraging
academically strong students to choose to work in computational science, and (3)
drawing such students into strong summer and academic-year research programs.
These programs produce students well prepared for further research and study or
for direct entry into the workforce. This program is specifically designed to
increase the number of students from underrepresented groups, both ethnic
minorities and women, in computer science courses through expanded recruiting
and visibility, an emphasis on cross-disciplinary applications of computational
skills, and intentional mentoring and cohort experiences throughout the
undergraduate careers of the scholarship students. These efforts are augmented
by ongoing college-wide efforts to increase the diversity of student population
at the college.