* 1154641
* Transport Pathways in the North Atlantic:  Searching for Throughput
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Jong-Jin Park, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 615,738.00

This study aims to clarify the connectivity of the subtropical and subpolar
North Atlantic by mapping exchange pathways for the upper and lower limbs of the
meridional overturning circulation. The work is motivated in part by
discrepancies between Eulerian transport estimates and the behavior of floats
and drifters in the upper and lower limbs of the MOC. The work will take
advantage of the extensive Lagrangian data set that has accumulated from
different programs over the past 40 years, as well as of historical hydrographic
data and altimetric sea surface heights. The data-based analysis will be
augmented by numerical models. Insights into the relationship between kinematics
and dynamics will result from comparisons of barriers with the potential
vorticity field. Finally, an improved understanding of residence times for the
waters comprising the upper and lower limbs of the overturning circulation
should be forthcoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connectivity between the
subpolar and subtropical North Atlantic constitutes an important piece of the
global ocean circulation and climate system. Because the meridional transport of
heat and carbon in both the upper and deep ocean depends crucially on the
linkage between these gyres, predictions of climate change will benefit from a
better understanding of this complex link. The physical oceanographic community
at large may also benefit from an illustration of the strengths and weaknesses
of the dynamical systems techniques described herein. They have been applied to
smaller scale flows and to idealizations of basin scale flows in the past, but
never to a flow field of the scale and complexity of the North Atlantic wind-
driven gyres and MOC.