* 1155338
* Archaeological and Environmental Investigations along the mid-Holocene shoreline near Aitape, Northern Papua New Guinea
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* John Terrell, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 102,330.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Mark Golitko and colleagues will
conduct one field season of excavation and survey targeted at reconstructing
mid-Holocene (~7000-3000 BP) landscape, environment, settlement patterning,
subsistence, and exchange networks near Aitape, northern Papua New Guinea (PNG).
The project brings together American, Australian, and New Guinean experts in
Pacific prehistory, paleo-environment, and paleo-tsunami research.

The north coast presents considerable environmental challenges to human
survival. For instance, a massive tsunami in 1998 wiped out villages along
Sissano Lagoon, and similar events are believed to occur several times per
century. The north coast of PNG is also heavily impacted by the ENSO cycle,
which can cause severe subsistence stress resulting from alternating cycles of
heavy rainfall and drought. This region is among the most linguistically and
biologically diverse places on earth, suggesting a history of inter-community
isolation, yet in recent history, coastal communities are linked into extensive
social networks through which goods, people, and ideas travel. These social
connections presently serve in part as a form of insurance in the face of
environmentally driven risk. Thus, in addition to informing scientists about the
past, the research has the potential to provide insight into successful
strategies to mitigate the detrimental effects of extreme environmental events.

The place of the north coast of PNG in Pacific prehistory is controversial and
poorly understood due to a relative paucity of research conducted there. In one
view, the north coast was largely uninhabited and isolated from Island Melanesia
prior to the disappearance of Lapita style pottery after ~2000 BP, resulting in
significant linguistic, genetic, and cultural differences between people living
on the mainland and off-shore islands. Alternatively, it has been suggested that
the introduction of highland PNG domesticates during the mid-Holocene period
increased population levels on the coast to such a level that new settlers were
excluded from the region. From another perspective, the north coast may have
served as a significant barrier to human movement and interaction only prior to
the stabilization of world sea-levels and formation of productive alluvial
plains after ~6000 BP. Settlement on these alluvial plains, in conjunction with
an upswing in ENSO frequency after ~7000 BP may have increased the degree of
social interaction as populations on the north coast became increasingly exposed
to environmental risk. Thereafter, the north coast formed the heart of an
interaction sphere through which people, goods, and ideas freely moved.

To test these alternative hypotheses regarding north coast prehistory,
excavations will be conducted at two sites located on the reconstructed mid-
Holocene shoreline inland from the modern town of Aitape - Paniri Creek, where
human remains dating to the mid-Holocene were previously recovered in
association with potential paleo-tsunami deposits, and Kobom/NGRP25, where
obsidian was collected during prior survey work. Survey and coring at river-cuts
and garden clearings elsewhere along the mid-Holocene shoreline will provide a
broader regional perspective on paleo-environment. Excavation and survey will
target paleo-environmental indicators (pollen, phytoliths, charcoal), datable
materials, and obsidian for sourcing analysis.

The project will provide significant new information about prehistory on the
north coast that will address the origins of human diversity in the Pacific. The
study will examine long-term human adaptive responses to climate change and sea-
level rise, and therefore contribute to modern policy debate in PNG and
elsewhere regarding global warming, sea-level rise, and effective response to
environmental risk. Involvement by local archaeologists and students will
contribute to archaeological training in PNG.