* 1155121
* Collaborative Research: Along-coast structure and propagation of internal tides
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Clinton Winant, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2016
* USD 253,962.00

The behavior of the barotropic tide in a closed ocean basin is well understood:
in plan view the basin modes appear to rotate around the periphery of the basin
as Kelvin waves, in the counter- clockwise sense in the northern hemisphere.
This project explores whether the coupled baroclinic response, internal basin
modes of much smaller wavelength than the surface tide, can be responsible for
the large internal tides that are observed on the continental shelf. In the
presence of any topographic variability, the barotropic and baroclinic modes are
coupled, and the tide generating potential can generate large amplitude internal
basin modes as well as barotropic modes. Because the baroclinic parameters
(density anomaly and stratification structure) vary in time, the baroclinic
response is not expected to be locked in constant phase with the tide generating
potential, as is the barotropic mode. Nonetheless there will be a response that
is slowly modulated, over times that are longer than a tidal period.
Observations of internal tides reveal that there exists an along-coast energy
flux, and that the variables (velocities, isotherm displacements) do not conform
to a simple mode one internal wave, because the sense of rotation of the
horizontal velocity vector changes with depth. That behavior is however
consistent with baroclinic frictional Kelvin waves over shoaling
depth.&lt;br/&gt;This study will combine theoretical analyses, idealized and
realistic simulations and analyses of previously collected data to study the
generation and propagation of along-coast propagating internal tides.
Theoretical techniques will be used to investigate baroclinic response along
continental shelves to basin-scale barotropic tidal forcing in a stratified,
rotating basin. Idealized numerical simulations will be used investigate the
structure of along-coast propagating internal tides generated by barotropic
Kelvin waves interacting with along-shelf bathymetric variations. The
sensitivity of barotropic to baroclinic energy conversion to shelf width,
stratification, amplitude of barotropic tide and amplitude of bathymetric
variability will be quantified.&lt;br/&gt;Realistic simulations of internal tide
generation by barotropic tides will be conducted for U.S. west coast shelf and
slope domains to investigate barotropic to baroclinic energy conversion and the
nature of along-coast internal tide propagation. Long-term time series from
previous field experiments also will be analyzed to determine the spatial
structure of internal tides there and the nature of along-coast
propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Current variability on
many continental shelves is dominated by internal tides. The nature of along-
coast structure and propagation is currently not known. This study aims to
provide the idealized and realistic framework with which to understand along-
coast trapping and propagation of internal tides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts. This study will support the development of a permanent exhibit and
related curriculum at the Hatfield Marine Science Center?s Visitor Center
(HMSVC) in Newport, OR. A graduate student at Scripps Institution of
Oceanography will be supported by this study and will be trained in coastal
physical oceanography, numerical methods, and in field data analysis techniques.
The circulation induced in coastal waters by internal waves and tides are
currently the focus of attention along the Pacific coast of California and
Mexico. This project will also allow the PIs to continue their collaboration
with Mexican colleagues in the design of an observational study of internal
tides, internal waves and cross-shore fluxes off the Mexican coast.