* 1155797
* Social Integration, Stress, and Ambition in Transitions to Adulthood
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Karen Van Gundy, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* marie cornwall
* 03/31/2017
* USD 212,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines how youths' stress exposure,
social integration, and aspirations affect their well-being as they transition
to adulthood. We focus on youth in an isolated rural region where communities
that were once sustained by jobs in pulp and paper mills have experienced the
closing of these mills in recent years. Our research explores how youth
outcomes,such as health, deviancy, education, and work,are related to family-,
school-, and community-related stress experiences, integration, and aspirations.
Building on the stress-process literature in sociology, this research likewise
examines how sex, age, and socioeconomic differences in well-being are linked to
stress, social integration, and aspirations. Finally, this research examines the
degree to which links between stress exposure and the above forms of well-being
differ depending on youths' levels of social integration and aspirations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We build on an existing two-wave population-based
quantitative survey of youth who were in 7th and 11th grades in 2008, and on
qualitative interviews with a subsample of 24 7th graders and their mothers. We
will collect an additional wave of survey data from the original youth
participants, and conduct follow-up interviews with the original qualitative
study participants. Our interdisciplinary (e.g., Sociology, Justice Studies,
Family Studies, and Education) and mixed-method approach will allow us to
examine in-depth and over time the experiences relevant for successful
transitions to adulthood in an understudied population facing a unique set of
economic and developmental challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of our study include our involvement of undergraduate and graduate student
assistants across all phases of the research, ranging from data collection and
management to analysis and dissemination. Benefits to students include various
opportunities to complete senior, MA, and PhD theses and dissertations, and many
other possibilities for collaboration on research and outreach with faculty and
community leaders. Senior faculty researchers will continue to disseminate
project information, results, and policy-relevant material via scholarly
journals and national conference presentations, on which student co-authorship
across disciplines will be a priority. In addition, our team will continue to
establish and foster local collaborative partnerships with the long-term goal of
designing, implementing, and evaluating innovative interventions that promote
the successful transition to adult roles in rural Communities facing unique
economic challenges. In keeping with the University of New Hampshire Carsey
Institute's mission of "building knowledge for families and communities," the
information gleaned from the project will be the subject of presentations,
lectures, policy briefs, and other public service activities relevant to the
promotion of youth and young adult well-being locally and nationally. The
project will promote scientific inquiry and practice by contributing to stress
and life course theory, research, and policy development.