* 1155366
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic Study of Rivaling State Jurisdictions and the Politics of Health Care Access in Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Deborah Poole, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 04/30/2013
* USD 11,523.00

This project explores legal regulation and women's experiences in Mexico,
contrasting two different states with different legal frameworks. Women can
strategize about the law that affects them by going from their home state to
Mexico City, with different legal rules. An ethnographic study will be conducted
in advocacy networks in Mexico City and court archives in the adjacent state of
Guanajuato, located to the west of Mexico City. The researcher will work with
advocacy groups in Mexico City and women who access the groups, and with legal
documents in archives. Advocacy groups located in Mexico City enable women to
mobilize the law; this study will evaluate contrasts to address two central
questions: 1) How are conflicting legal and moral discourses of kinship,
obligation and autonomy entangled in neighboring jurisdictions with different
legislation and 2) How do women negotiate the legal pressures generated by
rivaling juridical regimes? With regard to intellectual merit, this research
project will bring valuable insight into legal mobilization, legal advocacy, and
implementation of new laws in different jurisdictions in Mexico, an area that is
understudied and with legal frameworks that raise new challenges within law and
social sciences. By combining archival research with ethnographic methods such
as participant-observation and iterative open ended interviews, this
investigation will contribute to knowledge on legal mobilization when there are
differences in law in neighboring jurisdictions.

With regard to broader impacts, this project will allow the training of a
graduate student, and provide feedback to community groups in Mexico concerning
how women strategize when engaging legal regulation.