* 1155980
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Group Decision-Making in Gregarious Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Terry Harrison, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2013
* USD 0.00

The change from a solitary life to living in groups is considered one of the
major transitions in evolution, and group-living is also a hallmark of the
primate radiation. In group-living animals such as primates, decisions that
require coordination of activities are not carried out by individuals alone, but
are rather negotiated with fellow group members. If there are conflicts of
interest among individual group members, however, decisions that require group
consensus necessarily implicate a compromise for at least certain individuals in
the group. Recent developments in game theory and computer simulation suggest
that the level of conflict of interest relative to the benefits of group-living
should predict the decision-making mechanism a group displays; i.e. whether a
species displays a more democratic or a more despotic mode of reaching a
consensus. Empirical studies are still lacking, however, which could refute or
provide support for the current theoretical models for the evolution of group
decision-making.

The aim of this project by doctoral student Anand Dacier (New York University),
under the supervision of Dr. Terry Harrison, is to examine group decision-making
in gregarious primates by addressing hypotheses concerning the mechanisms by
which groups come to a consensus (despotic vs. democratic); whether conflict of
interest among group members can predict group decision-making; how leadership
is distributed across the group; and the consequences of decision-making in
terms of reproductive success for individual group members. This study employs a
novel methodological approach, in which conflict of interest among individuals
will be artificially created via manipulating the spatial distribution and
temporal availability of resources in feeding platforms. By following this novel
experimental setup, the study empirically evaluates the recently developed
theoretical models for the evolution of group decision-making, and whether such
models are adequate to explain the variation in group decision-making seen
across the primate order. By exploring how animal groups come to collective
decisions, this study contributes to the broader discussion on the evolution of
sociality and the mechanisms that help maintain it.