* 1155109
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Consequences of the Informationalization of Healthcare in the U.S. and India
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Gina Neff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 03/31/2013
* USD 11,825.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: &lt;br/&gt;The Social Consequences of the
Informationalization of Healthcare in the U.S. and
India&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide, health information technologies, such as
telehealth systems, have been introduced as ways to reduce costs and healthcare
access disparities. Yet the social implications of these informationalizing
technologies, and variations in how social contexts shape the implementation in
everyday practice, are poorly understood. This research project fills those gaps
by observing and analyzing how the dramatic expansion of telehealth and data-
based medical technologies are reshaping medical knowledge, clinical practice,
and healthcare organizations in the rural United States and in rural India.
Evidence is gathered using participant observation and in-depth interviews with
care providers, patients, and project developers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bringing
together theories from communication studies and science, technology &amp;
society studies, this project provides new insights about the causes of the
growing uses of new kinds of data in healthcare across the globe, the challenges
and opportunities these data pose for healthcare delivery and management, for
the ways that patients and their bodies are conceptualized and treated, and the
organizational and institutional arrangements needed to meaningfully utilize
these data for patient health. Because India is a global leader in telehealth,
the reserach here will contribute to studies that investigate the blurring of
the boundary between the developed and the developing world. The findings will
provide new theoretical and practical insights to healthcare and development
practitioners and to researchers in the fields of communication and science,
technology and society. Finally, the project also has implications for debates
among healthcare policy makers and technology developers as they rethink
relationships among healthcare technology, information infrastructure, and
notions of development, in order to imagine possible futures for healthcare.