* 1155981
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Biomechanics of Vertical Clinging and Grasping in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Laura Johnson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/28/2014
* USD 18,483.00

Doctoral student Laura Johnson (Duke University), under the supervision of Dr.
Daniel Schmitt, will investigate the biomechanics of a specific set of primate
postures - those adopted while vertically clinging to tree trunks. The research
focuses on a key adaptive shift associated with the evolutionary origins of
primates, that of the 'invasion' of the complex arboreal environment. Early
primates evolved grasping hands and feet with nails, rather than keeping claws,
such as found in other tree-dwelling species (e.g., squirrels). This
evolutionary event of loss of claws raises a critical paradox for biomechanists,
that of understanding how arboreal primates maintain an effective grip on large,
vertical tree trunks without claws. The investigation of this question addresses
morphological adaptation to an arboreal niche in both living and ancestral
primates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not being able to take advantage of claws in the
arboreal habitat, primates must hold onto the trees by using postures that will
minimize muscular work. Prior research on mammalian biomechanics suggests
hypothesized variation within three contexts involving differing musculoskeletal
anatomies, substrate sizes, and body weights. To examine these variables, a
sample of eight primate species from the Duke Lemur Center which differ in
anatomies and body weights are observed in a laboratory setting. Individuals are
prompted to vertically cling and grasp to substrates of four increasing sizes,
relative to their body weight. The ground squirrel, Scurius caroliniensis, is
included as a clawed non-primate mammalian outgroup. Video data are collected
using an eight-camera system to document postures in three dimensions, and data
on single-limb loading patterns are collected utilizing force plates inserted
into the substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this study will shed light
on the evolutionary pressures that led primates to lose claws in favor of nails,
an adaptation that may be related to primate body size increase, and is a
necessary precursor to human hand grasping. The project also incorporates
undergraduate training and broad dissemination of data to other researchers and
the public, including local K-12 schools, and will find application in zoo
design and primate conservation.