* 1155710
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant: Social Interaction and Colonialism in Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Verity Whalen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 19,985.00

Under the direction of Dr. Kevin J. Vaughn, Ms. Verity Whalen will conduct
dissertation research to investigate the relationship between societal
interaction and colonialism. She will examine ancient households and burials at
Cocahuischo, a Late Nasca site on the south coast of Peru. Cocahuischo is
located in the upper valley of the Tierras Blancas River, at a key geographical
borderland in the Andean landscape - between the coast and the highlands. Around
AD 600, Cocahuischo was a community of nearly 300 households and the center of
the local valley polity. By AD 1000, the settlement had been abandoned following
the collapse of the Wari state - the first Andean empire. What happened during
the 400 years in between is a crucial case study in the emergence of empires.
Ms. Whalen's dissertation research will develop current understandings of Wari
colonialism in Nasca by examining the history of contact and interaction between
the people who would become the "colonizers" and the "colonized." To do so, Ms.
Whalen will draw from a number of archaeological techniques, including household
archaeology, Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis of pottery, Laser
Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry of obsidian tools, and
isotopic analysis of human skeletal remains, to track the movement of people and
objects in prehistory.

Although archaeological in nature the research is relevant to the present day in
which similar disparities exist between adjacent political entities.
Understanding such interactions provide insight into the bonds that hold states
together and the forces which undermine unity. Archaeological data because of
the long term perspective it can provide allows researchers to track such
interactions across periods which may span multiple centuries.

By investigating how regional engagements shape local community politics and
emerging colonial systems, Ms. Whalen's dissertation builds from an extensive
body of anthropological research and stands to contribute new insights into
societal interaction and colonial encounters in both the past and present. The
approach employed advocates viewing colonial encounters as the outcome of a
lengthy and mutually influential process of regional interaction between
indigenous and non-local groups. The research has the potential to shape how
interaction is analyzed. Recent scholarship has begun to investigate the active
role of indigenous groups in such encounters and how cultural traditions may
become intermixed through interaction and colonialism. But such work is fraught
with problems and does not really address the question - how and why do people
draw from the beliefs, traditions, and symbols of others to shape their own
identity and position within the community? Ms. Whalen's dissertation research
will advance anthropological understandings of these issues and provide a
methodological framework for addressing them by systematically analyzing
pottery, non-local goods, mortuary practices, and skeletal material.

This project will further Ms. Whalen's graduate training. In addition it is a
collaborative effort between American and Peruvian archaeologists that will
provide learning opportunities for Peruvian and American students, and engage
the local communities in Nasca and the Tierras Blancas Valley. Prior
collaborations with local community members in Nasca, who participated in
excavations and survey on past field projects, will continue to contribute
training opportunities and foster a dialogue on archaeological research and
discoveries. Ms. Whalen will also present the results of this research at
schools, town meetings, and museums in Nasca, working to create educational
displays that will encourage archaeo-tourism and ensure that the impacts of this
project reach far beyond the academic community.