* 1155809
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Consumer Demand in Postsocialist China
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Li Zhang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 19,975.00

University of California-Davis doctoral student Doris Duangboudda, under the
guidance of Dr. Li Zhang, will investigate how auto designers plan auto shows in
an effort to create consumer demand among middle class families in China. The
research will be conducted in Shanghai, a major site for automobile production
and consumption in the country, as well as host of the national auto show (which
alternates annually with Beijing). The need for China's export-oriented economy
to be domestically driven, coupled with a greater dependence of declining world
economies on the Chinese market, requires serious examination of how consumer
demand is created. As car consumption has become a central focus of government
and corporate marketing initiatives, auto shows take on heightened importance.
The objective of this research is to identify the ways in which designers
mediate state and corporate engagement in postsocialist countries, and offer new
insights into how China's mass consumption might transform global markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doris Duangboudda will employ multiple social science
methods, including formal interviews and participant-observation, to obtain
empirical data from government officials, corporate representatives, auto show
designers, and middle class families and individuals. This project contrasts the
multiple interests of national and municipal levels of government and domestic
and foreign corporate entities in creating consumer demand at auto shows. This
project also evaluates how families and individuals interpret and implement
ideas about middle class lifestyles derived from auto shows in their daily
lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to the understanding
of consumption and class formation in a postsocialist context. By identifying
potentially changing consumption patterns, this study seeks to produce new
conceptual tools to look at the how consumption might be institutionalized as a
part of everyday life. This research will also empirically link consumption with
national identity formation and global economic flows and provide information
that could be valuable to US industry. Funding this research also strengthens
international scholarly collaborations with China and supports the education of
a graduate student.