* 1155844
* Food, Ethnicity, and Place: Feeding Families and Nourishing Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Fernando Bosco, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 11/30/2016
* USD 249,170.00

The project investigates the everyday food practices of children and their
families in various urban neighborhoods in an effort to better understand the
relationships between food, ethnicity, and place. Although scholars have noted
the importance of food environments in shaping food choices and health outcomes,
research to date tends to compartmentalize place-level factors and ignore the
relational qualities of place. The presumably less healthy food habits of low-
income and minority populations are typically explained by lower access to
affordable and healthy food. However, food practices, ethnicity and place are
mutually constituted through a web of social, political, economic and emotional
relations within homes and communities. These connections between food,
ethnicity and place remain poorly theorized and need to be more systematically
substantiated through empirical and comparative analysis. In particular, there
is limited research on the ways that family dynamics and children influence
these relationships. The project addresses this knowledge gap by investigating
everyday family food practices associated with the acquisition, preparation and
consumption of food, intra-household negotiations of these practices and
responses to diverse and changing local food environments in several
neighborhoods in San Diego representing predominantly Italian, East African and
Mexican communities. Particular attention is given to the enabling/constraining
capacities of place in shaping social reproduction and children's agency in
influencing family practices, resisting gendered divisions of labor, and
creating new bridges between home and other environments. Quantitative and
qualitative approaches are integrated to collect and analyze data. In each site,
the research team will conduct food audits, map food resources and census data,
and interview store and restaurant owners, school and public officials, and
leaders of community-based organizations to generate a better understanding of
the local food environment. This will inform extensive ethnographic research
centered on children and their families to collect data on everyday food
practices and the dynamic relationships between food, place, and ethnic
identities. Data will be collected through food-related activities in schools,
participant observation, focus groups and subsequent family interviews of
children and parents/guardians both separately and together.

This project will be the basis of a new community-based research and service-
learning curriculum for undergraduates and will provide training for graduate
students. The research team will work closely with local organizations in
identifying needs and resources, developing solutions, and disseminating
findings. This project will also advance the literature on food practices by
situating them in place-specific social relations. Doing so, it will contribute
to research on environmental context of food consumption by considering the
relational qualities of place, their embeddedness in social relations, and the
ways these spatialized relations produce unique food environments and influence
food choices. It will expand and further connect literatures on children and
social reproduction by bringing children firmly into the negotiated process of
social reproduction through our ethnographic work. In addition, the research
will contribute knowledge on race by generating better understandings of the
spatiality of 'ethnic' food practices and the social construction and
materiality of race.

This project is cofunded by the Geography and Spatial Sciences and Cultural
Anthropology Programs.