* 1155957
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Warring Forties: New Evidence on the Economic Consequences of World War II
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Price Fishback, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2014
* USD 9,900.00

World War II was a significant event for the US economy, particularly for
postwar economic and social policy. The war years saw dramatic changes in the
economy; some fueled by previous trends and others a creation of the war years.
Following World War II, leading economics and law journals took up the question
of whether the glut of resources left over from the war years would be an
obstacle to recovery and growth. More recently, Field (2011) has suggested
revisions that place the 1920s and 30s ahead of World War II in terms of
technological progress and total factor productivity growth. This research
project addresses hitherto unanswered questions about the war years and
subsequent allocation (or misallocation) of resources that resulted from
mobilization.&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project considers the war's effect
on the educational attainment of the school age cohort in the early 1940s and
their subsequent labor market outcomes. Earlier research highlighted the GI
Bill's positive effect on the educational attainment of veterans, while
mobilization's effect on the school age cohort was potentially negative. The
second part focuses on the connection between wartime labor market institutions,
the surge in postwar internal migration, and the Great Compression. The final
part studies the causes of postwar productivity growth in industries that were,
in different ways, caught up in the mobilization effort. By studying some of the
inputs into the process of economic change and growth, each chapter pushes us
toward a better understanding of a bigger question: How did mobilization for
World War II affect postwar economic growth?