* 1155849
* Collaborative Research:   Continuing a unique time-series of volcanic inflation at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* William Chadwick, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2014
* USD 116,391.00

Axial Volcano, a large submarine volcano sitting on the Juan de Fuca spreading
ridge, 250 miles off the Oregon coast, is one of the three sites of a major NSF
investment in ocean observing. Due to its association with an important and
unique hydrothermal vent system and its propensity for erupting on what appears
to be a decadal time scale, Axial has also been the site of a 15 year NSF/NOAA
time-series study of submarine volcanic activity. Axial is also the first and
only site where active volcanic inflation has been documented on the seafloor
and used to successfully forecast the timing of the next eruption. During a
routine visit to the volcano in July of 2011, it was discovered that Axial had
once again erupted and spewed lava flows more than 2 kilometers wide and many
kilometers long across the seafloor, causing the floor of the caldera to subside
by more than 2 meters. This research supports the collection of geophysical and
geodetic measurements on the volcanic edifice to measure the rate at which magma
refills the emptied magma chamber inside the volcano. Innovative undersea
surveying methods, using a combination of newly established benchmarks and
bottom pressure recorders will be used to monitor the long-term vertical
deformation of the volcano. Results of this work extend the present time-series
and allow us to refine and test models of both the eruption cycle behavior and
of submarine volcano shallow magma dynamics and rheology. It will also help to
allow us to assess how predictably the volcano behaves over several eruption
cycles. Insights from the project will have applications for in both undersea
technological advances as well as improving our understanding of the behavior of
mid-ocean ridge magmatic systems and undersea volcanic hazards. Broader impacts
of the work include the development of new techniques that build infrastructure
for science and developing a better understanding of submarine volcanic hazards.