* 1155187
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intimate Sharing: The Enduring Connections of Living Organ Donation in the Contemporary United States
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Miriam Ticktin, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2014
* USD 10,000.00

Introduction This research project is an ethnographic study of living organ
transfer as a potent site where Americans grapple with challenges to fundamental
Euro-American liberal assumptions about bodies and persons. It brings
perspectives from studies of science and technology that are highly attentive to
materiality and the shifting ontological status of objects.

Intellectual Merit In contrast to previous studies? disinterest in organs
themselves, this research emphasizes sharing as a way to attend not only to the
value of organs and tissues as they move and regenerate, but also to how their
very materiality is enacted and circumscribed through particular configurations
of knowledge, practices, and relationships. The fieldwork is thus driven by two
interrelated objectives. The first is to explore when and how living organ
transfer is understood through the analytic of sharing, staying equally
attentive to situations in which sharing is not expressed, namely when "mine"
and "yours" are emphasized and understood as being mutually exclusive. The
second is to explore the ways in which transplanted organs and transplant-
modified bodies are rendered material and agentive in particular ways that shape
and are shaped by attitudes toward organ ownership.

Potential Broader Impacts Drawing on the experiences of enduring connectivity
between living organ donors and recipients, the research proposes to revitalize
sharing as an analytical concept. Elaborating this long ignored mode of
possession promises to enrich ways of talking about property, exchange, and
relationships by providing a term that emphasizes connection without assuming
this connection to be necessarily founded in sameness, equality, or joy. The
focus on sharing also stands to help living organ donors, recipients, and other
interested parties give valid expression to experiences that contradict the
"spare parts" and "gift of life" models that currently dominate transplant
rhetoric.