* 1155692
* Bureaucratic Professionalization in New Democracies: Drivers and Developmental Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Milena Neshkova, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2015
* USD 25,000.00

A major criterion for the evaluation of quality of governance is the existence
of a professional bureaucracy which is capable of offering expertise and
impartiality in the formulation and implementation of public policies. The newly
established democracies of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) introduced
administrative reforms to transform the highly politicized and inefficient
bureaucracies inherited from Communism into professional administrations. What
are the outcomes of this transformation some 20 years after the start of the
transition process? This research assesses the degree of bureaucratic
professionalization in 14 CEE democracies by drawing upon the adopted legal
frameworks and administrative procedures in these countries.

First, the research aims to assess the degree of bureaucratic
professionalization in post-Communist countries and its dynamics over time. The
project offers a new way of thinking and measuring bureaucratic
professionalization, consisting of three dimensions: 1) political neutrality and
impartiality; 2) competence; and 3) integrity. The research develops a set of
indicators for each dimension and assesses the degree of bureaucratic
professionalization in each country based on legislation from 1992 to 2007.
Developing such a measure is needed to understand the dynamics of the region's
administrative development, and will be an important step in moving the
comparative study of public administration away from its static and descriptive
orientation.

Second, the research attempts to uncover the conditions under which countries
are more likely to develop competent, impartial, and corruption-free
administrations. The project includes an integrative framework to explain the
variation in the outcomes of administrative rebuilding, which draws upon two
streams of institutionalism: 1) historical institutionalism with its focus on
path-dependent processes and 2) rational-choice institutionalism with its
emphasis on the activities of rational actors pursuing institutional change with
expectations for positive returns.

Intellectual merit: This is the first study to develop a quantifiable measure of
bureaucratic professionalization to assess administrative rebuilding in the
countries making the transition to democracy and a market economy. Moreover, the
study of professionalization of CEE administrations moves away from the
descriptive studies of administrative change. Finally, it provides a new
integrative framework to explain the variation in the levels of bureaucratic
professionalization among the countries in the region.

Broader Impacts: There are at least three reasons why it is important to
investigate the level and dynamics of bureaucratic professionalization of CEE
countries. First, the region has been relatively successful in implementing a
series of institutional reforms, including the development of administrative
capacity. The lessons from the CEE experience should be generalizable to other
counties in transition and the insights of this research can be used to inform
the policy design of future reform efforts. Second, by investigating why some
countries have pursued more vigorous administrative transformation paired with
strong implementation while others opt for weak measures and even policy
reversals, this research contributes to our understanding of the determinants of
successful administrative restructuring and provides practical advice to
governments undertaking reform efforts. Third, this research will generate a new
data base that provides a foundation for future inquiries. The broader social
value of this study lies in its relevance to issues of trust in government.
Having an impartial, competent, and corruption-resistant bureaucracy is a major
issue when citizens evaluate the quality of their government.