* 1155403
* Measurements and Modeling of the Kinematics and Dynamics of Surface-Wave Breaking in Directional Wave Fields
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* W Melville, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2016
* USD 1,178,199.00

This project will use a high resolution scanning LIDAR along with visible and
infrared imaging to measure the directional distributions of the surface wave
field and wave breaking, and use this data to test and develop models of wave
evolution and dissipation. The novelty is that it will give the directional
wavenumber spectra of the surface waves from the scale of the swell, O(100) m,
down to the scale of gravity- capillary waves, O(0.01)m. Similarly, it will give
corresponding directional distributions of breaking across the same range of
scales. These broadband data are expected to support a greatly improved
understanding of the statistical description of wave breaking first proposed by
Phillips (1985), based on the length of breaking fronts per unit area of ocean
surface moving at around the phase velocity. The measurements of breaking front
length in the literature are very limited and have a unimodal structure that is
not understood. This program, including the analysis of field data, high-
resolution wave breaking kinematics and directional wave measurements from the
Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) Per and airborne measurements during a
R/P FLIP experiment and Santa Ana wind events offshore Southern California and
Baja California, will allow more thorough testing of the current dissipation
source function models in numerical wind wave models and development new models
based on an analysis of the data constrained by the radiative transfer equation
for the wave field. The data will also permit quantitative exploration of the
transition from air-entraining whitecapping to microscale breaking, and the
relationship between the kinematics and dynamics of
breaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;While the funded effort
is focused on investigating hitherto inaccessible aspects of surface wave
kinematics and dynamics, improvements in surface-wave and wave-breaking models
will have a significant impact on coupled atmosphere-ocean models used for
weather and climate prediction. The momentum and energy fluxes from the
atmosphere to the ocean are a function of the directional wave spectra and wave
breaking distributions. The air-sea transfer of greenhouse and other gases
depend on air entrainment due to breaking.&lt;br/&gt;The SIO Pier experiments
will be used as a hands-on teaching opportunity in graduate and undergraduate
classes at SIO, UCSD. Currently, PI Melville uses the laboratory to provide
demonstrations and hands-on experience for students taking classes in fluid
mechanics and wave mechanics. The pier experiment will extend this experience
for the students from the controlled environment of the laboratory to the
uncontrolled environment of the field, thus providing a broader and
qualitatively different experience for the students.&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide research experiences for undergraduate students at UCSD during the
academic year and for fellowship programs during the summer sessions. From
personal experience during his own undergraduate career, Melville understands
the value of these programs in shaping careers and has worked to continue these
programs in his laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research and related
material will be posted to Melville?s research web site
(http://airsea.ucsd.edu).