* 1155761
* Contractual Arrangements and Bargaining Institutions in Inter-Firm and Intra-Firm Strategic Environments
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Kathryn Spier, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 03/31/2018
* USD 205,000.00

Contracts between private parties are ubiquitous. The relationships between
buyers and sellers, employers and employees, lenders and debtors are all shaped
by the contracts they write. Rather than existing in isolation, however, private
contracts often have real and profound effects on third parties (i.e., generate
externalities or spillovers). This raises important public policy questions
about the appropriate role for the regulation of private contracts. While the
theoretical economics literature on contracting with externalities is well-
developed, there is little empirical work on the topic. This project will
examine the private design of contracts and their social welfare effects in a
laboratory setting with human subjects paid according to their
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project considers a class of inter-
firm strategic environments. Business contracts often include clauses that
restrain the ability of parties to deal with others in the future. Examples
include exclusive dealing contracts, damages provisions, minimum commitments,
and non-tocompete clauses. While these contractual arrangements serve the
important role of protecting relationship-specific investment and mitigating
exposure to risk, they may also adversely affect competition. The second project
addresses intra-firm team production environments where the private contracts
affect the magnitude and distribution of profits, and might affect social
welfare. This research will make several important contributions to the
literature. First, the findings will shed light on equilibrium selection in
strategic settings where the theoretical implications are ambiguous. Second, the
work will provide empirical evidence of the effects of behavioral factors, such
as social preferences, moral considerations, social proximity, loss aversion and
framing. Finally, the non-invasive software developed for these studies will
contribute to the understanding of decision-making processes in complex
strategic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current methodological approach
underscores the importance of combining experimental and behavioral observation
with theoretical modeling. This work will enhance understanding of the social
welfare effects of private contractual arrangements, and thus help inform policy
makers.