* 1155123
* Understanding the influence of surfactants on characteristic whitecap foam decay times
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Malcolm Stokes, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 720,416.00

The goal of this project is to develop a model for whitecap persistence and its
sensitivity to surfactants. The model will be based on a mathematical
description of foam physics and the results of a series of scale-model
laboratory experiments using seawater and breaking wave packets. The motivation
for this work lies in the critical role foam plays in aerosol formation and the
sea-to-atmosphere transport of biologically active and climatically relevant
material. Moreover the aerial coverage of foam, which in one way or another is
implicit in remote sensing of wave breaking and resulting air-sea exchange
processes, also depends critically on its persistence. Answers to the following
key questions will be sought: 1) Can high resolution and high speed photography
be used to determine the decay times for whitecap foam produced by laboratory
generated breaking waves under different levels of surfactant concentration? 2)
Using the whitecap foam decay data coupled with measured source terms for the
bubble size distributions within laboratory generated waves, can the evolution
of foam produced by a single breaking event be modeled? 3) Using datasets of
measured whitecap coverage and foam decay rates, can some of the observed
variability be accounted for by incorporating the effects of surfactant
concentration on whitecap foam decay rates?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination
of laboratory experiments and desktop analysis of existing sea surface images
will be used to gather data on the decay time of whitecap foam produced by
breaking waves. The laboratory experiments are based on observations of breaking
waves in a wave channel using water with variable surfactant concentration.
Wave, bubble plume and foam characteristics will be monitored for plunging and
spilling breakers using wave gauges, a downward looking camera to monitor foam
persistence, and a sideward looking camera to monitor bubble plume composition
and depth. Total organic carbon content and water surface tension will be
measured to capture the effects of surfactant concentration on surface tension
and whitecap foam decay times. These data will drive model calculations of foam
decay and will be compared with foam decay times and overall whitecap coverage
data from existing field data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Measurement of whitecap coverage provides a remote sensing tool capable of
parameterizing a range of air-sea exchange processes such as air-sea gas
exchange and primary marine aerosol flux. The present order of magnitude scatter
between recent whitecap coverage datasets may in part be due to variations of
surfactant concentration. The link between surfactant concentration and foam
stability has long been known in the field of foam physics but has not yet been
explicitly explored in the oceanographic community. It is anticipated that a
model for whitecap foam decay times that is related to surfactant concentration
could be used in conjunction with field observations of whitecap coverage to
help explain variations within and between datasets of whitecap coverage and
also as a remote sensing tool to determine surfactant
concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The formation of surface
foams by breaking waves in the open ocean play a critical role in a number of
climate-related oceanic processes including aerosol production and the
scavenging and concentration of important surface active chemicals at the sea
surface, which have implications for cloud formation and atmospheric chemistry.
The development of a physics-based mathematical model of whitecap foam
production and persistence will greatly enhance current remote sensing tools.
The data generated during the wave channel study will be presented at
conferences and shared with other researchers through publication in the open
literature. The experiment and analysis of the resulting data sets will include
the participation of a postdoctoral researcher. In addition, undergraduate
interns from UCSD working in the Deane and Stokes laboratories will gain
experience in experimental oceanography by participating in the laboratory
investigations. Broader impacts through communicating ocean science research to
the public will be facilitated through the educational program at the Birch
Aquarium at Scripps (BAS). The PIs will participate in the BAS Perspectives on
Ocean Science lecture series, a monthly earth and ocean science speaker series
the provides the public with direct access to up-to-date science in a format
specifically designed for a non-specialist audience.