* 1155572
* Infrastructure for Population Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Steven Ruggles, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2015
* USD 750,000.00

SES-1155572&lt;br/&gt;Steven Ruggles&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota
Population Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infrastructure for Population
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a
large-scale database that will make possible analyses of long-term economic and
social change. The database will cover the entire US population with full
geographic detail, providing contextual information on childhood neighborhood
characteristics and labor-market conditions. The project is funded
collaboratively by the Minnesota Population Center with the nation?s largest
producer of genealogical data, and it receives funding from the Census Bureau,
the National Archives and Records Administration, in addition to the NSF. This
collaboration allows a highly cost-effective use of scarce resources for shared
infrastructure for social and behavioral research. The component funded by the
National Science Foundation involves digitizing the supplemental 1940 Census
questions, including the parental birthplaces, veteran status, Social Security
enrollment, occupation, marital status, number of children born, and other
information collected for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves (1) transcription of data describing the demographic and economic
characteristics of individuals, families, households, and group quarters present
in the United States; and (2) evaluation of data quality through random blind
verification and comparison with published census returns. The outcome of the
project will be a raw data file providing a transcription of demographic and
socioeconomic characteristics of the 1940 population of the United States.
Researchers will be able to link Census data to e.g., panel surveys,
administrative records, and the national death index, allowing study of the
impact of early life conditions on later outcomes. The database will also enable
innovative multi-level spatial analysis impossible to conduct until now.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This Census database seeks to
enhance scientific and public understanding of critical policy-related issues,
such as population aging, migration, economic mobility, and the impact of
government policy on economic development and well-being. The new database will
make a permanent and substantial addition to the country's statistical
infrastructure, serving as a foundational reference collection with potentially
far-reaching implications for research across the social and behavioral
sciences. The project will also offer substantial research training to
undergraduate and graduate students.