* 1155257
* Understanding Observed Equatorial Pacific, Indian and Atlantic Ocean Interannual Flow Using Theory and High-Resolution ECCO2 Model Results
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Allan Clarke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2016
* USD 485,424.00

Fundamental to an understanding of El Nino/Southern Oscillation climate
fluctuations is an understanding of the interannual equatorial Pacific surface
flows which advect the surface waters and change the sea surface temperature.
Through the advent of accurate satellite altimeter measurements from late 1992
to the present, we now have long records of estimated sea levels and surface
currents that are spatially well resolved and available not just in the Pacific,
but also in the Indian and Atlantic Oceans. These records are long enough to
study the observed interannual surface flows and their dynamics. While we have
some knowledge of the observed interannual flows in the equatorial Pacific, less
is known about the structure, strength and variability of the interannual flows
in the equatorial Indian and Atlantic Oceans. The main goal of the project will
be to describe the interannual equatorial surface flows in all three ocean
basins and understand major aspects of them using theory and the dynamically
consistent high resolution ECCO2 numerical model results. The scientific
community is beginning to take advantage of the ECCO2 global ocean model, and a
secondary benefit of the analysis will be the evaluation of the accuracy of this
model and its dynamics near the equator in all three ocean
basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Accurate, long satellite altimeter
records from 1992 to the present day provide an unprecedented opportunity to
examine the detailed spatial and time-varying structure of low frequency surface
equatorial flows, flows which play a key role in changing equatorial sea surface
temperature and climate. As noted above, surprisingly little is known about the
structure and dynamics of these flows, so investigating these flows, and
understanding their physics in all three equatorial ocean basins, will make a
significant impact on our knowledge of equatorial ocean and climate dynamics.
This fundational knowledge will be helpful to the many scientists who will
analyze future long records of equatorial climate data gathered in the
multinational Atlantic Ocean PIRATA and Indian Ocean RAMA observational
programs. It is important to the future of oceanography that new young
scientists develop their careers, and this project will support a junior
researcher who recently completed her postdoctoral work.