* 1155352
* WORKSHOP: Conference on the Future of Jury Research (Two day workshop @ CUNY)
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 36,890.00

Research on juror and jury decision-making has proliferated over the past 45
years since the publication of the classic monograph, The American jury (Kalven
& Zeisel, 1966). Although the scholarship on juries is clearly characterized by
quantity, some have expressed concerns over the variability of the quality of
research generated in this area. The proposed conference will bring together
leaders and emerging leaders in the field of jury research for a conversation
about the future of jury research. Participants will come from a variety of
disciplines, including law, psychology, sociology, economics, and criminology.
This interdisciplinary group will address important questions that remain
unresolved in the area, identify new questions of theoretical and practical
importance, assess the contributions of theoretical models of individual and
group decision making, evaluate methodological variance across studies and
paradigms, and discuss the challenges to ecological validity in current and
future research efforts.

Improving the quality of research on jury behavior has the potential to increase
the impact of the research on legal practice and decisions, as well as improve
the justice received by plaintiffs, complainants, and defendants participating
in jury trials. In addition, the discussions of interesting and important
research questions and debates about appropriate methodologies could impact
graduate training in law and social science, influencing the quality of work
produced by the next generation of scholars. The conference will be held at a
Hispanic Serving Institution and we will provide opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to attend the conference and benefit from the
discussions.