* 1155250
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Judges' and attorneys' judgments of the extent to which jurors have been prejudiced by pretrial publicity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 03/31/2014
* USD 14,550.00

Whether judges and attorneys are able to detect bias among potential jurors
(venirepersons) is a pivotal concern in highly publicized cases in which most of
the jury pool has been exposed to pretrial publicity (PTP). The current research
will address 1) whether attorneys and judges can accurately gauge differences in
PTP exposure/bias among potential jurors, 2) how potential jurors? motivations
to serve or not serve on a jury (and subsequent impression management tactics)
affect attorneys' and judges' abilities to detect bias, and 3) whether
withholding instructions on the importance of juror impartiality can reduce
venirepersons' abilities to tailor voir dire responses to their specific
motivations.

In the first phase of the proposed dissertation, the researchers will manipulate
the amount of negative PTP presented to mock venirepersons and subsequently
measure their bias against the defendant. Mock venirepersons will then be
motivated to be impaneled on or excused from a jury before they participate in a
simulated voir dire. A mock judge will then instruct venirepersons before
questioning either on the importance of impartiality among ideal jurors (which
is standard) or the importance of honesty and a variety of opinions among ideal
jurors. Finally, venirepersons will watch a videotaped trial and render
verdicts. In the second phase of the proposed dissertation research, attorneys
and judges will view videos of the voir dires to gauge whether they can 1)
accurately judge the extent of venirepersons' exposure to PTP and their pretrial
prejudice and 2) effectively use causal challenges and peremptory strikes to
eliminate unfavorable and/or biased venirepersons. The proposed study will
specifically test judges? and attorneys? abilities to differentiate between more
or less biased venirepersons, and will provide insight into how venirepersons?
motivations and impression management tactics influence judges' and attorneys'
abilities to accurately detect PTP bias.