* 1155246
* Collaborative Research: Kinetics and stable isotopic fractionation for abiotic and microbial transformations of elemental sulfur at seafloor hydrothermal environments
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Dionysios Foustoukos, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2016
* USD 80,071.00

Elemental sulfur (So) is a key intermediate species for biochemical sulfur
cycling in chimney deposits, the shallow subsurface in diffuse flow areas, and
hydrothermal plumes at mid-ocean ridges. Although the floc found in the water
column after a volcanic eruption is predominantly So and many microbial isolates
from vents are found to utilize So, no significant reservoir of So has been
found in chimney deposits, suggesting high turnover rates of elemental sulfur in
the subsurface. The kinetic rate constants for abiotic So oxidation and
reduction are unknown, even though they are critical for constraining the
metastability, and thus bioavailability, of So in the presence of H2(aq) and
O2(aq) at temperatures and pH conditions relevant to hydrothermal mixing
environments. Nor have the rate constants describing microbial transformations
of So been studied at environmentally relevant conditions. As a result, there is
a discrepancy between predictions based on energetics and the observed
physiology of microorganisms that have been isolated and grown in laboratory
conditions. Accurate and realistic biotic and abiotic kinetic rate constants are
essential for modeling biogeochemical transformations involving intermediate
sulfur species and active microbial consortia at the variable pH and redox
conditions found in subsurface underlying basalt- and ultramafic-hosted
hydrothermal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers at
Washington University of St. Louis (WU) and at the Carnegie Institute of
Washington (CIW) will experimentally evaluate the kinetics of elemental sulfur
abiotic oxidation/reduction at a range of T, pH and H2(aq)-O2(aq) concentrations
relevant to the shallow subsurface of basalt and ultramafic hydrothermal
systems: 250 bars, 40-120 deg C, pH 4 - 9, 0.1-20 mM H2(aq) and 0-0.25 mM
O2(aq). Simultaneously, they will characterize the catabolic reaction rates of
thre key bacterial species that mediate elemental sulfur redox transformations
to determine if fractionation increases as environmental conditions begin to
inhibit growth, as has been seen for SO4 reducing bacteria. By characterizing
the geochemical and isotopic effect of So-oxidizing/reducing thermophilic
autotrophs from vent systems, they expect to be able to evaluate the impact of
complex subsurface microbial ecological systems on associated plume environments
contributing to the global ocean sulfur cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts: The proposed project brings together experimental, microbial, and
sulfur isotope expertise, establishes a new collaboration between WU and the
CIW, and reintroduces a female scientist back into full-time research by
facilitating a leading role in this project. Two distinct undergraduate research
projects crossing biology, geochemistry, and computer science will be supported.
Furthermore, the research team will develop an online interactive simulation for
secondary students that will allow them to use the real scientific data produced
by this study in student-driven investigations. This educational outreach
activity will also establish a working relationship with a secondary school
teacher with experience adapting scientific data and methods for online
learning.