* 1155924
* Manipulating numeracy: Causal effects on judgments and decisions
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* Ellen Peters, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 01/31/2016
* USD 369,735.00

Recent research in numeracy suggests that individuals differ substantially in
their abilities to process numbers and that, in fact, many people are
"innumerate". In our increasingly technical world, innumeracy (a lack of ability
to understand and use basic probability and mathematical concepts) may be a
critical disadvantage to making good decisions in financial, medical, and other
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Principal Investigator will
test whether numeracy (as measured through scores on a math test and manipulated
in a statistics course) has a causal influence on decision-making abilities
tested in the lab and on the quality of judgments and decisions that individuals
make. Numeracy will also be manipulated through an in-class self-affirmation
manipulation shown previously to improve classroom learning of topics found
threatening by some students. She will conduct two series of studies. Study
Series 1 will focus on numeracy's causal role in decision-making abilities and
(longitudinally) on risk and decision outcomes. Study Series 2 will examine its
causal role in additional decision-making abilities, explicit and implicit math
attitudes, and important process mechanisms (for example, attention to
numbers).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this research will
examine whether improving number ability will subsequently improve how people
make decisions in health, financial, and other domains. Numerical information is
often necessary to making good decisions (e.g., mortgages, health insurance,
credit card debt, medical treatment options). Policy makers and others generally
assume that if you provide the appropriate numbers, people will understand and
use them. Previous research, however, has shown that individuals lower and
higher in numeracy rely on different sources of information in decisions, and
that those lower in numeracy comprehend less and may make poorer decisions when
numbers are involved. For example, lower numeracy has been associated with less
ability to follow complex medication regimens and less adequate retirement
savings. Numeracy research, however, has been largely correlational in nature
and its causal influence is not well understood relative to other third
variables (for example, general intelligence). The proposed research should add
substantially to our understanding of psychological mechanisms underlying
decisions and their impact on quality of life and wellbeing. In short, we
propose to test whether numeracy training may be the educational gift that keeps
on giving. Broader impacts also include training and career development of
graduate and undergraduate students. Finally, the project is expected to inform
efforts to improve the teaching of statistics to undergraduates