* 1155015
* Collaborative Research: SHINE--Observations and Modeling of the Longitudinal Extent and Variation of Multi-Spacecraft Solar Energetic Particle (SEP) Events
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Alexis Rouillard, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/29/2016
* USD 121,956.00

This collaborative research team will investigate the relative roles of shock
acceleration, flare acceleration, suprathermal particle composition, and
particle transport as a function of position (along the shock and/or the
longitudinal distance from the solar source region). The relative contributions
of flare and shock acceleration to solar energetic particle (SEP) events and
their resulting compositional signatures are as yet undetermined, and this fact
provides the motivation for this work. The research team will use observations
of specific individual SEP events obtained from multiple spacecraft, rather than
attempting to infer phenomenology through statistical studies of many events
measured by a single spacecraft under varying conditions, as has been done in
the past. This approach will allow a more accurate determination of the driving
coronal mass ejection's source region and of its related properties. The team's
analysis technique will also provide a more global view of solar activity and
non-local effects, which may play an important role in the generation of SEP
events and in determining their longitudinal extent. This effort will directly
address open scientific questions regarding SEP composition and particle
transport.

Understanding the production, composition, and extent of SEP events is critical
for accurate predictions of space weather and its potential impact on astronauts
and satellites. The team will disseminate their scientific results through
published articles, scientific talks, and the web pages associated with the
relevant NASA spacecraft missions. This project will contribute to the training
of a postdoctoral researcher as a co-investigator at George Mason University,
and, through an international collaboration, a graduate student in Germany. The
team will also supervise and train students at the University of Arizona and the
Naval Research Laboratory who will work on this project. The Lead Principal
Investigator at the California Institute of Technology is an active participant
in "Solar Week," a local program designed to encourage high school girls to
pursue careers in science.