* 1155728
* A novel approach for evaluating temporal and spatial changes in trophic structure of the mesopelagic eastern Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Matthew McCarthy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/29/2016
* USD 516,441.00

Anthropogenic and natural climatic perturbations drive changes in population
dynamics of species, the structure and function of food webs, and biogeochemical
processes. The PIs propose a comparative analysis of three major ecosystems to
investigate temporal change in the structure of mesopelagic food webs.

Intellectual Merit: The PIs will investigate temporal changes in the structure
of mesopelagic food webs in three major ecosystems: the California Current,
Eastern Tropical Pacific, and the Peru-Humboldt Current over the past 50 years
using a globally distributed apex predator as an indicator species. The predator
is the sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus, and the PIs will use stable isotope
ratios of carbon and nitrogen as indicators of habitat and diet. Isotope values
from bulk tissues of teeth and skin (C and N) as well as specific amino acids
(N) will be used to address two primary objectives: (a) examine temporal
patterns in the trophic position of sperm whales (as an indicator of changes in
mesopelagic trophic structure) and baseline isotopic values (as indicators of
nutrient cycling); and (b) use isotopic values, which vary among systems, to
define the population structure of sperm whales from past and present times, and
connectivity among populations.

Broader Impacts: This project will be conducted by researchers from academia and
NOAA/NMFS with expertise in stable isotope analysis, trophic ecology, and
ecosystem-based management of protected species. As such, it represents an
opportunity for collaboration between scientists with complementary skills and
from diverse institutions to compare structure and function of ecosystems across
the eastern Pacific. Moreover, it represents a collaboration between academia
and a federal agency with research and management responsibilities. The project
will support a postdoctoral scholar (Iliana Ruiz-Cooley), a Ph.D. student, and
undergraduate students to enhance their career and collaborative opportunities.
The PIs anticipate that the results of their study will provide unique data to
evaluate the effects of perturbations within and among mesopelagic ecosystems.
This information may allow the scientific community to relate trends in climate
to changes in trophic position of top predators and nutrient cycling, allowing
more robust understanding of possible responses to future warming. Finally, as
the first systematic applications of compound-specific stable isotope analysis
to marine mammals, the project should be highly instructive for future
evaluations of the feeding ecology, population structure and dynamics of
endangered marine mammals. As such, this novel approach and unique historic
perspective will be directly applicable for stock assessment and management.