* 1155207
* Overcoming Obstacles in the Implementation of Forensic Age Progression
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Charlie Frowd, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 300,587.00

Missing children represent an important problem for law enforcement. This
problem is complicated by the fact that the appearance of children changes as
they grow older, making it more difficult to engage the public's help in finding
them. One approach that has been recommended is the use of forensic age
progression. In forensic age progression, knowledge of typical facial growth
patterns are applied to photographs of children from around the time they went
missing in order to provide an estimate of the child's current appearance. Age
progression may also use photographs of biological relatives on the assumption
that the child?s current appearance may be similar to that of their
relatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Age progression is used in about one-third of
long-term missing child cases. Unfortunately, prior research has been limited
and has produced mixed results. Although it is sensible to apply information
about average growth rates to provide an estimate of a child's current
appearance, there is also considerable variability in growth patterns between
children. This makes accurate prediction in the case of an individual child
difficult. The planned research examines factors that may influence the
effectiveness of age progressions. During the first year, this research will
examine the influence of age range on the effectiveness of age progressions. In
Years 2 and 3, the research will examine the impact of presenting multiple age
progressions showing what the child may currently look like.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is one of the first systematic
attempts to understand the factors that impact the success of forensic age
progression. Knowing more about the factors that lead to successful age
progressions will allow practitioners to more create more accurate estimates of
the appearance of missing children, resulting in an improved likelihood of
recovering missing children.