* 1155983
* Large-scale controls on Equatorial Pacific nutricline structure
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Robert Key, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 04/30/2016
* USD 561,102.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt; Subantarctic Mode Water (SAMW) originates from
the high latitude Southern Hemisphere. Measurements of radiocarbon and other
chemical tracers clearly demonstrate that SAMW is present in the deeper water of
the Pacific Equatorial Undercurrent (EUC) [Toggweiler et al., 1991]. More recent
WOCE and CLIVAR measurements also show the low radiocarbon signal in the
tropical Pacific. These data indicate that the directly ventilated Pacific
thermocline is not insulated from deeper levels. Instead, the data show that the
thermocline has properties derived from significant diapycnal exchange with
deeper waters. Currently no consensus exists on the mechanism responsible for
these observations.&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate the mechanisms
governing the supply of mode water nutrients (primarily NO3 and SiO3) to the
equatorial thermocline. Its first hypothesis concerns the fate of mode water in
the Pacific. For the lower thermocline, it is argued that an upward diapycnal
transport is responsible for the supply of mass and nutrients from below. This
primarily occurs over the South Pacific and is a consequence of the tremendous
expanse of the subtropical region. This diapycnal nutrient transport mechanism
is distinct from explicit vertical diffusion of nutrients, but it is sustained
by physical diffusive processes and thus related. For the upper thermocline, it
is expected that a distinct combination of mechanisms is responsible, namely:
the impact of solar radiation penetrating below the base of the mixed layer,
direct air-sea heat exchange between the atmosphere and the sea surface, and
local mixing in the upper part of the EUC.&lt;br/&gt;The second hypothesis is
that summer mixed layer depths largely control the formation and export of mode
water nutrients from the Southern Ocean. A preliminary sensitivity study
indicates that increased Southern Ocean MLD leads to increased pre-formed mode
water nutrients. Deeper summer mixed layer depths inhibit NO3 and SIO3
consumption leaving higher winter nutrient concentrations at times of mode water
subduction. The goal here is not only to identify the dynamical controls on mode
water nutrients, but also to investigate the fate of pre-formed nutrients in the
low-latitude thermocline and how this is influenced by Southern Ocean
physics.&lt;br/&gt;These hypotheses will be tested in a water mass framework
using Eulerian and Lagrangian diagnostics. This new theoretical approach allows
one to identify the interplay of processes including transport, mixing, and
biological cycling and analyze their impact on the nutrient supply. A global
non- eddying ocean model will be used. It has significantly higher vertical
resolution than is typical of ocean climate models, but still allows convergence
to steady state for sensitivity studies. This does not imply that mesoscale and
sub-mesoscale processes aren?t important. Rather, these efforts to understand
vertical processes are complementary.&lt;br/&gt;The data analysis component of
the proposed work will use oceanic &amp;#8710;14C measurements and
"conservative" nutrient proxy tracers to constrain upwelling pathways and
transformation rates in the real ocean. Additional analysis with a full suite of
biogeochemical tracers will be carried out to better constrain the large-scale
vertical fluxes operating in the Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Implications:
Although the proposed work is largely focused on the physical mechanisms
controlling nutrient supply to the EUC, the work will have implications for
scientific understanding of both Pacific and Southern Ocean ecosystems and
biogeochemistry. The work will also benefit the training of a postdoctoral
researcher, and thereby in the preparation of the next generation of earth
scientists to engage in interdisciplinary research. If possible, the PIs will
also involve undergraduate student(s) in this work as summer interns.