* 1155816
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Balancing Costs and Benefits of a New Method of Eliciting Children's Disclosures
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Jodi Quas, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Zatz
* 05/31/2013
* USD 12,060.00

Researchers, clinicians, and child welfare professionals alike recognize that
nondisclosure and delayed reporting of child maltreatment is a significant
concern that prevents the identification and treatment of abuse victims. Because
of this concern, interviewing techniques effective in increasing disclosures
while remaining non-suggestive are sorely needed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current study will investigate such an interviewing technique termed the
putative confession (PC), which involves an interviewer telling children that
the perpetrator has already told everything that happened and wants [the child]
to tell the truth. The technique follows from precepts of Social Cognitive
Theory in that it directly addresses internal and external motivational
influences on children?s disclosures by both providing reassurance and making an
explicit appeal to tell the truth. Two studies have found that PC is effective
in increasing disclosures of adults? transgressions. However, whether PC may
augment false reports when children have been previously exposed to
misinformation regarding allegations of wrongdoing has not been tested. It is
critical to do so because in actual maltreatment investigations children often
experience conversations with others (e.g. caregivers) that may expose them to
misinformation about incorrect abuse allegations. In the current study, children
will experience a laboratory play session during which a transgression (toys
breaking) will or will not occur. Subsequently, children will be questioned by a
parent, who has or has not been given suggestive information that something bad
happened during play. Finally, children will experience an investigative
interview in which the interviewer will employ either the PC or control
instructions. The experimental methodology will allow a clear test of the impact
of PC on true and false disclosures, and of how exposure to misinformation may
augment its efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results have the potential to advance
our knowledge regarding how certain investigative interview technique
specifically designed to elicit disclosures from reluctant children may operate
in the field. Additionally, the research will provide opportunities for
introducing undergraduates to the process of conducting scientific research.