* 1155463
* Collaborative Research: Development of a low-cost PHOtosynthesis, Respiration, and Carbon balance Yielding System (PHORCYS)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Richard Keil, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2016
* USD 234,631.00

The PI's request funding to develop an in situ incubator called PHORCYS
(PHOtosynthesis, Respiration, and Carbon balance Yielding System). PHORCYS will
include development of a simple, modular, low-cost PHORCYS system capable of
making high-precision oxygen measurements in clear and opaque incubation
chambers deployed in situ; configuration of PHORCYS for use on a drifting array
in order to study upper water column primary production; configuration of
PHORCYS for use with sediment traps in order to assess sinking particle
respiration rates; creation of an experimental version of PHORCYS with extended
capabilities that can be used for in situ amendment incubation experiments;
testing different configurations on short cruises in coastal waters and on
cruises of opportunity to the open ocean; comparison of PHORCYS results with
those collected using other techniques; and creation of a standalone unit for
education. The goal is to create a PHORCYS system that will be widely adopted by
the oceanographic community and used for a variety of process
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These
instruments would be of great value to the oceanographic community since they
are relatively cheap and portable and would eventually permit widespread use and
worldwide intercomparisons. Beyond the training of MSc and PhD. students this
activity will target the education of high school students. The PI's have a
successful long term commitment to broadening ocean education (e.g. the Ocean
Inquiry project) to constituents outside the community and this will be
furthered in this activity. Exciting young scientist about the ocean is both a
vehicle of recruitment to the field as well as a vehicle to enhance science and
ocean literacy in the greater public.