* 1155813
* Quantifying the importance of biological factors in the estimation of larval connectivity and population dynamics in the coastal ocean.
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* David Siegel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 01/31/2016
* USD 370,141.00

Larval connectivity, which quantifies the intensity and pathways of connections
among populations through the dispersal of larvae, is a critical factor in
marine population dynamics and has broad reaching consequences for marine
spatial planning and fisheries management. Biophysical models, consisting of
ocean circulation models combined with Lagrangian particle tracking, are now
widely used to provide insights into the spatial and temporal dynamics of larval
connectivity that remain unobtainable through empirical approaches. However,
many of the biological assumptions used to characterize larval life history in
these models are quite general and the impacts of these assumptions have yet to
be rigorously tested. The goal of this project is to quantify How important are
the details of larval biology in estimates of connectivity and long-term
population dynamics? To answer this question, the investigators will study the
spatial and temporal impacts of larval biological factors on site-to-site
connectivity and long-term population growth using a biophysical model for near
shore species in the Southern California Bight (SCB). Four major, larval
biological factors will be investigated: (1) temperature effects on larval
growth, maturation and mortality, (2) vertical swimming behavior, (3)
spatial/temporal variability in larval production, and (4) role of habitat on
settlement. Using a biophysical model of the SCB, differences in larval
connectivity due to the biological factors will be assessed statistically by
comparing connectivity estimates that incorporate the additional biological
factors to a baseline of connectivity estimates calculated from passive,
neutrally buoyant particles. The investigators will also employ a spatial
demographic model, driven by the connectivity estimates, to quantify the
influence of biological factors on long-term population dynamics. The project
will generate significant insights into the various aspects of larval biology
that are critical for determining larval connectivity and for projecting
population dynamics into the future. The results of this project will improve
the credible application of biophysical modeling approaches to scientific
studies of coastal species as well as to marine spatial planning and fisheries
management.

BROADER IMPACTS The results of this study will contribute greatly to our
scientific understanding of the role of circulation in dynamics of marine
organisms and population connectivity. As importantly, the results will have
direct management applications. Siegel and Kendall have both been involved in
the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary's and the State of California's
processes to designate marine protected areas (MPAs) and this study is expected
to contribute as the State's Marine Life Protection Act (MLPA) process moves
into its monitoring and evaluation phase in the Southern California Bight. The
PIs have extensive experience involving undergraduate and graduate students in
research and ~20 students a year from diverse backgrounds participate in
research in their labs. This project will also maintain diversity in the
sciences by supporting the research of one female PI with no prior NSF support
(Simons) and a female graduate student. The investigators will continue weekly
group meetings in spatial marine ecology at UCSB that have become a nexus of
activity for graduate students, postdocs and faculty. In addition, the
connectivity estimates produced for the SCB from this project will be made
freely available to all interested investigators via the SBC LTER information
management system (http://sbc.lternet.edu/data). There is a great need for these
connectivity estimates by both academics and resource managers throughout the
SCB. This collaboration with SBC LTER will also expand the types of analyses
they can conduct and provide added value to both the present project and the SBC
LTER.