* 1155934
* Grad Student Support for Hybrid Code Simulation of Whistler Chorus in Dipole Coordinates
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Richard Denton, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2017
* USD 186,000.00

This project will develop a two-dimensional, fully electromagnetic hybrid code
(ions treated using particle-in-cell method and electrons treated as a fluid) to
investigate the propagation, evolution and distribution of oblique whistler
chorus waves in the magnetosphere. The simulations will be carried out in a
realistic dipole magnetic field geometry. The project will test existing
theories of these waves and will explore new generation mechanisms. The
simulations will yield information on the distribution of such waves with
respect to both space and frequency. The scientific questions to be investigated
include the distribution of the waves in space, in frequency, and the wave
polarization. In additional the project will determine whether or not variations
in the cold plasma density can explain the rapid initiation of the waves and how
such variations affect the propagation of wave energy along magnetic field
lines. Finally the project will examine how the large oblique whistler waves may
accelerate electrons to high energies in the radiation belts.

Recent observations have shown that large amplitude whistler chorus waves often
propagate at a large angle relative to the terrestrial magnetic field. This
makes the common assumption of propagation parallel to the magnetic field
invalid. The generation mechanism that leads to such waves is still
undetermined. The simulations that will be done by this project will improve our
understanding of how such waves affect the electrons in the radiation belts.
Understanding the radiation belts is an important topic in space weather. Most
of the funding for this project will support research conducted by a female
graduate student.