* 1155026
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sociocultural Effects of Ecosystem Restoration: Remaking Identity, Landscape, and Belonging in the Florida Everglades
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Laura Ogden, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 6,063.00

Doctoral candidate, Rebecca I. Garvoille (Florida International University),
with the guidance of Dr. Laura A. Ogden, will undertake research on the cultural
consequences of ecosystem restoration. The focus of her research will be the
effects that restoration initiatives may have on local identities, environmental
attitudes, and long-term expectations for regions and their management. The
research is important because governments and development organizations around
the world are increasingly choosing ecosystem restoration as a means to
rehabilitate degraded environments.

To address these questions, Garvoille will conduct 12 months of research in the
southern Florida Everglades, at two sites affected for several decades by
various Everglades restoration plans. Everglades restoration has cost billions
of dollars and is affecting local lives and livelihoods in significant ways,
which makes it an excellent site for this project. Garvoille will gather data
using multiple social science research methods, including participant
observation, semi-structured interviews, and archival research. Participant
observation will be conducted at locally significant venues, such as those
associated with majority culture outdoorsmen and local indigenous peoples, as
well as at public meetings held by state resource management agencies. Semi-
structured interviews will be carried out with indigenous peoples, outdoorsmen,
state officials, and environmental NGO staff. Archival research will complement
and contextualize the interview data.

Findings from this research will contribute to theories of the social dimensions
and tradeoffs of ecosystem restoration projects. Findings also will help
planners better anticipate as well as respond to social and cultural effects of
deliberate landscape transformation. Supporting this research also supports the
education of a social scientist.