* 1155673
* U.S. - Japan Seminar on Two-Phase Flow Dynamics, June 6-12, 2012, Tokyo, Japan
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Masahiro Kawaji, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2012
* USD 19,800.00

PI: Masahiro Kawaji, City College of New York&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CBET-1155673&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed U.S.-Japan Seminar on Two-Phase Flow Dynamics will bring together young
researchers and well established researchers from the two countries in the area
of two-phase flow and heat transfer research. Multiphase flow and associated
heat transfer occur in a wide variety of industrial processes and are of
critical importance in energy generation and conversion systems, chemical
reactors, oil recovery and refining systems, and nuclear reactor systems, among
others. They are also important subjects to study in many engineering
disciplines such as mechanical, chemical, petroleum, nuclear, aerospace,
electrical, and environmental.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective: The key objective
of the seminars is to provide an opportunity for the participants to carry out
in-depth discussions on the state of the art of the field, current challenges,
and future directions for research on this important and pervasive phenomenon.
The interactions amongst researchers from the two countries will lead to
development of co-operative research programs beneficial to the advancement of
the field and to pooling of intellectual resources of the two countries in
charting the direction of future research. Topics to be considered at the
seminars include multi-scale modeling and validation. A thorough discussion of
these topics is essential as new tools are developed for simulation of
multiphase flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The physics of
multiphase flows is extremely complex and early investigations lead to
formulation of empirical correlations. However, these correlations invariably
did not fare well when applied to situations beyond the range of parameters over
which the correlations had been developed. Subsequent efforts lead to
mechanistic models which also relied on empirical constants to correlate the
data. More recently advances have been made to numerically simulate the
phenomena while solving conservation equations using appropriate boundary and
interfacial conditions. These recent advances have increased confidence in
extending the results validated with scaled systems to prototypes. Recent
advances have also lead to formulation of models at nano, micro, and macroscale.
However, scaling of the phenomena over several length scales is still not a
resolved issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In energy generation and conversion
systems, the reduction of greenhouse gas emission is an urgent goal which can be
achieved by developing alternative energy generation strategies that do not
depend on fossil fuels. Nuclear energy is one such option and consequently is
experiencing a renaissance, however, a recent accident at Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Generating Station in Japan has highlighted a need to improve our
understanding of coolant flow and heat transfer in complex flow channels inside
a damaged reactor core and spent fuel bay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The uniqueness
of the seminars is in the in-depth discussions that would take place among all
the participants. Unlike other meetings and workshops where diverse topics are
discussed, this seminar focuses on specific topics of current and future
importance in multitudes of applications. The in-depth discussions amongst
researchers of the two countries will lead to collaboration that will have
lasting impact in advancing the field of two-phase flow and heat transfer.
Junior researchers will be intellectually challenged and stimulated through
interactions with nationally/internationally recognized senior and well
respected members of the technical community.