* 1155399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Bodies, Computers, and Productivity in South Korea
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Keith Murphy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 14,249.00

University of California at Irvine doctoral candidate, Stephen C. Rea,
supervised by Dr. Keith M. Murphy, will investigate the relationship between
somatic skill and everyday computer use in two seemingly distinct realms: the
information technology (IT) sector and computer gaming culture. The research
will be conducted in South Korea among IT workers and computer gamers, two
groups who utilize similar physical, technical, and social skills in the
operation of computers, but who have radically different social statuses.
Whereas IT workers are praised for the contributions that they make to the
growth of the South Korean economy, computer gamers are often regarded as lazy
and unproductive, garnering the label of "pye-in," a slang term meaning "garbage
people." South Korea is an ideal location for this research because of the
intensity with which computer technology dominates both work and leisure
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address these issues through the
use of traditional and innovative social scientific research methods, including:
participant observation with South Korean IT workers and computer gamers in
their everyday lives; ethnographic interviews; archival research in South Korean
media technology archives; and analytical videography of IT workers and gamers
using computers. These methods will help answer questions about how the
cultivation or eradication of specific physical, technical, and social skill
sets, as well as the discourses about such practices, impacts cultural concepts
of productivity and of the appropriate relationship between individuals and
computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is important because it will further
scientific understanding of the technological socialization of workers in post-
industrial economies; the roles of computer technology in everyday life; and the
effects of discourses and practices around cultural concepts of productivity on
human physical development. Supporting the research also supports the education
of a graduate student.