* 1155269
* Toward a better characterization of the aromatic and alicyclic components of marine dissolved  organic matter: development and application of a one-step reduction reaction
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,06/30/2014
* Lihini Aluwihare, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 06/30/2014
* USD 289,253.00

Identifying the chemical structure of compounds that constitute the refractory
dissolved organic matter (RDOM) reservoir will yield new insights into the
processes that control the accumulation and removal of organic matter from
aquatic environments. A scientist from Scripps Institute of Oceanography will be
working to optimize an existing chemical reduction technique to render oxidized
aliphatic and aromatic dissolved organic matter (DOM), two compounds which
together comprise as much as 60% of the carbon in RDOM, more amenable to gas
chromatography (GC) separation. This will allow for the characterization of this
important RDOM component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the time and effort
associated with the proposed research will be invested in identifying backbone
structures of reduction products. To assist with this structural
characterization, the proposal also seeks to adapt and modify existing GC×GC
time of flight mass spectrometry techniques to better separate the complex
mixture of reduction products. In addition to enabling more accurate compound
characterization, this technique will also allow a more rapid determination of
structural homogeneity within aquatic DOM. As part of this proposal, a
preparatory GC×GC will also be modified such that methods developed using the
previous instrument can be easily applied to isolate relevant compounds for
further characterization (including isotope measurements). This work will also
generate an MS library the aliphatic and aromatic reduction products that will
be made available to other investigators interested in pursuing a similar avenue
of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides continuing to further develop the
analytical method, the researcher also plans to apply the method to test three
hypothesis, namely (1) that reduction will yield several aromatic compounds,
some of which resemble degraded lignin; (2) that reduction will yield a range of
alicyclic compounds including terpane derivatives; and (3) that GC×GC separation
will confirm the presence of structurally related families of aromatic and
aliphatic compounds. Samples for this study include Suwannee River fulvic acids
and natural organic matter, ultrafiltered DOM isolated from the eastern tropical
Pacific Ocean and western tropical Atlantic Ocean, DOM isolated from Circumpolar
Deep Water in the Southern Ocean isolated using Agilent Bondesil PPL, and one
surface and one deep water sample collected in the North Pacific subtropical
gyre obtained using reverse osmosis/electrodialysis that will serve as an ad-hoc
marine, reference DOM. Analyses of these four different DOM sample types will
help to determine reaction and GC/MS-based analysis parameters to be optimized
for each sample type and compound class under study.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
analytical method to be developed and the mass spectrometry library for
reduction products would be of interest to the science community. One graduate
student would be supported and trained as part of this project. Two high school
summer interns chosen with the help of the Ocean Discovery Center would also
participate in the study. Students from this program tend to be underrepresented
minorities.