* 1155643
* The Effects of Shocks on International Networks: An Agent-Based Model with Simulated and Real-World Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Zeev Maoz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2015
* USD 255,220.00

Dramatic events such as wars, revolutions, economic crises, and the rise and
fall of global powers, are known to have major effects on the international
system. Yet good theoretical and empirical foundations to explain exactly how
shocks affect the structure of international politics are lacking. This project
examines how shocks affect the structure of international networks (e.g.,
security cooperation, international trade, or international conflict).

The study combines two distinct methodological approaches: network analysis, a
scientific approach that allows for structural analysis of connections between
entities, and agent-based modeling (ABM), a method that uses computer simulation
to study the behavior of autonomous entities. The project contains three stages:
(a) ABM to simulate the different processes by which international networks form
and evolve; (b) Shocks of different types and different characteristics are
added into these networks; (c) The ABMs are re-run following the shocks to
compare the characteristics of individual states, dyads, groups, and the entire
network in the pre-shock and post-shock periods. The ABMs will first be run on
randomly generated network data, yielding propositions about the effects of
different types of shocks on international networks. Subsequently, these
propositions will be tested both by statistical analyses of historical network
data and by running the ABMs using real-world data. In order to facilitate the
empirical tests, a cultural networks dataset will be collected that includes a
breakdown of states' populations into religious and linguistic groups. By
integrating computational and empirical methods, this project will contribute to
our understanding of how shocks affect international networks.

The intellectual merit of the project rests in explaining the effect of shocks
on international politics, an important and under-examined avenue of research.
This project will provide new insights into historical developments in
international networks that were the products of major shocks. In addition, the
models and ideas developed by the project can be applied to research questions
across the social and behavioral sciences, such as the effects of natural
disasters on public health, or the effects of government collapse on economic
networks.

The project offers several broader impacts. First, it develops an ABM platform
that can be extended to examine the effects of shocks on many types of social,
economic, and physical networks. Second, it provides a method for testing a
large number of hypotheses by using real-world data as inputs to the ABMs, then
comparing the simulated networks to historical networks. Third, it establishes a
new method for predicting the impact of future shocks on international politics,
potentially providing decision-makers with insights into structuring network
ties in a way that will optimize the effects of shock-induced challenges (e.g.,
a revolution in Egypt) on a given state. Fourth, it provides a valuable
longitudinal publicly-available dataset on world cultures that will enable
research into the effects of culture on international relations and of political
processes on culture. Fifth, it provides a much-needed data depository for
datasets formatted for network analysis. Finally, it offers graduate and
undergraduate students training and experience in theory development, data
collection, and empirical evaluation.