* 1155764
* Collaborative Research: Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) transformations in deep sub-surface sediments and its role as a source of "old" DOC to the water column
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Tomoko Komada, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2017
* USD 430,578.00

Organic carbon (Corg) remineralization rates are typically highest near the
sediment-water interface, and decrease with depth as labile substrates and
strong oxidants are consumed. However, in many ocean margin sediments, at the
depth interval where sulfate (SO4=) is exhausted and CH4 concentrations begin to
increase (the sulfate-methane transition; SMT), SO4= reduction rates typically
show strong sub-surface maxima, indicating locally-enhanced microbial activity
and carbon turnover. These hot spots for SO4= reduction are generally attributed
to anaerobic oxidation of CH4 by SO4=, but a number of studies have found an
excess of SO4= reduction over CH4 oxidation, indicating the presence of a major
additional SO4= sink in the SMT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a
research team from San Francisco State University, Florida State University, and
Old Dominion University will investigate the nature of this SO4= sink by
combining cutting-edge porewater compositional analyses -- del-14C and del-13C
of CH4, dissolved organic and inorganic carbon (DOC and DIC), and 1H-NMR on DOC
-- with numerical reactive transport modeling. They will test the hypothesis
that the SMT is an oxidation front for not just CH4, but also for DOC that is
produced deeper in the sediment column, and transported upward into the SMT.
They will also test the idea that not all of this DOC is oxidized in the SMT,
and that some reaches the surface sediments, and represents a source of
14C-depleted (pre-aged) DOC to the oceans. The premise is that DOC production
from Corg is enhanced in methanogenic sediments due to an uncoupling in the
anaerobic food chain between terminal metabolism and fermentation reactions
involved in the overall Corg remineralization process. The work will focus on
two ocean margin sites, Santa Monica Basin and Santa Barbara Basin, which
despite their geographic proximity, appear to have different CH4 dynamics in the
deep sediments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This study should
result in a greater understanding of the role of sub-surface sediments in the
overall benthic Corg remineralization process, and in the exchange of major
elements between the sea floor and the water column. It will also allow testing
of the hypothesis that marine sediments are sources of 14C-depleted,
recalcitrant DOC to the overlying water column, thereby addressing a problem
that has perplexed chemical oceanography for several decades: what factors
control the 14C signature of DOC in the deep oceans?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will integrate research and
education in several ways. It will allow the 3 PIs to continue with their effort
to incorporate their research activities into the classes they teach, which
range from advanced graduate- to 100-level undergraduate courses intended for
non-science majors. Second, it will directly impact the learning experiences of
2 Ph.D. and 2 M.S. candidates, and at least 2 undergraduate students who will
receive training in key aspects of the proposed work, including the field,
experimental and modeling components.