* 1155495
* Towards a Global Reconciliation of Last Interglacial Sea Level Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Andrea Dutton, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2017
* USD 314,258.00

Sea level rise reconstructions and predictions are currently limited in accuracy
by our incomplete understanding of dynamic ice sheet behavior. Recent research
indicates that sea level rise during the Last Interglacial (LIG) period may have
been similar to what is projected for later in the 21st century; thus far,
however, it has not been possible to produce consistent reconstructions of
eustatic sea level change for this period, underscoring the need to better
understand the influence of changing ice sheet volume and extent. Glacio-hydro-
isostatic effects can obscure the eustatic sea level change signal at sites
located near ice sheets, necessitating investigations of sea level change at
far-field sites (e.g., the Indian Ocean and Caribbean) where these effects are
less severe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, led by a faculty member at the
University of Florida in collaboration with Australian scientists, uses fossil
corals in the Seychelles to reconstruct eustatic sea level via diagenetic
assessments, Uranium-series dating, and surveying integrated with geophysical
(glacio-hydro-isostatic) modeling. LIG sea level markers across the Caribbean
will be also be surveyed. Together, the dataset and model results will place
constraints on past ice sheet volumes and extents, which will help to resolve
serious disparities (+4 m) in sea level reconstructions, as well as facilitating
the generation of a best-estimate eustatic sea level change curve.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of sea level change data and geophysical
modeling involved in this research aligns closely with the objectives of PALSEA,
a PAGES/IMAGES working group created to place empirical constraints on future
sea level rise using the paleo record. The work will involve close collaboration
between the lead researcher and her international colleagues. Educational
impacts include the involvement of undergraduates at the University of Florida
enrolled in a "Geology of the Bahamas" course, who will directly participate in
the field component of this project; in addition, these students will
participate in a series of lectures placing the work in context. The project
will also be featured in a multimedia exhibit promoting STEM research at the
Florida Museum of Natural History. This award will support the professional
development of an early-career researcher, as well as the training of a PhD
student and several undergraduate assistants.