* 1155923
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food and the Production of Social Distinctions in Lima, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Thomas Abercrombie, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 18,750.00

New York University doctoral student Amy Lasater-Wille, supervised by Dr. Thomas
Abercrombie, will investigate the effects of planned and targeted cultural
change projects on socioeconomic hierarchies and ideas of racial difference. The
research will be carried out in Lima, Peru, which has long been marked by
socioeconomic differentiations predicated on ideas of racial and bodily
difference. Peru is an appropriate research site because in the wake of a recent
spike in rural-to-urban migration and ongoing national recovery from internal
violence (1980-1992), coalitions of development, corporate, and government
programs in Peru are explicitly creating new cultural and economic ties between
groups once kept separate. The research examines how the practices and goals of
these new institutions affect older ideas of social and economic differentiation
and stratification.

To investigate these issues, the researcher will focus on changes in the area of
national cuisine, which has been a site of development interventions. Research
will be conducted through an ethnographic study of three locales: a culinary
school for working-class youth on the outskirts of Lima; a network of
professionals involved in the Peruvian Gastronomy Society; and new public,
culinary festivals. Research methods will include participant observation, life
history interviews, social network analysis, and the collection and examination
of periodicals and texts related to Peru's cuisine and culinary industries.

Findings from this research will contribute to social science understandings of
the relationship between macroeconomic change, everyday practices, and
persistence of or changes in systems of social distinction. This research is
also important because it investigates the social impact of economic development
and public health projects that focus on cuisine as a target for intervention.
Funding for this research also supports the training of a social scientist.