* 1155674
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Making and Circulation of a Policy in Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Charles Briggs, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 9,105.00

Doctoral student Alissa Bernstein (University of California, Berkeley), with the
supervision of Dr. Charles Briggs, will undertake research on the relationship
between the making of public policy and its implementation. While the two
processes generally are regarded as distinct phases, Bernstein will explore the
possibility that they may be closely intertwined, informing each other as a
circuit. This study will offer insights into how new policy ideas emerge and how
they may alter entrenched practices and improve outcomes.

To investigate these questions, Bernstein will conduct a twelve-month study of
the planning, making, revising, and implementing of major health reform policy
in Bolivia, Salud Familiar Communitaria Intercultural (SAFCI). The researcher
will examine how this policy is shaped and possibly changed as it circulates
within different sectors of the Bolivian health care system. Data will be
gathered at two public clinics and two worker health insurance clinics. The
researcher will employ a variety of social science methodologies, including
ethnographic interviews, participant observation, and epidemiological analysis.
As an institutional ethnography, the research will be carried out in offices,
meetings, conferences, workshops, and clinics where policies may be generated,
debated, circulated, revised, and implemented.The overarching research questions
are: (1) Can the reform policy-making process be truly collaborative? If so, who
is involved and how does this approach impact the form of policy that emerges?
(2) How does the context of a particular sector or community shape the ways that
policy is interpreted, rewritten, and implemented for use? (3) What are some of
the measurable outcomes of reform policy implementation and what areas are
facing problems or resistance?

In addition to contributing to social science theory, findings from this
research will have practical application, in the health field and beyond. This
study is innovative in that it looks not just at policy outcomes, but also takes
an original approach to understanding processes of policy formation. Though
often marginalized in these debates about public policy, many observers argue
that Latin America has recently generated some of the most creative ideas and
undertaken significant pervasive transformations, which makes Bolivia an ideal
site for pursuing these questions. Funding this research also supports the
education of a graduate student.