* 1155571
* Collaborative Research: Microbial Interactions with Marine Plastic Debris: Diversity, Function and Fate
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Linda Amaral Zettler, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/28/2017
* USD 506,195.00

Plastic marine debris is a recent introduction to marine ecosystems resulting
from the widespread use of polymers in consumer goods after World War II. The
current global annual production of plastic is 245 million tonnes or 35 kg of
plastic for each of the 7 billion humans on the planet, rivaling the combined
biomass of all humans. Drifter buoys and physical oceanographic models
demonstrate that surface particles passively migrate from the coastline to the
central gyres in less than 60 days, illustrating how quickly human-generated
debris can impact the pristine gyre interiors, more than 1000 km from land.
Plastic debris has been implicated as a vector for transportation of harmful
algal species and persistent organic pollutants, and provides a substrate for
microbes that moves between environments and lasts much longer than most natural
floating substrates. Despite increases in plastic production no significant
trend in plastic accumulation has been observed since 1985. Physical shearing
and photodegradation are known mechanisms of plastic degradation, but microbial
degradation has also been implicated. Unpublished data employing pyrotag
amplicon sequencing targeting bacterial and eukaryotic small subunit ribosomal
RNA gene sequences, together with Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) data are
consistent with the notion that plastic debris harbors a unique association of
microbes including members capable of degrading plastic. The term "Plastisphere"
describes this unique microbial community attached to and surrounding marine
plastic debris and distinct from microbes in the surrounding seawater and on
natural substrates such as macroalgae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will:
(1) characterize diversity through amplicon sequencing and comparative -omics
combined with SEM and confocal microscopy to investigate the microbial
composition of the Plastisphere; (2) describe function of the Plastisphere
taking a cultivation-independent environmental DNA gene expression approach, as
well as a cultivation-based approach to interrogate environmental clones and
microbial isolates for the ability to degrade hydrocarbons; and (3) determine
key biological factors that control the fate of plastic debris in the upper
water column.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. Plastic is now the most
abundant form of marine debris. Gaining an understanding of how plastic is
affecting the very foundation of the food web in delicate open ocean
environments is a first order question that will be addressed in this proposal
and provides a base for an emerging research topic that has been identified as a
high-priority research area. Understanding how microbes interact with plastic
debris that accumulates in the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre and North Pacific
Subtropical Gyre (two of the largest biomes on Earth) will provide a foundation
for follow-up research questions such as: Do microbial biofilms provide
sustenance for filter feeding zooplankton?; how is the abundance of plastic
debris affecting the health of these delicate biomes?; and can a truly
biodegradable plastic be formulated that will have minimal impact on the
oligotrophic environment? With a growing human population and second and third
world economic growth, it is inevitable that more plastic debris will find its
way into the ocean and collect in convergence zones such as the
gyres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The field component of this project
is built around independent research projects by undergraduate students
participating in Sea Education Association?s SEA Semester research cruises in
the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. In addition to mentoring SEA Semester students
who will be collecting samples and helping with this project throughout the
year, the project will engage faculty and students from the Caribbean region who
are studying at St. Georges University in Grenada. Underrepresented minorities
in the US will be mentored through the Partnership Education Program (PEP)
program, the WHOI minority fellowship program, and the MBL REU Site program in
Biological Discovery in Woods Hole. Outreach to the general public and K-12
teachers and students will be delivered through a dedicated website for the
"Plastics at SEA expedition" in 2010 by adding a section that specifically
addresses microbial ecology and the role of plastic marine debris in open ocean
marine ecosystems. All members of the research team will contribute to a newly
developed undergraduate curriculum in "Marine Biodiversity and Conservation" via
lectures and participation aboard ship.