* 1155340
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biomedical Practices and New Medical Pharmaceuticals in Germany
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Judith Farquhar, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 04/30/2014
* USD 13,220.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biomedical Practices and New Medical
Pharmaceuticals in Germany&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
origins, meanings, and effects of new medical pharmaceuticals that can both
treat disease and address the functioning of healthy individuals. Using
interviews with biomedical professionals who deploy these new pharmaceuticals,
and ethnographic observations, this research examines how the development and
use of these pharmaceuticals are understood by biomedical professionals, who
have historically been oriented toward assisting those who are ill rather than
addressing biomedical issues in healthy people. Interviews and ethnographic
research are also used to investigate how users learn about and attribute value
to these new pharmaceuticals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to
social science theories of how human health and well-being are understood and
evaluated by biomedical professional and scientists. It also contributes to
social science theories of the sources of change in biomedical practices, by
examining the role of new products in shaping assumptions, subjects, and
personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this research include new
resources for programs intended to provide public information about new
pharmaceuticals, and materials that can help in the formulation of policy
responses and professional guidelines for biomedical professionals whose
practices may be shaped by new orientations toward human well-being.