* 1155997
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: The Competitive Environment of the Origination and Early Diversification of Euprimates in North America
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Gary Schwartz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 03/31/2014
* USD 16,425.00

The goal of this research by doctoral student Laura Stroik (Arizona State
University), working under the supervision of Dr. Gary Schwartz, is to determine
the model of dietary competitive interaction that characterized the origination
and early diversification of Eocene euprimates (earliest "true" primates) in
North America, ca. 55 million years ago. Three models of competitive interaction
are examined: (1) absence of dietary competition, (2) presence of strong dietary
competition, resulting in the competitive exclusion of non-euprimate species,
and (3) presence of weak dietary competition, resulting in the coexistence of
euprimate and non-euprimate species. Competition is defined by niche overlap,
and each hypothesis is distinguishable by its unique predicted pattern of
dietary niche overlap among species through time.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dietary
niches of fossil taxa are reconstructed using morphological measures of molar
teeth that are found to discriminate dietary regimes within a comparative sample
of extant mammals. The degree of separation between reconstructed niches of
early euprimates and their competitors is evaluated statistically across a
series of fossil samples at a single site, the Bighorn Basin in Wyoming.
Competitive environments are examined just prior to the origin of euprimates and
then during the initial phase of their radiation within North America. Observed
patterns of dietary niche overlap over time, together with species abundance and
climatic variables, are compared to the expected patterns of each competition
model.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Establishing the dietary competitive environment in
which euprimates arose enables a direct test of the standing hypotheses of
euprimate origins by demonstrating whether diet was, in fact, a primary driver
of early euprimate evolution. In addition, climatic warming processes comparable
to those seen today were also present during the time when true primates
originated; thus, the results of this project are directly applicable to studies
of the effects of global climate change on modern animals, particularly those at
risk of extinction. This research promotes the training of undergraduate
students, and the results of this study (including methodological techniques,
quantitative data, and computer algorithms) are accessible to other researchers
and educators through an online database.