* 1155931
* Information Transmission and Aggregation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Navin Kartik, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 287,160.00

This award funds research that uses game theory to analyze situations where
information has an important effect on how individual decisions lead to group
outcomes.

The first part of the project considers whether and how political systems lead
to the implementation of efficient policies. A key feature of any real world
political system is that information is dispersed across citizens, policy-
makers, government executives, and legislators. Social scientists now have a
fairly well developed understanding of how elections aggregate voters'
information in a representative democracy, but we do not yet know whether or not
politicans' or parties' information is also disseminated and aggregated in an
efficient way. The researcher will use a novel model of electoral competition
between office-motivated candidates with private information to answer this
question.

The second part of the research develops a new approach to studying strategic
information transmission. The key idea is that conventions of natural language
can be formally captured by imposing a weak restriction on the space of
available strategies. While the restriction by itself does nothing to affect the
essence of the strategic possibilities, it mitigates one source of multiplicity
in games. Given the formal restruction capturing conventions, the second step is
to apply iterative admissability, ie to iteratively delete weakly dominated
strategies. The new approach provides sharp and robust predictions. The project
includes an investigation of this approach to broader classes of games.

The projects here will be valuable for many applications of game theory
modelling. The project also contributes to training graduate students in how to
use game theory to model concrete situations.