* 1155810
* Doctoral Disseration Research: Chronically Normal: Reshaping Everyday Life through Type-2 Diabetes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Celina Kapoor, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 04/30/2013
* USD 9,210.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Chronically Normal: How Biomedical Knowledge is
Used in Everyday Life

This project investigates how people create new kinds of health knowledges and
identities as a result of living with type-2 diabetes. This illness is often
attributed to combinations of social, environmental, biological, and political
causes that are often deeply intertwined with conceptions of individual and
group identity. Understanding how people come to treat illness such as type-2
diabetes as normal is important because worldwide, chronic disease conditions,
such as cancer, heart disease, obesity, depression, and asthma are prevalent.
Intergovernmental organizations as well as local and national public health
organizations across the world are scrambling to stem the tide, yet
interventions often draw on either individual or community-level interventions,
which do not take into account the meanings that people with chronic illness
attribute to these diseases, nor integrate individual and larger-scale
attributions of causality. By studying everyday settings, such as at support
groups and free health screenings, or watching public service announcements,
this research investigates how illness binds people together who would otherwise
be strangers. In these social interactions, chronic illness sufferers produce
new kinds of knowledge -both about their illnesses and about their identities-
as well as develop sociality based around illness. In doing so, they form what
can be called a chronic public.

The theoretical significance of this project is that it integrates medical
anthropology, science and technology studies, and cultural anthropology to
analyze how people make sense of biomedical knowledge about chronic illnesses in
everyday life in the United States. In contrast to studies of illness and
biomedicine that focus on intense moments of individual decision-making in
clinic settings to discover how people take on illness identities, this research
examines how social ties, expert and non-expert knowledge, and material culture
mediate and shape illness identities among the ill, the non- and pre-ill.
Moreover, it contributes to theories about how micro- and macro-level social
processes coexist and are refashioned through everyday life.