* 1155863
* Tidal-Band and High-Frequency Internal Waves on the Inner Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* John Barth, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 01/31/2015
* USD 135,306.00

This study will characterize and understand the variability of internal waves on
the Oregon inner shelf through three analysis approaches using historical data,
targeted high-frequency inner-shelf observations and realistic numerical model
output. The historical data come from a 10+ year observational record of the
central Oregon inner shelf collected by the Partnership for Interdisciplinary
Studies of Coastal Oceans, and a mid-shelf mooring maintained by the Northwest
Association of Networked Ocean Observing Systems since 2007. Data include moored
water-column velocity and water properties (temperature, salinity). The inner-
shelf data set also includes a combination of high-frequency sampling in-situ
moorings and Argus video remote sensing to capture the high-frequency nonlinear
internal wave field around Yaquina Head, OR. Data from experiments conducted in
summer 2010 and 2011 will be analyzed to establish the relationship between
high-frequency internal motions on the inner shelf and offshore continental
shelf processes (e.g. internal tides, buoyant plumes, upwelling fronts). Since
moored observational records are necessarily limited in space, output from a
hydrostatic, 3-dimensional numerical model (ROMS) with realistic bathymetry and
forcing conditions will be analyzed in conjunction with the observational data
to study the propagation and arrival of internal tides to the Oregon inner
shelf.

The inner shelf is the last stretch of stratified coastal ocean and is
potentially the termination point for internal waves. This study will
investigate how various oceanic background conditions and external forcing
induce temporal and spatial variability in internal wave evolution as they
propagate across the shelf. This includes the effects of variable wind,
stratification, subtidal currents, tidal forcing, and surface wave conditions.
It will also provide estimates of how internal wave energy and potential mass
transport to the inner shelf are modified by these background conditions.
Because the internal tide is intermittent in time, complex demodulation or
wavelet analysis will be used to isolate the internal tidal component from
velocity and temperature data. Time series techniques (e.g., lagged
correlations, empirical orthogonal functions) will be employed to explore a
number of hypotheses of how inner-shelf internal tide energy relates to offshore
processes, external forcing and background oceanic conditions.

Intellectual Merit: Internal waves are an important link connecting nearshore
environments to offshore shelf circulation. With the extensive historical data
record, tidal-band internal wave variability will be described for a wide range
of background oceanic and forcing conditions over regions of both simple and
complex topography. This work will uncover interannual variability in these
mechanisms and begin to address the question of how these processes might change
over time. Understanding these processes will also provide insight into locating
regions of energy dissipation and mixing on the continental shelf. Lastly, the
use of Argus technology will address the utility of shore-based video remote
sensing to monitor high-frequency internal waves across the inner shelf.

Broader Impact: Understanding inner-shelf internal tides is of interest in
marine ecology and biogeochemistry. For example, recruitment of intertidal
invertebrates has been linked to internal tide events. Furthermore, the study
region is near the entrance to the Yaquina river - an example of a small coastal
estuary with active oyster farming and commercial fishing industries.
Understanding the processes that determine the source water content to these
estuaries is crucial for effective estuarine management especially as shelf
waters have been found to be acidic and low in dissolved oxygen. Internal waves
are often unresolved in coastal numerical models and collaborating with modelers
will allow for a feedback between this research and the modeling community.
Finally, this project primarily supports the dissertation research and
scientific training of a graduate student.