* 1155289
* Reciprocity, Generosity, Trust, and Group Solidarity
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Jeffrey Lucas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/2015
* USD 210,243.00

SES-1155289&lt;br/&gt;Jeffrey Lucas&lt;br/&gt;Carmi
Schooler&lt;br/&gt;University of Maryland, College
Park&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reciprocity, Generosity,
Trust, and Group Solidarity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has shown that
individuals raised in Western cultures (e.g., U.S. and Canada) and those raised
in Eastern cultures (e.g., China and Japan) differ in their views of themselves
and their relationships and obligations toward the groups of which they are
part. This experimental project has two goals. The first goal is to investigate
whether these documented cross-cultural differences can be produced by changes
in the social structure. To that end, the experimental conditions in this study
vary the types of networks of social exchange in which participants interact.
The second goal is to study how variations in structures of exchange contribute
to the development of trust and commitment in networks of exchange. The
investigators predict that generalized exchange, in which actors give benefits
to different actors than those from whom they receive benefits (as opposed, for
example, to networks in which actors compete with each other for resources),
will produce more interdependent and holistic orientations, as well as higher
levels of trust and commitment, than other types of exchange. Ultimately, the
research seeks to contribute to our understanding of how changes in social
structure can affect profound cultural differences between Eastern and Western
societies, a well as differences in trust and group solidarity across
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
social conditions, including network structures, shape group solidarity has
important implications, both for everyday interactions and in critical
situations created e.g., by rapid social change or unexpected events. If
successful, results might suggest interventions to promote cooperative behavior
in groups, increase trust and solidarity, and improve performance on various
types of tasks. The research also has a significant education component, leading
to the training of a number of graduate and undergraduate students in research.
Finally, the research will involve modifications to a widely used software
program for behavioral experiments, modifications that will be made freely
available to interested researchers.