* 1155918
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Implementing International Standards in the Commodification of Brazilian Biofuels
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2013
* Adriana Petryna, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 7,810.00

University of Pennsylvania doctoral student, Derek Newberry, supervised by Dr.
Adriana Petryna, will undertake research on the creation and implementation of
biofuel standards in São Paulo, Brazil. Brazilian biofuel producers seek to tap
into global markets for sustainable energies but in order to do so, they must
meet the social and environmental criteria mandated by the governments of
countries where those markets are located. In response, ethanol executives have
joined energy experts, government officials, and activists in Brazil and abroad
to produce an environmental and social production standard, which is to be
implemented by refinery managers. How these stakeholders with different
understandings of morally responsible production create and implement standards
will determine whether ethanol is successful as a major export and how its
socio-environmental impacts are distributed. This research will therefore
analyze the dynamic relationship between actors defining and implementing
ethanol standards, describing the knowledge labor and work practices that
constitute this emergent green energy commodity chain.

Derek Newberry will conduct ethnographic fieldwork in São Paulo among
professionals involved in creating ethanol sustainability standards and at a
production site in the interior of the state where the standards are being put
into practice. He will use a range of social science research methods including
participant observation and in-depth interviews to collect data on the ethical
ideas held by different actors about what constitutes morally responsible
production. He will also investigate the work practices through which ideas
about sustainable ethanol are selected and how these affect the standards and
the production chain.

Findings from this research will contribute to social science theory of how
local processes connect with international ones, as viewed through the lens of
cultures of regulation. The research may also support the promotion of
transparency for ethanol standards negotiations that affect both the producers
and the local residents who are impacted by production of this energy. Funding
this research also supports the education of a graduate student.