* 1155240
* The Variable and Changing Carbonate Chemistry of the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Nicole Lovenduski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2017
* USD 453,752.00

The Southern Ocean is a source of great uncertainty and large potential change
in predictions of the future carbon-climate system. In this project, a research
team at the University of Colorado at Boulder will develop improved numerical
models to better predict the rate of Southern Ocean carbon uptake over the next
several decades to centuries. This will require a thorough understanding of the
variable and changing carbonate chemistry of the Southern Ocean, including
better constraints on the present-day mean state and seasonal cycle,
quantification of past variability, and characterization of key processes
driving change in the future. The primary numerical tool for this project will
be the Community Earth System Model (CESM), a state-of-the-art Earth system
model with fully interactive marine ecosystem and global carbon modules. Output
from hindcast and 21st century CESM simulations, hydrographic data, and
satellite data products will be used to understand model biases, interpret
variability, and quantify carbon-climate feedback strength.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives are to: (1) analyze biases in, and
guide improvement of, the Southern Ocean alkalinity cycle in the CESM; (2)
quantify multi-decadal changes in modeled Southern Ocean carbonate chemistry
over the last 60 years, and validate these trends with satellite and
hydrographic data sets; (3) identify drivers of interannual to multi-decadal
variability in Southern Ocean carbonate chemistry; and (4)quantify carbon
feedbacks in the Southern Ocean due to changes in acidification, stratification,
and wind-driven circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By quantifying past
variability in the inorganic carbonate chemistry of the Southern Ocean, and
identifying the physical and ecological processes that modify carbonate
chemistry here, this project will offer new insights into the changing rate of
Southern Ocean carbon uptake and acidification. The vast user base of the CESM
stands to benefit from the proposed improvements in the representation of
biogeochemistry and ecology in the CESM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
This research will lead to a better understanding of the future evolution of the
global carbon-climate system, which is of direct benefit to society. Results
from this work will be widely disseminated in the scientific community through
publication in peer-reviewed journals and presentation at scientific meetings.
It will support an early-career scientist and the development of her research
group. The PI is a mentor for the Summer Multicultural Access to Research
Training program at her home institution, which aims to provide hands-on
experience in research and an introduction to graduate education to
undergraduate students who are members of racial/ethnic groups severely
underrepresented in science, math, and engineering. The project will support the
education and training of two graduate students. Significant research findings
from this project will be incorporated into the curriculum of four courses at
the University of Colorado.