* 1155558
* Horizontal Convection at Large Rayleigh Number: Laboratory Experiments and Direct Numerical Simulation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Alberto Scotti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2017
* USD 565,572.00

Intellectual merit: Horizontal Convection (HC) has been used as a model to study
the ocean Meridional Overturning Circulation. However, based on several
influential works, the prevailing view in the oceanographic community is that HC
cannot generate turbulence and is therefore unable to contribute energetically
to the observed 2Ã—10^15 W of poleward heat transport in the ocean. Based on
these results, additional sources of abyssal ocean mixing (including even
biological organisms) have been sought to explain the &amp;#8764;2.1 TW thought
to drive the MOC. However, recent results based on Available Potential Energy
(APE) analysis, and this teams own Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) are
producing a surprising new picture of HC. It demonstrates fully-developed
turbulence, despite an energy bound that proves energy dissipation goes to zero
with viscosity (violating the first law of turbulence), and a mixing efficiency
which approaches 1, much larger than the canonical value of 0.25 used to
estimate the MOC energy requirement. These results suggest that HC may in fact
be highly efficient at transporting heat, and leads to this fundamental study of
the fluid dynamics of HC, strategically combining DNS and large-scale laboratory
experiments in the UNC Interdisciplinary Fluids Lab stratified wave tank using
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and temperature-sensitive Laser-Induced
Fluorescence (LIF). This approach will allow the detailed energetics of HC to be
explored at Rayleigh numbers (forcing strength) much larger than previously
possible. These tools will be used to explore (1) the connection between
buoyancy forcing and mechanical energy input in maintaining HC, (2) the behavior
of the mixing efficiency and whether it indeed approaches 1 at large Ra, (3)
energetic pathways through which HC can be such an efficient mover of heat, (4)
the nature of the seemingly paradoxical HC turbulence (with small dissipation
but fully-developed), and (5) specific pathways through which mechanical mixing,
driven for example by tidal flow over topography (simulated in the experiments),
enters the energy budget, and affects the generation of APE. Detailed
investigation of turbulent mixing and its spatial distribution will hopefully
explain how HC is apparently such an efficient mechanism for heat
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The results of this study have
the potential to inform our understanding of ocean circulation and to complement
to ocean observations of temperature/salinity structure in the MOC. By informing
our understanding of the MOC energy balance, the results may contribute to an
improved understanding of the response of the ocean circulation to climate
change and improved interpretation of circulation under past climatic regimes.
Given its climate implications, this work is of potential interest to the
general public and policymakers, and the PIs plan to share experimental
demonstrations with the public, through K-12 outreach, the UNC Morehead
Planetarium Summer programs, and the annual North Carolina Science Festival,
showcasing science and technology in the state. They also plan to take advantage
of the cyberinfrastructure resources of RENCI for data visualization and
sharing, including use of the Social Computing Room, a 360 degree interactive
display for HD projection, and the Teleimmersion Room, a 3D Stereoscopic room
for data visualization to display and share the PIV and DNS visual data, to
improve dissemination of results to the public, media outlets, and others in the
scientific community. This work will support the training of one graduate
student and one postdoctoral researcher. The UNC Marine Sciences-Applied Math
Interdisciplinary Fluids Lab has a strong record of promoting undergraduate
research, with many students regularly presenting work at national meetings, and
the same is anticipated from the undergraduates funded by this project.