* 1155855
* Development and Application of a Radiotracer Rate Method for Ethane and Propane Consumption
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* David Valentine, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2016
* USD 388,632.00

Ethane and propane are released in abundance to the ocean through natural
seepage, as byproducts of photosynthesis, and by the petroleum industry. For
example, ethane and propane together constituted greater than 5% of the total
mass release during the Deepwater Horizon event and were the primary drivers of
oxygen decline in the deep waters of the NE Gulf of Mexico during the spill.
Despite the importance of these gases, little is known about their release into
the ocean, the capacity of marine bacteria to consume them, or the fate and
impacts of the carbon and energy they store.

In this project researchers at the University of California at Santa Barbara
will specifically address the consumption of ethane and propane in the ocean by
developing, validating and applying highly sensitive tracer techniques to
quantify consumption rates for these gases in ocean waters. Two specific
hypotheses will be tested with the goal to better understand the factors
controlling ethane and propane consumption in the ocean. Hypothesis 1: The
capacity for ethane and propane oxidation is ubiquitous throughout the upper
ocean and along continental margins, with constitutive rates that depend on
regional input and total bacterial abundance; Hypothesis 2: Propane and ethane
consumption are readily inducible beyond a basal level on the timescale of days,
propane consumption more so than ethane consumption.

The research team will address these hypotheses in two steps. The first step
will entail the development of a method to quantify the consumption rates for
ethane and propane, including the laboratory synthesis of radiolabeled ethane
and propane, purification of the products, systematic investigations of tracer
storage to minimize effects of autoradiolytic exchange, and validation of the
measurement through intercomparison. The second step is the application of the
method to interrogate the rates of ethane and propane consumption in the ocean,
including the coastal ocean and along the continental margin off California. The
field component of the research will take place during a series of short cruises
in the Santa Barbara Basin, and during one value added cruise aboard a UNOLS
vessel.

Broader impacts This project will provide support for the dissertation research
of one graduate student. Several undergraduate students will receive laboratory
training and participate in the coastal research. A field studies course will
bring several undergraduates on a research expedition and provide them a rich
hands-on educational experience, truly integrating teaching and research, using
an established methodology. The PI will continue to lead outreach efforts by
example, serving as a resource to journalists, federal agencies, and members of
Congress, and through popularization of appropriate aspects of this research