* 1155385
* Collaborative Research: The role of soluble Mn(III) in the biogeochemical coupling of the Mn, Fe and sulfur cycles
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2016
* George Luther, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2016
* USD 410,915.00

The research conducted by investigators in the School of Marine Science and
Policy at the University of Delaware and within the Department of Environmental
and Biomolecular Systems of Oregon Health and Science University will examine
the importance of soluble Mn(III) in the biogeochemical cycling of Mn. To date,
most studies of Mn in marine environments have not considered Mn(III), the
intermediate oxidation state between the soluble reduced state (Mn(II)) and the
more insoluble oxidized state (Mn(IV)). The presence and stability of Mn(III) in
marine systems, especially those where oxygen levels are reduced, changes the
dynamics and stability, solubility and fate and transport of Mn in these
locations, and at interfaces between oxic and low oxygen environments. This is
not understood at present and the proposed research is poised to provide new
information concerning the Mn cycle and is potentially transformative research.
The PIs have developed new methods to examine Mn(III) levels in the environment
and this capability will bolster the successful accomplishment of the project?s
goals. The studies will not only focus on understanding the cycling of Mn
between its various oxidation states but will determine the concentration and
distribution of Mn(II) in stratified coastal ocean waters and in sediment
porewaters. The study will also examine the potentially important role of
Mn(III) in mediating and influencing the biogeochemical cycling of Mn with that
of Fe and S, which are both important components of the major ocean chemical
cycles. A better understanding of the biogeochemistry of Mn will inform not only
scientists interested in metal cycling in the ocean but also those focused on
studies across redox transition zones. The proposed research has an
international component and the investigators have developed plans to broadly
disseminate their results to students at all levels and to the community. The
Principal Investigators have a strong history in education and graduate student
and post-doctoral support and mentoring and this will continue under the current
grant.