* 1155146
* Gauging American Attitudes Toward Minorities, 1920s-1960s
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Howard Schuman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 03/31/2014
* USD 80,000.00

SES-1155146&lt;br/&gt;Howard Schuman&lt;br/&gt;University of
Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gauging American
Attitudes Toward Minorities, 1920s-1960s&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Survey data
provide systematic evidence on changing attitudes of white Americans toward
black Americans over the past 70 years, as the rights of African Americans --
and later of other minorities -- expanded as part of the "rights revolution."
Little is known about the evolution of white racial attitudes prior to the
mid-1940s, however, when surveys began to gather trend data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our first research goal is to investigate trends in racial
attitudes through a content analysis of a sample of articles in key newspapers
and national magazines from the period 1929-1946. Our second research goal is
partly methodological, and centers on an investigation of the years 1946-1965, a
period in which survey data on racial attitudes became increasingly available.
Using the same approach, we will carry out a content analysis for these years as
well, allowing us to compare the content analysis from both eras with racial
attitude trends identified by means of repeated surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research seek
to improve our understanding of public attitudes toward minorities during the
period of the Great Depression and World War II years. The substantive findings
may be of interest to the general public and scholars. The study also seeks to
make an epistemological contribution: In this case, our understanding of how
racial attitudes have changed has been limited by the fact that trend data have
only been available since the post-WW2 era. Findings from this content analysis
of mass media sources pre- and post-WW2 will help us assess the degree to our
historical understanding of race relations reflects the methodologies used to
gauge racial attitudes, and the advantages and limitations of each.