* 1155566
* Collaborative Research:  Cyanate availability and utilization by marine microbial assemblages
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2014
* David Mark Welch, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,992.00

Researchers from the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole and from Old
Dominion University will continue to develop a HPLC method for the measurement
of cyante in seawater and will use this to demonstrate that cynate is present at
measureable and environmentally relevant concentrations in natural water
samples. It is hypothsized that cyanate could be an important source of nitrogen
(N) to microbes and potentially also a source of carbon, for both phototrophic
and heterotrophic organisms. Once the method is developed and tested the
investigators will perform experiments in the laboratory primarily to examine
the importance of cyante as a N source to microbes, and to demonstrate that
cyanate itself rather than a breakdown product is assimialted and incorporated
into cellular material. The studies will also involve coastal sampling focusing
on Synechococcus and the identification of the organisms that assimilate
cyanate, and examine the expression of the related genes. These preliminary
studies will provide the foundation for more detailed future studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to an improved understanding of
the importance of small molecular weight organic N compounds as a source of N
for organism growth and will build on other studies examining the importance of
organic N compunds in the marine environment. The project will be part of the
studies of a graduate student and fund other researchers and the investigators
will incorporate their findings into current outreach efforts at all levels.