* 1155066
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of the U.S. Courts of Appeals in Legal Development: An Empirical Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2013
* James Spriggs, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 09/30/2013
* USD 12,308.00

What are the causes and consequences of legal development? In recent years
scholars have begun to address these challenging questions, yet there is still
much work to be done. The intermediate level of the federal court system
(a.k.a., circuit courts) provides an institutional context replete with
opportunities to extend our theoretical and empirical understanding of legal
development. This project takes advantage of these opportunities in three ways.
The first component is an examination of the impact of circuit courts on state
policy diffusion. Data on the adoption and content of state legislation
regarding medical procedures, election law, and family law will shed light on
the intersection of federal constitutional case law and the development of state
law. The central claim is that state legislators will be more heavily influenced
by other states under the jurisdiction of the same federal circuit when
legislation has potential federal implications. The second and third segments of
this project leverage circuit judges' citation to precedent in search and
seizure cases over the last twenty years in order to gain insight into the
extent to which law and the structure of legal institutions influence judicial
behavior. A circuit court precedent is binding in its own circuit, but merely
persuasive in other circuits. Consequently, the effect of ideology on how a
precedent is treated should be significantly less when it is considered in its
own circuit than when considered by a sister circuit. Moreover, the nuances of a
circuit's citation to its own binding precedent are likely to be influenced by
strategic anticipation of whether a case will be reviewed and overturned by the
entire circuit. Empirical testing of both of these expectations will contribute
to further understanding of how an important institution, the federal court
system, both influences and is influenced by legal development.

With regard to broader impact, this project will contribute to the training of a
graduate student. In addition, public debates concerning the courts address the
significance of judicial ideology. This project will contribute to providing
information concerning the complexity of judicial decisionmaking and influence
to the public debate.