* 1155084
* Influence of organism-scale turbulence on the predatory impacts of a suite of cnidarian medusae
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Kelly Sutherland, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/29/2016
* USD 304,007.00

Bloom-forming jellyfish are increasing in number, frequency and magnitude, in
part due to anthropogenic impacts, underscoring a need for enhanced
understanding of trophic exchanges in jellyfish-dominated ecosystems.
Interactions between jellyfish and their prey are driven by morphology,
behavior, and unique fluid signatures that result in species-specific prey
selection patterns. Fluid signatures generated by predators entrain prey, and
motile prey organisms have evolved to sense and respond to these stereotyped
fluid signatures. The shape and coherence of these unique fluid signatures are
strongly mediated by turbulence, which is ubiquitous in the ocean. Yet, the
effects of turbulence are almost always neglected in feeding studies. This
three-year project will investigate the influence of turbulence on predator-prey
interactions using a suite of cnidarian hydromedusae with unique morphologies,
fluid signatures and prey selection patterns collected in the region of Friday
Harbor Laboratory, WA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project
seeks to establish a detailed, mechanistic understanding of the effects of
turbulence on organism-scale predator-prey interactions using gelatinous
zooplankton predators with contrasting predation modes. The PI will investigate
prey selection under varying levels of turbulence by studying swimming behavior,
wake structure, and predator-prey interactions in a laboratory turbulence
generator designed for fragile plankton. The PI will also make in situ
measurements of turbulence and observations of organism behavior using a Self-
contained Underwater Velocimetry Apparatus (SCUVA). This is a fully submersible
instrument for flow visualization, and its use will provide a cross-calibration
of field and laboratory rates and behaviors. The influence of turbulence on
trophic position among the different species of hydromedusae will be quantified
through field studies of prey selection patterns. The proposed comparative
approach using species with distinct predation modes will provide insights
applicable to other planktonic predators that can be similarly
grouped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Two undergraduate students will
receive mentoring and training, and will be recruited through a COSEE program
aimed at under-represented groups in community colleges. Students will learn
advanced flow visualization techniques and strategies for working with fragile
plankton but will more generally gain an increased understanding of the marine
environment and an increased awareness of career opportunities in marine
sciences. The PI will reach out to the public through the COSEE Oregon Coast
Master Naturalist Program by teaching local volunteers current knowledge about
the biology and ecology of gelatinous zooplankton. Plans are also underway to
include images and research findings in a book about jellyfish authored by a
science writer and geared to a general audience.