* 1155592
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:Modeling temporal coordination in speech production using an artificial central pattern generator neural network
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Erin Rusaw, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2014
* USD 5,298.00

This project investigates how timing is coordinated in speech production and how
this coordination can be computationally modeled using artificial neural
networks. Research has shown that speech rhythm reflects a multi-tiered,
hierarchical organization of speech units (syllables, accentual units, phrases)
that are essentially cyclical in nature. One type of neural network which shares
these properties, the central pattern generator (CPG), has been hypothesized to
underlie speech timing. This project presents two speech production experiments
designed to investigate temporal coordination within and among three levels of
speech units in French and English, languages with distinct rhythm types, and to
discover which timing properties they share and which are language-specific. A
three-level CPG-type artificial neural network is presented which is used to
model the results of both experiments in order to test the ability of such a
model to simulate the timing behavior of two rhythmically distinct languages.
Experiment 1 focuses on the coordination between phrases, accentual units, and
syllables through a comparison of the durational effects of lengthening due to
phrasal stress and phrase-final syllable lengthening in both languages.
Experiment 2 compares the overall temporal coordination of spoken phrases and
their constituent parts in the two languages by measuring the changes in
articulatory timing of phrases which are repeated multiple times. The main goals
of the proposed studies and modeling work are to investigate temporal
coordination between the hierarchically structured levels of speech units,
specifically how that coordination varies between languages, and to test the
ability of a biologically inspired CPG-type neural network model to model this
coordination and the speech patterns that result from
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work contributes to an understanding of the
coordination and timing of rhythm units in speech and how that coordination may
be generated by the brain. In its broader impact, it will enable the integration
of theories of speech production with other motor behavior in biological and
cognitive models, and help to forge links between research on speech, linguistic
prosody, and more broadly, neural models of animal behavior. This work will also
contribute to the construction of a unified model of rhythm and prosody which is
sufficient to explain both the underlying universalities and the variations of
human language. The project will also enrich the training of the graduate
student co-PI.