* 1155754
* Collaborative Research: Ecology of microbial mats at seamount associated Fe-rich hydrothermal vent systems
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 06/30/2016
* USD 603,631.00

A grand challenge in microbial ecology is to understand what drives the
structure of microbial communities. A recently discovered novel class of
Proteobacteria, the Zetaproteobacteria, are associated with microbial mats at
iron rich hydrothermal vents at submarine volcanoes deep in the ocean. These
bacteria only grow using iron as an energy source and fix carbon dioxide. Within
iron rich microbial mats, Zetaproteobacteria are the dominant bacterial
population; however they are rare in most other deep-sea or marine habitats,
suggesting they may be restricted to specific niches characterized by gradients
of oxygen and iron. Recent discoveries have expanded their range to fluids
collected from deep ocean crust boreholes, iron deposits in coastal saltmarshes,
and with steel associated bio-corrosion, demonstrating that marine
Zetaproteobacteria are cosmopolitan. A unique property of these marine iron
oxidizing bacteria is that they produce morphologically distinct iron oxide
structures in the form of filamentous sheaths or stalk-like structures. These
structures are easily recognized by light microscopy, and electron microscopy is
beginning to reveal subtle differences among them that may be diagnostic of
different populations of iron oxidizing bacteria. Another unusual aspect of iron
oxidizing bacteria is that they produce large quantities of oxides with
relatively little bacterial biomass. As a result, the oxides form a matrix that
influences water and nutrient flow in the microbial mats where they grow, and in
turn, may influence the growth of other groups of bacteria and archaea that live
in the mats. In an ecological context, the PIs believe this makes them a
keystone species that form the predominant structural matrix of the mat, and
engineer an environment conducive for growth of specific bacterial populations
within the mat ecosystem. The PIs propose to use high resolution mat sampling
techniques to investigate the architecture of mat ecosystems and couple these
with modern molecular methods (i.e., single-cell metagenomics) and geochemical
measurements of the vent fluid to couple morphological and functional diversity
to phylogenetic and physiological diversity. Because the Zetaproteobacteria are
ancient, have unique metabolic and morphological attributes, and appear to be
restricted to a well-defined habitat, they offer an interesting model for
understanding fundamental ecological concepts that drive microbial diversity and
evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A better understanding of iron
oxidizing bacteria that include Zetaproteobacteria is of fundamental interest to
scientists interested in areas of earth science and oceanography because they
illustrate how microbes can fundamentally influence geochemical cycling and
mineral deposition. Furthermore, morphological structures similar to those
produced by Zetaproteobacteria can still be identified hundreds of millions (and
possibly billions) of years back in the geological record, making them of
paleontological, and potentially of exobiological, interest. As knowledge of
extant populations grow, it is possible they will also help to inform us of
environmental change in past Earth history. A wealth of educational and outreach
opportunities will be made possible by this work, including graduate and
postdoctoral education, research experiences for undergraduates, and teacher
training. In addition the participating scientists are involved in a number of
programs to make the general public aware of the process of how scientific
research is conducted, and how discoveries of a fundamental nature can
ultimately benefit humankind.