* 1155184
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Technological Citizenship through Hackerspaces
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Miriam Ticktin, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 19,796.00

New School University doctoral student, Jason Euren, with the supervision of Dr.
Miriam Ticktin, will undertake social science research on new intersections of
citizenship and technology. The focus of his research will be "hackerspaces,"
which are community-operated, physical facilities, where people meet, share
resources, and pursue technical projects. These facilities provide such
resources as advanced laboratory equipment, engineering machinery, and
computers. Through hackerspace participation, ordinary citizens are given access
to complex, technical systems they would not otherwise have, often for the
purpose of addressing issues of public concern (such as monitoring environmental
hazards after a natural disaster). Euren seeks to understand the nature,
practice, and effect of this growing phenomenon. He will test the hypothesis
that it constitutes a new kind of citizenship, which he terms technological
citizenship. The researcher will carry out nine months of ethnographic field
research in three hackerspaces, all located in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Through participant observation, interviews, and media analysis, he will collect
data on the technologies, users, technological activities, and political
engagement.

The research is important because hackerspaces are a growing phenomenon
throughout the world. They suggest a new civic appropriation of technological
devices and processes as political strategies, a new kind of citizenship that
appears to be crossing national boundaries. Thus findings from this research
will contribute to theorizing the changing relationships between citizenship and
technology in both national and global contexts. Funding this research also
supports the education of a graduate student.