* 1155233
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Circulation of Public Religious Speech and the Remaking of Community
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Fouad Halbouni, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 14,288.00

Johns Hopkins University doctoral student Fouad Halbouni, with the guidance of
Dr. Veena Das, will undertake research on the circulation of public religious
speech, in the form of sermons, homilies and recorded lessons, from formal
religious institutions to less formal public spaces of interaction. He is
particularly interested in how such circulation takes place in the aftermath of
political upheaval. For the purposes of this project, he will focus on religious
ideas in an old popular quarter in Cairo which has a long history of religious
plurality. While this plurality is often represented in the media as an
oppositional relationship between two monolithic groups, Coptic Orthodox
Christians and Muslims, the researcher wishes to investigate the possibility
that the two communities are not as monolithic as they are portrayed and that
there may be or may develop a plurality of positions regarding questions of the
religious "other."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will undertake 12 months
of field research in al-Azbakiya, a popular Cairo neighborhood. He will employ
multiple social science research methods, including: participant observation and
recording at mosque and church sermons; participant observation at local Muslim
and Christian teaching institutions; discourse analysis of commercially
available sermon recordings; tracking of sermons and the ideas they contain as
the sermons move out of the formal sphere to be dispersed and discussed in
public venues; focus groups; and interviews with religious officials and lay
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because its findings
will contribute to social scientific understanding of how ideas in general, and
public religious speech in particular, may contribute to the making and remaking
of political community. Significant public religious speech and political
activity co-occur throughout the world. Understanding their relationship is
critical for theorists and policy makers alike. Funding this research also
contributes to the education of a graduate student.