* 1155698
* Collaborative Research: T-LEOST (realTime-Larval Environment and Ocean Signal Tracking): An Integrated System for the Study of Navigational Cues in the Marine Environment
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Claire Paris, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2015
* USD 249,668.00

The current challenge in the study of larval fish navigation is to sample
signals as they are perceived by fish larvae in the pelagic environment. To meet
this challenge, the PI?s plan to build upon novel bio-acoustic technology and
proof of concept methods for monitoring larval behavior in situ, to develop an
integrated realTime Larval Environment and Ocean Signal Tracking (T-LEOST)
system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost nothing is known about the orientation of
larvae earlier in the larval phase, far offshore, or at night. It is now clear
that behavior can play a crucial role in pelagic larval dispersal, but the
biological processes involved in larval dispersal remain largely unknown. The
sequence of cues that dispersing larvae use to determine their swimming
direction (orientation) and how they vary spatially is entirely subject to
speculation. The orientation of marine larvae is a central issue in
understanding and modeling the pelagic stage of coastal organisms. The proposed
research will supply important pieces of the pelagic orientation puzzle, that
will lead to a better understanding of larval dispersal and population
connectivity, and an improved ability to model them. The project will also serve
as an observing system platform that will be vital in understanding larval use
of a full suite of sensory cues, such as polarized light, electroreception of
water movement, and other (magnetic, thermal). One of the over-arching benefits
of our proposed system is the capacity to provide existing ocean observing
systems with recording of environmental signals meaningful to the successful
recruitment of benthic species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impact lies in its potential to
contribute meaningfully to our understanding of the mechanisms underlying
dispersal in marine organisms. Personnel will produce an educational video,
mentor high-school and college students and provide videos of swimming larval
fish in public forums.