* 1155579
* Collaborative Research:HF-Isotopes as Tracers of Highly Depleted Oceanic Mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Vincent J. Salters, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 01/31/2017
* USD 292,735.00

Volcanic activity on mid-ocean ridges constitutes one of the largest scale and
most important chemical differentiation processes on earth. Magmas, created from
the selective melting of Earth's mantle, bring some elements and elemental
ratios to Earth's surface and leave others behind as residues in Earth's mantle.
Of all the potential geochemical tracers examined to date, Hafnium (Hf) and
Neodymium (Nd) appear to be the most powerful in helping us understand not only
the chemical evolution of the mantle but also the ages and process of melt
segregation and mid-ocean ridge volcanism. This research will use samples of
abyssal peridotite from various mid-ocean ridges, emphasizing samples from the
recently discovered ultra-slow spreading Gakkel Ridge in the Arctic, where
mantle rocks outcrop on the seafloor. It will focus on determining the fraction
of the mantle source that melts to form the vast majority of volcanic rocks
erupted on the seafloor. To make this determination, trace elements and Hf and
Nd isotopes will be measured, with the Hf isotopes illuminating the melting
process and Nd providing age constraints. This work complements, but does not
overlap with, a geochemical study of Gakkel abyssal peridotites. Broader impacts
of the work include student training in state-of-the art geochemical analytical
techniques and engaging high school students and their teachers in the research.
It will also involve the high school participants in the laboratory and its
activities.