* 1155135
* Deterministic and Stochastic Equilibrium Selection in Evolutionary Game Theory
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* William Sandholm, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2016
* USD 272,325.00

This award funds research pursuing two new directions for equilibrium selection
in evolutionary game theory. The first part of the project introduces models of
equilibrium selection under deterministic dynamics, and the second considers
equilibrium selection via stochastic stability.

The PI and his co-authors first introduce a new class of deterministic
evolutionary game dynamics called sampling best response dynamics. To define
them, they assume that when an agent considers switching actions, he observes
the actions of a fixed or random number of randomly sampled opponents. He views
the empirical distribution of actions in his sample as an estimate of the
distribution of actions in the population, and chooses an action that is optimal
against this empirical distribution. The team shows that in certain games with
multiple strict equilibria, there is one equilibrium that is almost globally
asymptotically stable, attracting solutions from all interior initial
conditions. Since the analysis is deterministic, the predictions they obtain
require little time to pass to become relevant. The team also investigates the
extent to which deterministic selection results can be obtained for dynamics
derived from other revision rules.

The second part of the project considers stochastic stability in models of
evolution based on noisy best response rules. In models of best responses with
mutations, in which the probability of a suboptimal choice is independent of its
payoff consequences, stochastic stability analysis can proceed using mutation
counting arguments. But when the probability of a suboptimal choice depends on
its payoff consequences, the probability of following a given path between
equilibria depends on both the number of steps and the unlikelihood of each
step. Because of this, little is known about equilibrium selection beyond two-
strategy games. The researchers argue that by studying stochastic stability in
double limits, having both the level of noise in agents? decisions become small
and the population size become large, one can combine techniques from large
deviations theory and optimal control theory to evaluate the probabilities of
transitions between equilibria, and so determine the stochastically stable
states. They also argue that the asymptotic properties of the stationary
distribution, and hence the identity of the stochastically stable states, is
independent of the order of limits chosen. This analysis would extend simpler
existing results for two-strategy games to games with arbitrary numbers of
strategies.

Broader Impacts In environments with large numbers of interacting agents,
including settings with multilateral externalities and macroeconomic contexts,
the existence of multiple equilibria can lead to inefficiency and to an
inability to predict behavior. By developing dynamic models of decision that
lead to unique predictions in these settings, the PI provides tools that could
help planners attain social goals through the careful crafting of incentives and
information-provision policies. The research includes a component that develops
technology and instructional materials for research and teaching in game theory:
a suite of easy-to-use, open source software for constructing phase diagrams and
other graphics related to evolutionary game dynamics. This component of the
proposal has made evolutionary game techniques more accessible to theoretical
and applied workers in economics, biology, engineering, and other fields, and
continued development of the project will further its utility and scope.