* 1155642
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: In Service of Those Who Serve: An Ethnography of Psychologists, Ethics, and the Care of Soldiers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Shana Lessing, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2014
* USD 15,550.00

Doctoral student Shana Lessing (Graduate Center of the City University of New
York), supervised by Dr. Vincent Crapanzano, will undertake research on how
professional and ethical goals may be shaped by disciplinary histories,
institutions, and practices. The case on which she will focus is the military
psychologist. Against a background of debate about psychological care of
soldiers, the researcher will examine how ethical questions are figured in the
everyday work of treating, diagnosing, and producing authoritative knowledge.
Findings from the research will provide a situated analysis of how practitioners
negotiate between clinical and military institutional
priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted over 11 months.
In Phase I, the researcher will conduct an ethnographic investigation of
military psychology's professional cultures in the Washington, D.C., area. In
Phase II, she will shift her attention to psychologists who serve soldiers at an
army base. She will collect data using a mix of social science methodologies
including interviewing and participant observation in local activities. Data
collection will focus on institutional structures, professional cultures, and
theoretical and clinical approaches; professional-ethical discourses and
frameworks; identification and resolution of ethical
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this research will contribute to
social science understanding of the relationship between personal and
professional ethics and institutional contexts. Investigating military
psychologists' own perspectives on the value and efficacy of current treatment
models in a military context, this research will expand understandings of the
factors shaping mental health care in the military. Supporting this research
also supports the education of a graduate student.