* 1155188
* Collaborative Research: Biodiversity, connectivity and ecosystem function in organic-rich whale-bone and wood-fall habitats in the deep sea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Kenneth Halanych, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 02/28/2017
* USD 231,321.00

Organic-rich habitat islands support specialized communities throughout natural
ecosystems and often play fundamental roles in maintaining alpha and beta
diversity, thus facilitating adaptive radiation and evolutionary novelty. Whale-
bone and wood falls occur widely in the deep-sea and contribute fundamentally to
biodiversity and evolutionary novelty; nonetheless, large-scale patterns of
biodiversity, connectivity, and ecosystem function in these organic-rich
metacommunity systems remain essentially unexplored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs propose a novel comparative experimental approach to evaluate bathymetric,
regional, and inter-basin variations in biodiversity and connectivity, as well
as interactions between biodiversity and ecosystem function, in whale-bone and
wood-fall habitats at the deep-sea floor. Their experiments will use bottom
landers to carry and hold samples of bone and wood and a control substrate
(basalt) at two depths (1500 and 3000 m), 250-500 km apart, in the NE Pacific
and SW Atlantic basins, with quantitative recovery of the colonizing assemblages
15 month later. Each depth will have three replicates. Their experiments will
test fundamental hypotheses concerning biodiversity (genetic and taxonomic) and
biogeography of macrofaunal and microbial organisms exploiting these resource-
rich habitats in energy limited deep-sea environments, and will explore the
utility of whale-bone and wood falls as model experimental systems to address
patterns of connectivity and decomposer function in the deep sea.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have broader impacts in five areas: (1)
At least two graduate students will conduct Ph.D. research, and three
undergraduate students will participate in research cruises and develop senior
theses within the project. (2) Project results will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses at two universities. (3) The PIs will develop
and deliver a new a graduate-level summer course at Friday Harbor Laboratory
entitled Deep-Sea Biodiversity, Connectivity and EcosystemFunction based on
project results. A similar course will be offered at the University of Sao Paulo
in Brazil at no cost to NSF. (4) Public outreach will include project web sites
and cruise blogs at both the University of Hawaii (UH) and Auburn University,
and presentations at UH and Auburn open houses. (5) Results will be presented at
conservation forums such as the annual meeting of Pew Fellows in Marine
Conservation.