* 1155295
* Models of the Ocean Carbonate cycle and the Glacial-Interglacial CO2 Variations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Michael Follows, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2016
* USD 596,307.00

The mechanisms underlying the glacial-interglacial CO2 variations constitute one
of the major unsolved problems in the Earth Sciences. Ice-core measurements have
shown that during cold glacial periods, CO2 levels are around 190 p.p.m., but
reach 280 p.p.m. during warm interglacials. Though many mechanisms have been
hypothesized, it still remains unclear why these large CO2 variations occur, and
where the excess CO2 is stored during glacial periods. While it has generally
been assumed that the ocean carbonate cycle is (approximately) at steady state,
both during glacial and interglacial periods we propose to explore the
possibility, and potential impact, of autonomous dynamical behavior of the
carbonate cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of researchers at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology hypothesize the existence of a "biogeochemical
oscillator" as a contributor to the glacial-interglacial CO2 variations, and in
this project they will test that hypothesis. Their preliminary, highly-idealized
model reveals the possibility of an internal oscillation of the ocean carbonate
cycle which has several interesting features: (i) it produces oscillations in
global ocean alkalinity (and thus atmospheric carbon dioxide) with the
characteristic sawtooth shape observed in the ice-core record, (ii) the
oscillations are due to ecological interactions between calcifying and
noncalcifying primary producers, (iii) the period of the oscillations depends
upon the chosen parameters but is in a range consistent with the observed
glacial-interglacial variations, and (iv) the model predicts ?spikes? of
enhanced calcifier productivity at the glacial-interglacial transitions,
consistent with sedimentary records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, the team will
investigate the potential role of these mechanisms, employing a hierarchy of
models of vastly different complexities, starting from a set of two ordinary
differential equations and working up to a full general circulation model with
explicit and detailed biogeochemical components including an explicit ecological
model. The advantage of using such a hierarchical approach is that the idealized
models can help to gain insight into the mechanisms behind and the robustness of
the results from more realistic complex coupled simulations. They will test the
model results against ice-core measurements of CO2, observations of glacial-
interglacial variations in (carbonate) sediment accumulation, and observations
of carbon isotope distributions in the oceans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact : This work is obviously relevant for understanding historical climatic
change, but should also be of significance in considering how the Earth system
will respond to anthropogenically emitted CO2. The project is highly
multidisciplinary, bringing together expertise in biogeochemical and ocean
circulation models with advanced mathematical analysis and data from geological
observations.