* 1155962
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Discounting the Future in Strategic Interactions in a Heterogeneous Population
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Pradeep Singh, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2014
* USD 14,534.00

Increased diversity, in the form of ethnicity and other dimensions of social
identity, is associated with decreased provision of public goods (Easterly and
Levine, 1997; Alesina et.al, 2003). Most studies, however, do not consider the
implicitly embedded temporal dimension in the provision of public goods, i.e.
often the costs are incurred now and the benefits from the public good received
later. While a voluminous and growing literature investigates intertemporal
choices in individual decisions, other than Deck and Jahedi (2011) - who examine
discounting behavior in a competitive environment - there is little research
providing empirical evidence on how individuals make intertemporal choices in
strategic interactions. In this project the co-PI will address: 1) how the
timing of benefits affects voluntary contributions when the benefits are
realized in the future, including whether expectation of how others' discount
the future influences decision-making, 2) how the timing of contributions
affects voluntary contributions, and 3) how individuals discount future
provision of public goods in strategic, socially heterogeneous environments. To
address these questions, the study employs a novel experimental design that
varies (a) the timing of benefits received from public goods and from private
consumption in a Voluntary Contribution Mechanism (VCM) game, (b) the timing of
contributions towards public goods in the VCM game, and c) the social
heterogeneity of participants in the public goods game based on their
affiliation with student cultural organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms
of broader impacts, this research will help shed light on the roles of social
distance, temporal preferences and their interactions in the provision of public
goods. Empirical findings that behaviorally unpack the role of time and social
preferences in collective action scenarios will contribute to explaining the
mechanisms of non-cooperation when heterogeneous populations interact to provide
public goods with delayed benefits. Furthermore, the findings of such a line of
inquiry could inform many policy and real-life decisions, in addition to other
intertemporal choices that have a strategic component to them. Study findings
will be of relevance to scholars and policy-makers concerned with intertemporal
choice and the provision of public goods.