* 1155248
* Signal Detection Theory and Eyewitness Memory
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Laura Mickes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 08/31/2014
* USD 149,984.00

The purpose of the proposed research is to link a longstanding framework for
understanding how recognition memory decisions are made to the forensically
relevant question of how witnesses make a recognition memory decision when faced
with a lineup. In the field of experimental psychology, our understanding of how
recognition memory decisions are made has been effectively guided by signal-
detection theory since Egan's (1958) seminal report was published more than 50
years ago. By contrast, in the applied literature, signal-detection-based
efforts to understand decision-making on recognition memory tasks are virtually
nonexistent. The wide chasm separating experimental and applied investigations
of recognition memory is surprising because issues that may be informed by
signal-detection theory (e.g., the relationship between confidence and accuracy)
are of considerable interest in both fields. In the applied literature, it has
been repeatedly noted that signal-detection theory could inform eyewitness
memory but, to date, no signal-detection model of lineup-based recognition
memory has been seriously pursued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed research is to produce a simple signal-detection framework that will be
useful for helping to understand a variety of empirical phenomena that have been
investigated in the applied literature, including the relationship between
confidence and accuracy. Our strategy will be to test the viability of a signal-
detection-based model of eyewitness memory using tasks that are in some ways
similar to standard list-memory tasks (e.g., each subject studies a list of
items) but that have been modified to be more forensically relevant (e.g., the
stimuli will consist of faces, and the recognition tests will involve lineups).
After testing and developing a simple signal-detection model using those
relatively convenient laboratory procedures, we plan to then test the model
using more forensically relevant methods that are commonly used in the applied
literature (e.g., where each subject is drawn from a diverse population, views
one simulated crime, and provides one recognition decision). The results should
help scientists to better inform policymakers about how to improve police lineup
procedures.