* 1155725
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Increased Market Participation on Adaptive Capacity and Resilience in Rural Samoa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Donald Nelson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2013
* USD 19,980.00

University of Georgia doctoral candidate J. Brent Vickers, supervised by Dr.
Donald R. Nelson, will undertake research to investigate the effects of market
integration on the ability of farmers in the village of Falealupo, Samoa, to
recover from droughts, which have significant consequences for subsistence-based
livelihoods. Historically, the capacity to respond to droughts and other
environmental events depended on social institutions related to common property
management. Over the last fifty years, however, people in rural villages
throughout Samoa have increased their participation in the global market and
decreased their participation in traditional social institutions. The changing
context presents an opportunity to understand the effects of economic
development and increased market participation on households and their members
when recovering from, and adapting to, environmental
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a variety of quantitative and qualitative
ethnographic methods, such as semi-structured interviews, focus group
discussions, questionnaires, and household surveys to produce empirical data and
to test hypotheses. The research methods will also be used to document
experiences of Samoan villagers recovering from recent droughts and adapting to
ecological change. The research will also address the intellectually challenging
problem of assessing resilience from an emic (insider) rather than an etic
(outside expert) perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute
to the theoretical understanding of the effects of increased market
participation on adaptive capacity and perceptions of resilience. The research
will also contribute to resilience research methodology by using emic, rather
than etic, measurements to define and measure social-ecological resilience,
which could inform relief efforts and planning measures in communities facing
similar droughts and other environmental events around the globe. Funding this
research also contributes to the training of a social scientist.