* 1155484
* Collaborative Research: Marine Spatial Planning and the Role of Community and Environmental Actors
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Bonnie McCay, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 06/30/2015
* USD 72,051.00

This project will investigate how Marine Spatial Planning has evolved and
continues to be enacted as the principal ocean policy in the United States.
Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) is an emerging process of ocean governance that
seeks to address current concerns with how to organize and use the nation's
marine resources. MSP is a central component of the US federal government's
National Ocean Policy, and is the key avenue through which the government's
commitment to ecosystem-based management of the oceans will be realized. The
marine environment is home to a growing number of users and activities that MSP
is working to frame within a comprehensive planning process. Understanding the
process of ocean governance as produced within the context of MSP is critical to
sustaining coastal communities and the marine resources many of them depend on.
This project will investigate how emerging MSP policies are produced, focusing
particularly on the role of the federal geospatial database known as the
Multipurpose Marine Cadastre (MMC) in creating a cartographic basis for marine
spatial decision-making. The project will examine the national policy evolution
of MSP, what role the MMC plays in the continuing formulation of MSP, and the
implications of these processes for making coastal communities, economies, and
social structures more or less resilient to environmental changes. This research
will draw on actor-network theory, critical Geographical Information Science
(GIS), and political ecology to address the following questions: 1) How has MSP
emerged as the preferred ocean policy solution (e.g., for fisheries, energy, or
aquaculture questions) in the United States? 2) What types of information (e.g.,
scientific, economic, social) inform MSP discourses, and how is such information
being transmitted to the public? 3) How are communities and environmental actors
constituted (assessed, measured, represented) by MSP tools such as the MMC, and
what capacities might they accumulate or lose through such tools? To answer
these questions, the project will collect and analyze written and audio records
from government agencies, non-government organizations, industry groups, and
public forums concerned with MSP. Further, the project will collect and analyze
source data and outputs from the MMC, and conduct a short organizational
ethnography of the MMC. Project results are expected to help illuminate MSP
processes and to inform strategies for improving this new method of oceans
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze what types of human
and marine resource information is being incorporated into MSP, a critical need
as researchers and policymakers move forward with ever-larger data sets designed
to visualize and organize US ocean uses. The project will contribute practically
to the understanding of ocean management, while helping to inform MSP practices
as communities across the country engage with initiatives (e.g., aquaculture,
catch shares, wind energy) that define ocean space in different ways. More
generally, there is unprecedented worldwide interest in new forms of ocean
governance, and the 'oceans agenda' has emerged as a central topic in both
national and international forums. Although this research will focus on the US,
results will have significance for these larger processes. Thus, the broader
impact of this research is related to the scope of the policy processes that
stand to rewrite ocean governance in the US and elsewhere. The project's ability
to realize these impacts arises through its connections to key people and
institutions involved in these policy-making processes, as well as the PIs'
previous research on and contributions to ocean policy debates. Additional
impacts will include the training of a PhD student, the mentoring of a post-
doctoral researcher, and strengthened academic networks amongst the
collaborators.