* 1155978
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Cooperation and Conflict in Two Socially Monogamous Primates: Red Titi Monkeys and Equatorial Saki Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Lynne Isbell, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/28/2014
* USD 12,000.00

Social monogamy has long been of interest to anthropologists, primarily because
it is a rare social system in mammals, but appears to be more prevalent among
primates, and is especially common in humans. Although pair-bonds are considered
an important component of human mating and parenting strategies, we understand
relatively little about the dynamics of male-female relationships. Reviews of
social monogamy across a wide range of taxa, including human societies, have
demonstrated significant variation in male-female relationships, which has
contributed to a longstanding debate regarding the functional significance of
pair-bonds.

This project by doctoral student Amy Porter (University of California, Davis),
supervised by Dr. Lynne Isbell, investigates comparative aspects of pair-bonding
and territorial behavior in two socially monogamous primates, red titi monkeys
(Callicebus discolor) and equatorial saki monkeys (Pithecia aequatorialis), in
which males and females differ in their degrees of parental care and
contributions to territorial behavior. This research will test the hypotheses
that 1) differences in direct paternal care and the potential costs of cuckoldry
and/or abandonment are related to differences in pair-mate relationships and
male-female mate guarding strategies; and 2) vocal communication in titis and
sakis is a component of their mate guarding strategies. The hypotheses are
tested using systematically collected behavioral data and vocal playback
experiments.

The fine-scale analysis of social interactions between pair-mates will
contribute substantially to broader theoretical issues in evolutionary biology,
especially those that relate to mating and parenting strategies. These data are
particularly relevant to understanding our own species, where there is
substantial variation in male-female relationships and the patterning of gender
roles, both within and between populations. This research also will contribute
to the field of ornithology by providing comparative data on how two socially
monogamous mammals use vocal communication in mate-guarding and territoriality,
two common behaviors in birds.