* 1155404
* Outlook on Life and Political Engagement
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Belinda Robnett, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Saylor Breckenridge
* 09/30/2013
* USD 259,231.00

SES-1155404&lt;br/&gt;Belinda Robnett &lt;br/&gt;Katherine
Tate&lt;br/&gt;University of California,
Irvine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outlook on Life and
Political Engagement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study employs nationally
representative panel surveys to assess the role of optimism and pessimism in
shaping the political beliefs and behavior of Americans. How do demographic
factors such as race and ethnic background, social status, gender, and religious
identity, as well as the intersections between such salient characteristics,
impact people?s outlook on life and their political engagement? Because the
panel surveys, conducted in 2012, are designed to oversample underrepresented
groups, the study also is able to assess the degree to which e.g., increased
Black political representation and the recent economic downturn has affected
Black women?s political attitudes and political participation compared to other
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have scant information regarding the ways in
which expectations, beliefs, political engagement, and personal goals differ by
demographic group. Especially the political attitudes and behaviors among
contemporary Black women remain understudied. This is surprising, given that the
life experiences of African Americans, and Black women in particular, are in
some ways unique. For instance, Black women have experienced, acutely, the
impact of the recent economic downturn, unemployment, and the housing crisis, in
addition to dealing with persistent stereotypes. Moreover, compared to women in
other ethnic/racial groups, Black women are less likely to be married, and
single Black women experience the highest poverty rates of any group. It remains
unclear, however, whether such statistics are predictive of people's political
attitudes and engagement, or their goals for the future. Drawing on insights
from social psychological literature, we hypothesize that there is only a weak
link between people's socio-demographic characteristics and their outlook on
life and politics. Specifically, we hypothesize that, for Black women,
perceptions that the socio-political climate is improving may negate grim social
and economic prospects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This
panel study complements otherwise well-funded surveys such as the General Social
Survey and the American National Election Study, which typically do not have
sufficient sample size, nor depth in questions posed, to permit a thorough
comparison of political attitudes and behaviors between ethnic, socioeconomic,
or other subgroups. Findings from this research may be of interest to policy
makers as well as scholars. Findings may also challenge persistent stereotypes
and inform public discourse about the role Black women, among other minority
groups, play in American political life.