* 1155638
* Direct Phase-Resolved Simulation of Wind-Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Lian Shen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 05/31/2013
* USD 293,843.00

Intellectual merit: The wind-wave problem is a classic subject in physical
oceanography and fluid mechanics with many important applications. The objective
of this study is to develop a wave-phase-resolved numerical capability for the
simulation of wind-waves under moderate sea conditions, to investigate the
interaction between the wind and waves, to effectively capture the effect of
wave breaking dissipation in the wave simulation, and to perform simulation-
based study of the dynamic evolution of wind-waves. The study aims at
establishing a framework for physics-based fine-resolution simulation of wind-
waves that can be used by theoretical, numerical, and experimental studies for
model development and cross comparison. The simulation builds on a suite of
advanced numerical methods including a high-order spectral method (HOSM) for
nonlinear waves, large-eddy simulation (LES) with advanced subgrid-scale (SGS)
models for wind turbulence on boundary-fitted grid that follows the wave motion,
and, as an auxiliary tool, a hybrid multi-fluid simulation (HMFS) method for
steep and breaking waves. The wind simulation will be dynamically coupled with
the wave simulation with two-way interactions. From the HOSM simulation, the
wave field will provide a realistic bottom boundary condition for the wind LES.
Using a new dynamic SGS sea-surface roughness model, the effect of short gravity
waves on the wind will be modeled without ad hoc tuning of the model
coefficient. In return, the wind LES will provide wind forcing for the HOSM
simulation of the waves. Using wave breaking models, which will be assessed and
calibrated with the auxiliary HMFS of steep and breaking waves, wave breaking
dissipation will also be taken into account in the HOSM. As such, the processes
of wind input, nonlinear wave interaction, and wave breaking dissipation will
all be incorporated to the phase-resolved simulation of the wave field for the
first time. Systematic tests and extensive comparisons with other studies are
planned in the proposed project. Some of the proposed computations, such as the
wind LES over dynamically-evolving nonlinear wave field with dynamic SGS sea-
surface roughness modeling, the phase-resolved simulation of nonlinear wave
field with direct wind input and modeling of wave breaking dissipation, and the
simulation of steep and breaking wind-waves, are the first of their kind. This
study will produce detailed data of the interacting wind and wave fields in a
wave-phase-resolved context, which can shed new light on the long- standing
problem of wind-wave dynamics. The results of the proposed research will be
useful for the comparison with experiment measurement and theoretical analysis.
The simulation data will also be helpful for the development of improved models
for large-scale wave-phase-averaged simulations.

Broader impacts: The topic of this study is of interest to the scientific
community as well as the general public. The proposed study will lead to
improved simulation capability and understanding of wind-waves, which are
essential to many applications including weather and climate change, operation
and safety of ships and offshore structures, renewable energy, and pollutant
transport. In the project, doctoral graduate education will stress multi-
disciplinary training with a focus on computation of wave and turbulence
problems. Graduate student recruiting and mentoring will leverage an NSF IGERT
project on modeling complex systems awarded to JHU. The IGERT project places
emphasis on training in high-performance computation of multi-scale multi-
physics problems for domestic doctoral students, especially under-represented
minorities, women, and first-generation students. Educational outreach will be
facilitated by the Center for Educational Outreach at JHU, through which the PI
will work with local Baltimore high schools to expose high school students,
especially those from underserved communities, to university research and to
inspire them to pursue higher education and careers in science and engineering.