* 1155143
* Collaborative Research: The American Mass Public in the Early Cold War Years
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Adam Berinsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 391,178.00

The study of individual-level public opinion and behavior has flourished in
recent decades. But our understanding of the dynamics of mass opinion prior to
the 1950s has been undermined by the absence of high-quality, individual-level
data. The surveys from this time have not been exploited by the social science
community because they are not easily usable. The data often contains numerous
miscodings and other errors. In addition, the surveys employed now-discredited
quota sampling procedures. Over the last seven years, the principal
investigators have, with the assistance of a grant from the NSF, worked to
resuscitate over 400 opinion polls from the 1936 to 1945 period. These data have
proven to be an extremely valuable resource. This new project will make
available to the social science research community a trove of public opinion
data that has largely been ignored in the past. The PIs will extend their
previous work in two ways. First, they will compile and produce readily usable
computer files for roughly 350 public opinion polls undertaken from late 1945
through 1952. Second, they will improve upon methods appropriate for analyzing
public opinion data collected through quota sampling. These methods will be
applied to create a consistent set of survey weights that will cover the entire
1936-1952 period. Recovering this early opinion data promises to illuminate
critical questions concerning the role of the mass public in the political
system. The public opinion polls from this time contain a plethora of valuable
items measuring attitudes concerning economic policy, racial relations, and U.S.
policy towards the Soviet Union and China. The PIs will use the polling data to
determine how the mass public guided and reacted to the realignment on civil
rights issues. The data will help understand the dynamics of change as economic
liberalism, Democratic partisanship, and racial liberalism gradually became
connected at the mass level. The PIs will also use the opinion data on foreign
policy as a resource for examining the nature of the public?s reaction to the
Korean War and the other major events of the early Cold War. The project will
have broad social value. It promises to expand the field of political behavior
by promoting the study of historical public opinion. It will provide to the
community of scholars a wealth of individual-level opinion data in the pre-
Eisenhower era, allowing researchers to gain new insights into an array of
substantively important topics.