* 1155251
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating the influence of Daubert's cross-examination safeguard on jurors', attorneys', and judges' judgments about scientific evidence
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* susan sterett
* 03/31/2014
* USD 14,934.00

In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, the Supreme Court clarified that
trial judges were responsible for serving as evidentiary gatekeepers for
scientific evidence. When judges fail at this gatekeeping role and admit
unreliable expert testimony, the task of identifying and assessing flawed
scientific testimony becomes the job of attorneys during cross-examination and
jurors during trial. The purpose of the proposed studies is to determine whether
judges, attorneys, and jurors are sensitive to threats to scientific validity,
to examine the effectiveness of scientifically informed cross-examinations for
educating jurors about sophisticated validity threats, and to assess the ability
of attorneys and judges to develop questions that would elicit information about
scientific validity.

Study 1 examines the utility of cross-examination to educate jurors about
threats to scientific validity. Jurors will view a videotaped trial, render a
verdict, and provide evaluations of the expert's testimony. In Study 2, the
researchers will examine whether judges and attorneys are capable of fulfilling
Daubert requirements in their evaluation of scientific quality and the
development of questions that might highlight concepts of scientific validity or
reliability. Judges and attorneys will read a case summary and develop questions
intended to assess the reliability and validity of an expert's testimony.

This research has the potential to increase our understanding of the Court's
assumptions in Daubert. Further, this research will address a critical issue
regarding the effectiveness of Daubert?s safeguards that has not been previously
addressed, which is to examine whether attorneys and judges have developed the
skills necessary to elicit information about scientific reliability and validity
during questioning and cross-examination. Further, knowledge of whether cross-
examination can be an effective safeguard and whether attorneys and judges are
capable of developing effective cross-examination questions may lead to changes
in continuing legal education about scientific evidence.