* 1155696
* International Conference on Methods for Surveying and Enumerating Hard-to-Reach Populations (Oct 31-Nov 3, New Orleans, LA)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Rebecca Nichols, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 35,000.00

This award provides partial support for the organization and conduct of the
International Conference on Methods for Surveying and Enumerating Hard-to-Reach
Populations (a.k.a., the H2R Conference), scheduled to be held in New Orleans in
October 2012. Surveying hard-to-reach populations is a problem of increasing
importance. The concept of who qualifies as "hard to reach" is shifting. In
addition to historically undercounted groups such as racial and ethnic
minorities, new research suggests that additional hard-to-reach groups are
emerging. These include cell phone-only households, an increase in "hidden"
populations pushed out of the mainstream by new immigration-related policies,
and a growing percentage in the general population who are cynical about surveys
and censuses due to data breaches, identify theft, privacy concerns, and
mistrust of government. Moreover, in the U.S., Europe, and many other nations,
the population continues to diversify due to immigration. This diversification
has produced an increase in the composition and complexity of racial and ethnic
minorities, which in turn create barriers such as linguistic isolation, lack of
acculturation, and a general lack of familiarity and trust in
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together survey
methodologists, sociologists, statisticians, demographers, ethnographers, policy
analysts, and other professionals from around the world to present new and
innovative concepts and techniques for surveying hard-to reach-populations. In
doing so, it will address both the statistical and survey design aspects of
including hard-to-reach groups. The conference program will be available on the
conference web site prior to the conference, and the conference proceedings will
be available on the web site shortly after the conference. In addition, a
special monograph will be produced from invited conference papers.