* 1155736
* Short Courses in Methods of Cultural Anthropology III
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2019
* H. Russell Bernard, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 551,750.00

With the support of this grant, Dr. H. Russell Bernard, University of Florida,
will continue to direct the Short Courses on Research Methods in Cultural
Anthropology (SCRM) program to help professional anthropologists improve their
skills in collecting, analyzing, and presenting data. The SCRM program was
funded by the National Science Foundation from 2004 through 2012, and the
current award extends the program through 2016. The program currently consists
of six intensive five-day courses: Text Analysis, Methods of Behavioral
Observation, Methods of Ethnoecology, Analyzing Video Data, Network Analysis,
and Geospatial Analysis in Cultural Anthropology. Three five-day courses are
offered each summer. Participants are recruited nationally, and twelve
participants are accepted into each course. Readings are online, and
participants come prepared for rigorous hands-on training in data collection and
data analysis. Two more courses will be added to the curriculum during the next
four years from among the following: cross-cultural research; research design;
methods in medical anthropology; methods in cognitive anthropology. The SCRM
program has trained 179 anthropologists since 2004. From 2012-2016, it is
anticipated that between 120 and 160 more scholars will participate in these
courses. This will have a substantial broader impact as these scholars train
their students, who then move on to the research phase of their careers as
better trained social scientists. In addition to the five-day courses in the
SCRM, one-day workshops on the use of software for collecting and analyzing data
will be offered at national meetings of anthropologists and are open to students
as well as to faculty. In summer 2012, two courses in the curriculum will be
offered online for university credit through a program at the University of
Florida's distance learning center. By 2016, the goal is have six courses online
and to expand the program to accommodate all in the discipline who want this
training. Strengthening the research skills of cultural anthropologists will
help them do better research on important social issues.