* 1155956
* Selective Probabilistic Causality as Interdisciplinary Methodology
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Ehtibar Dzhafarov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 200,000.00

This project will develop a mathematical theory for selective probabilistic
causality, complementing it with statistical procedures and empirical
illustrations. The theory answers the question: Given a set of inputs into a
system and a set of probabilistic non-independent outputs, how can one
determine, for each of the outputs, which of the inputs it is influenced by? The
theory has applications in behavioral, social, and health sciences. For example,
in conjoint testing, does study time or specific training for one of the tests
selectively influence one's performance in this test only? In studying
perceptual judgments, is an assessment of a given stimulus property selectively
influenced by this property alone? Or in medical research, does the presence or
absence of a given symptom selectively depend on a given illness? The theory
also has applications in quantum mechanics, addressing such questions as whether
a model with local non-contextual variables can account for the distribution of
spins in a system of entangled particles. The project will classify various
necessary conditions for selectiveness and measure their comparative strength by
geometrically representing each condition as a multidimensional region and
measuring its hypervolume. The project also will classify and quantify different
forms of violations of selective influences by means of using generalized
quantum and classical probabilistic formalisms. A series of psychophysical
experiments will be conducted to "test-drive" and illustrate the computations
and analyses involved, as well as elucidate the long-standing psychological
problems of signal detectability and perceptual separability of signal's
dimensions.

The project is aimed at deepening our understanding of the notions of causality
and probability, bearing on such perennial issues as determinism and free will.
Being able to compute "what influences what" when the influenced quantities are
random entities is also of great practical importance in all spheres of science,
technology, and medicine. These applications will be facilitated by the freely
available software to be developed within the framework of the project. The
project is interdisciplinary, international, and collaborative, involving three
universities in two countries. A series of symposia and workshops will be
organized at interdisciplinary conferences. Topics related to this project will
be used in graduate and undergraduate courses as well as in research training.