* 1155205
* Collaborative Research:  Forcing and the North Atlantic Spring Bloom
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Glenn Flierl, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2017
* USD 690,486.00

The goal of this proposal is to determine whether easily observed physical
processes control phytoplankton bloom initiation in the North Atlantic. The
hypothesis is that blooms are triggered by a reduction in mixing in late
winter/early spring when heat loss and winds weaken. For a simple phytoplankton-
nutrient system with a wide range of biological parameters, blooms develop in
realistic models of convective turbulence in the upper ocean when the surface
cooling changes into heating in spring. This work hypothesizes that the change
in turbulence is readily predicted from observable properties and is strong
enough to spark a bloom in any biological model that admits them. Unlike
previous explanations which are very sensitive to details of the biological
interactions which are both poorly understood and difficult to quantify, this
atmospheric forcing hypothesis is testable with remote and in-situ data which
can constrain physical parameters much better than biological ones. This project
will extend our existing criterion for bloom initiation to account for wind
forcing, evaporation and precipitation. The range of biological models and
parameters for which the criterion works well will be assessed. The theory will
be tested using numerical simulations, new glider data (to be collected), an
established UK time-series station, and available satellite data. The proposed
project is a timely, unique and cost-effective opportunity to address one of the
longest-running and most intensively studied problems in oceanography.

The spring bloom, an annual population explosion that dominates the seasonal
cycle of phytoplankton abundance in much of the global ocean, exemplifies the
interplay between ocean biology and physics. The continuing lively debate on the
processes controlling bloom initiation is driven largely by the paucity of
testable hypothesis and suitable in-situ data. After 60 years of research into
this topic by the biological oceanography community, theory and technology has
now advanced sufficiently to the point where we can resolve fundamental
outstanding questions on the interactions between physical processes and bloom
timing. By coupling modern turbulence and biological models, driving them by
observed atmospheric forcings, and comparing results with observations, we will
determine the degree to which aspects of the bloom can be predicted simply by
knowing the forcing and gain a deeper understanding of the phenomenon.

Phytoplankton blooms in the North Atlantic are important for driving ocean
carbon uptake and supporting ecosystems, including the fisheries of the North
Americas and Europe. Hence this proposal targets topics of relevance for society
both in the short term (fisheries) and long term (climate change). The proposal
has a strong educational component through the training of a graduate student
and a postdoc in interdisciplinary research on topics of growing importance for
our understanding of the climate system. The international collaboration with UK
colleagues to collect relevant data is another important aspect.