* 1155984
* CAREER: Systematics of eustyline and geonemine weevils: Connecting and contrasting Caribbean and Neotropical mainland radiations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Nico Franz, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 02/29/2016
* USD 639,747.00

Weevils in the Exophthalmus genus complex are colorful, economically important
as pest species of citrus and other cultivated plants, and taxonomically
challenging. Approximately 45 species have been described from the Caribbean and
Mesoamerica; although field work indicates that dozens of additional species
remain undescribed. Most Caribbean species inhabit single islands, suggesting
that historical factors, as opposed to adaptation through host plant
relationships, have facilitated their diversification. This project aims to
resolve the long-standing difficulties of understanding the diversity in this
group. A combined phylogenetic analysis of 180-220 species and fossil-based
methods for dating divergence times will allow the testing of numerous
hypotheses regarding the sequence and relative importance of geological and
evolutionary events that have promoted the diversification of these insects. A
species-level monograph of Exophthalmus will be produced using modern
description tools. A comprehensive e-publication strategy will facilitate the
semantic integration of future taxonomic research on this and other beetle
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes resources for a postdoctoral
researcher, an education associate who will enhance the outreach program, a
graduate student, and six undergraduate students who will participate in
collecting trips throughout the Neotropics. A far-reaching insect diversity
learning program will be launched in Puerto Rico; including (1) the
implementation of a university-level course in contemporary methods of
biodiversity documentation, (2) on-campus workshops aimed at grade 6-12
teachers, (3) on-site workshops in insect diversity monitoring for people
affiliated with the island's leading organization in environmental education,
(4) the establishment of a K-12 grade-appropriate insect showroom in association
with the UPRM invertebrate collection, (5) opportunities for individual students
to conduct research projects adjusted to their skill level, and (6) the on-line
dissemination of the outcomes of all educational activities through a newly
developed, multi-contributor website.