* 1155804
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Violence, stress, and obesity among urban youth in the US
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Lauren Slubowski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2013
* USD 10,075.00

Northwestern University doctoral candidate Lauren Slubowski, supervised by Dr.
William Leonard, will explore the biological and cultural impacts of violence
upon the health outcomes of urban youth. How does violence impact stress in
young people? Specifically, what effect does the stress that can be attributed
to violence have on childhood obesity? These questions stem from biological and
cultural understandings of the relationship between the environment, stress
physiology, and metabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions,
Slubowski will work with a population of low-income, African American
adolescents who live in Chicago. She will conduct in-depth interviews and use
consensus methods to gain a better understanding of the stressors that youth
experience in their neighborhood. Using this information, Slubowski will compare
outcomes in a number of psychological stress measures, collect cortisol hormone
levels in hair samples, and measure basic health indicators, including eating
behavior, activity level, blood pressure, and body mass index (BMI).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will illuminate the pathways between
violence, everyday experience, stress, and health outcomes among young people in
an urban environment. The findings will expand understandings of biocultural
pathways to health and disease in a Western population, and involve an age
bracket that is understudied in the discipline of anthropology. Further, this
project has wider applicability to public health and the topic of health
disparities. Funding this project also contributes to the training of a graduate
student.