* 1155841
* SHINE: Eulerian Decorrelation Functions Derived from Multispacecraft Observations of Interplanetary Magnetic Field Fluctuations
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* James Weygand, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/29/2016
* USD 288,831.00

As the scientific motivation for this project, the Principal Investigator (PI)
explains that the magnetic Eulerian Correlation Function (ECF) is a measure of
the temporal decorrelation of particle transport in the solar wind due to
interplanetary magnetic field fluctuations, and he notes that the ECF is
directly invoked in particle scattering theory, as well as in fundamental
turbulence theory, dynamo theory, and plasma physics.

In order to provide accurate observations of solar wind decorrelation functions
for space physics modelers who rely heavily on ECF estimates, the PI will
provide observationally based measurements of ECF parameters for magnetic field
fluctuations in both the slow and fast solar wind, using data from multiple
spacecraft. This study will address questions concerning how the ECF varies with
solar wind speed and the role that turbulence geometry plays in how the ECF
varies with respect to the mean magnetic field. The answers to these questions
will, for the first time, provide detailed scale-dependent constraints on
theoretical models relevant to solar wind turbulence and cosmic ray transport.
Better knowledge of the ECF will also provide better estimates of the temporal
ranges over which solar wind propagation can be reliably simulated.

These results will have beneficial applications to space weather forecasting,
and will contribute to enhanced planning and data analysis for observations from
NASA's future "Solar Probe" spacecraft. These findings will also benefit ongoing
studies of interplanetary magnetic field turbulence which are applicable to a
much more extensive range of astrophysical and space research topics than this
effort alone addresses. This research project will also support one
undergraduate summer student. The PI will disseminate his research findings to
the community at international meetings, in conference presentations, and in
journal publications.