* 1155487
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Trauma, Mental Illness, and Cen: Networks of Therapeutic Care and the Cohabitation of Concepts of Suffering In Postwar Northern Uganda
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Alan Klima, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 19,862.00

University of California-Davis doctoral student Adrian Yen, supervised by Dr.
Alan Klima, will use northern Uganda's Acholi community as a case study to
investigate the global influence of Western psychiatry and its implications for
post-conflict societies. The proposed research will be conducted in the northern
district of Gulu, a major site of the recent civil war between the Lord's
Resistance Army and the Ugandan government. There, international peace-building
initiatives increasingly promote the use of Western psychiatry as a way of
treating what was recently declared one of the highest rates of war-related
mental illness recorded in clinical history. Focusing on a novel system of
referrals that remits individuals back and forth among traditional healers, the
psychiatry ward of the region's main government hospital, and NGOs, the research
will investigate how different psychiatric concepts and practices intersect with
popular Acholi models of traditional healing, and how these encounters shape
experiences of distress and related therapeutic outcomes for thousands of
affected individuals in the region.

Through fifteen months of ethnographic fieldwork with traditional healers,
mental health professionals, and Acholi clients, the researcher will observe
clinical consultations, conduct semi-structured interviews, and collect illness
narratives to investigate three inter-related sets of research questions. First,
why and how are psychiatric therapies made available to Acholi people today, and
who is involved in their administration? Second, how do different practitioners
adapt and manage the confluence of illness concepts and practices in the region,
and how do their clients respond to these accommodations? Finally, why do Acholi
people turn to psychiatric medicine and related technologies like drugs and
psycho-therapy, and how do they understand the role these therapeutic tools play
in their lives and communities?

The results of this research will contribute to a deeper understanding of how
traditional healing practices and psychiatric knowledge affect one another and
give rise to novel treatment regimes in a post-conflict context. By doing so,
the research stands to make an important contribution to the treatment of people
affected by traumatic events and warfare. Findings from this research will also
contribute to understandings of biomedicine and the implications of its growing
influence in the government of human affairs. Finally, funding for this research
supports the education of a social scientist.