* 1155996
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Industrial Production of Medications in France
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Michael Joiner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,920.00

Introduction Homeopathy plays a prominent role in the consumer healthcare market
in France, unlike the US where it plays a marginal role. In France, it both
competes with and is complementary to biomedicine. At the center of this
strategic ambiguity are the globules (small beads) of homeopathic medicines,
which are made to embody this dual role. By directly observing and interviewing
key actors in the industrial production of homeopathic medicines in France, this
project addresses the following question. How are homeopathic remedies produced
to function as both a contestation of and complement to biomedical therapies?

Intellectual merit Despite its increasing market presence in France and
elsewhere, including the United States, homeopathy has largely failed to garner
the attention of scholars of anthropology and the social studies of science.
This project will begin to fill this gap in our knowledge and shed light on the
industrial dimensions of an alternative treatment regime. It will focus on the
range of processes by which knowledge, technology, and politics play decisive
roles in the production of a treatment commodity. The production of a
homeopathic remedy entails continual material and symbolic transformation
through the application of various technologies (such as agricultural,
laboratory, manufacturing) and forms of expertise (such as farming, scientific,
marketing, regulatory). How this production process is shaped by evidence-based
research, technologies and expertise, values and ideologies, national and
international regulation, and a host of uncertainties is at the core of this
inquiry. It engages domains of knowledge related to the social studies of
science, the anthropology of medicine and pharmaceuticals, and the anthropology
and sociology of business in order to produce an integrative analytic approach.

Potential broader impacts The results of this study will provide the social
sciences with a much-needed tool to expand its traditional domains to include
sites whose technologies, materials and methods both mirror and diverge from
those of biomedicine and rethink a category of healthcare whose identity and
activities situate it both inside and outside the traditional domains of medical
anthropology.