* 1155339
* Governance of International Labor Migration: Scalar Politics and Network Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Micheline van Riemsdijk, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 10/31/2015
* USD 165,910.00

This project investigates factors that shape the governance of international
skilled migration. Skilled workers are in high demand, and high-income
(developed) countries vie to attract skilled migrants to remain competitive in
the global knowledge economy. The competition for talent is likely to increase
as populations decline and age, with related skill shortages emerging. In order
to attract more skilled workers, corporations and other stakeholders try to
influence migration policies at various scales. Traditional governance studies
have primarily investigated policymaking processes at the global, supranational,
and national scale, paying little attention to stakeholders at the subnational
scale. The primary goal of this project is to better understand the governance
of international skilled migration at various scales. The project investigates
the migration experiences of skilled workers and their families and the socio-
spatial strategies of stakeholders to influence skilled migration policies.
These findings are placed within the socio-institutional context in which
skilled migration takes place. Also, the project integrates literatures on the
politics of scale and networks to analyze the governance of international
skilled migration. This investigation uses a case study of the information
technology (IT) industry in Norway to investigate these issues. Norway shares
several concerns with other high-income countries, including low enrollments in
engineering and computer science courses, an increased demand for skilled
workers, and a shortage of developers and analysts of software and its
applications, database professionals, and network professionals. Interviews with
stakeholders in international skilled migration examine the ways in which they
influence migration policies. In addition, interviews and an online survey
investigate the migration experiences of IT specialists and their strategies to
navigate institutional barriers.

The research findings will provide insights into the actual practices of
scaling, rescaling, and network modes of governance in migration policymaking.
The project will make theoretical contributions to geographical understandings
of scales and networks, including the possible emergence of new forms of
governance. The findings of the project will enhance the understanding of the
processes of international skilled migration, particularly the operation of
global talent recruitment. Thus, this study will inform policy debates about
competitiveness and innovation in the global knowledge economy. Understandings
of the migration experiences of skilled workers can also contribute to more
effective and efficient skilled migration policies. U.S. graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained as part of the study.