* 1155697
* Bayesian Multivariate Analysis for Causal Inference with Intermediate Variables
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Fan Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 79,999.00

Across a wide range of academic disciplines, government agencies, and business
sectors, drawing inferences about causal effects of treatments, intervention,
and actions is central to decision making. In both randomized experiments and
observational studies, it is increasingly common that treatment comparisons need
to be adjusted for confounded intermediate variables; i.e., post-treatment
variables potentially affected by the treatment and also affecting the response.
Multivariate information is routinely collected in real-world applications
involving intermediate variables, but it is infrequently and ineffectively used
in causal inference. This research project will develop general purpose
statistical methods and software for such multivariate analysis under the
principal stratification framework within the Rubin Causal Model. A core
methodological focus will be to develop cutting-edge Bayesian models, methods,
and computation for flexible multivariate analysis, latent structure,
nonparametric analysis, model selection, and factor analysis for drawing valid
causal inferences in the presence of intermediate variables. In particular, this
project will develop Bayesian parametric, semi-parametric, and non-parametric
bivariate models that exploit multiple outcomes of different types to improve
the estimation of weakly identified causal estimands in studies with binary or
continuous intermediate variables. A Bayesian factor model also will be
developed for causal studies with multiple intermediate variables.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve statistical analyses for causal
inference with intermediate variables, hence enabling more accurate conclusions
from experimental and observational intervention studies across many
disciplines. The research will blend theory and methodological developments with
motivating applications in areas including health policy, epidemiology, social
sciences, and economics. The open source R/Matlab software developed from the
research will provide valuable data analysis and educational tools for the
scientific community.