* 1155255
* Researching and Improving Geography Teacher Preparation Through Transatlantic Collaborations
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Michael Solem, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/2015
* USD 99,294.00

This collaborative transatlantic research with United States, the United
Kingdom, and Finland partners will determine how geography contributes to the
overall capabilities of K-12 students. There are two major components to this
project that address capabilities, or the principles of understanding topics
like autonomy, human rights, citizenship, sustainable development, economy and
culture. The first is an international comparative analysis of national
geography standards, teacher preparation curricula and practices within the
U.S., U.K., and Finland to determine how standards address the capabilities of
students. The resulting synthesis report will illustrate for other nations how
capability concepts can bridge divergent conceptions and practices in geography
education and set the stage for international collaborations in teacher
preparation. The second project component will design and implement a workshop
convening geography professors and recent graduates from pre-service teacher
education programs in the U.S. and EU. Informed by the outcomes of content
analysis research performed in the first year, participants will identify and
ultimately bridge differing national conceptions of geography as an academic
discipline, what it means to "think geographically," and the role of post-
secondary teacher preparation in enhancing geographic education. Following the
workshop, the participants will develop online educational resources that will
connect pre-service geography teachers for international collaborative projects
using the Center for Global Geography Education (CGGE) at the Association of
American Geographers. These educational resources draw on an approach to
curriculum development known as the "capability approach" to unify various
national conceptions of geography in a way that enables aspiring geography
teachers to engage the perspectives of their peers internationally as they
develop expertise in the subject. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geography plays an
important role in everyday decision-making. Thinking geographically underpins
the practice of asking questions that identify changing relationships between
places, and communicate patterns observed at various scales. These questions
become more complex when viewed from an international lens. This project,
founded on international partnership, will enhance geographic education through
teacher preparation workshops and freely accessible professional development
resources. The new CGGE case studies and collaborative projects will connect
pre-service teachers online to study and discuss important geographic questions
in their respective nations and provide them with important opportunities for
cross-cultural understanding and geographic learning in relation to capability
principles. Eventually, the students of project participants will experience
similar opportunities to attain international perspectives on geographic content
emphasized in national standards. Together, these cross-cultural research and
educational activities will facilitate the development of internationally
connected teacher preparation programs rooted in sophisticated international
geography perspectives.