* 1155402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the Use and Impact of Social Knowledge Claims concerning Regional Changes
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,11/30/2014
* Jessica Koski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 15,000.00

Introduction&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the epistemic significance of
attempts to reframe climate change as a human rights concern. What is striking
about the application of human rights to climate change is how it brings social
knowledge into conversation with natural science. As with many environmental
problems, natural scientific knowledge and experts figure prominently in the
construction of climate change. By contrast, advocates of a human rights-based
approach re-frame climate change as a social problem and rely on social
knowledge claims to support their assertions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Through content analysis and interviews with key actors, this
project analyzes this important shift in the dominant discourse and knowledge-
making practices in relation to climate change. Specifically, it asks two
questions. How do advocates employ social knowledge claims to demonstrate the
link between human rights and climate change? What impact may the use of social
knowledge claims have on the climate debate? Such research contributes to a
basic framework for studying social knowledge and provides insight as to the
role of social knowledge in policy debates, as well as practices that lend
social knowledge credibility. This project further extends our understanding of
the co-production of scientific and political orders from cases involving the
natural sciences to those involving social knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Potential Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its
intellectual contributions, examining how the deployment of social knowledge
potentially challenges dominant natural scientific constructions of climate
change may yield strategies for overcoming the political gridlock that often
accompanies technocratic debate, thus facilitating more effective policy-making.
Further analyzing the human rights frame's political impact, including its
effect on the range of participants eligible to contribute to the climate
debate, may also provide practical insights as to how to incorporate a wider
range of participants, including the public, into scientific and political
debates.