* 1155196
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Degree semantics in Washo and cross-linguistic variation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Michael Bochnak, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2014
* USD 11,865.00

Washo is a Native American language spoken in the Lake Tahoe area of California
and Nevada. It is highly endangered, with only a handful of elderly native
speakers left. Washo makes use of two strategies for expressing comparison of
objects (cf. English: John is taller than Mary): conjoined comparison, where two
independent clauses containing antonyms are juxtaposed; and locative comparison,
where the standard of comparison is marked with a locative postposition or
suffix. While both strategies for comparison are typologically quite common in
the world's languages, these constructions remain under-studied in formal
linguistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr. Christopher
Kennedy, Mr. Ryan Bochnak will conduct primary fieldwork in the Washo community
with some of the remaining speakers to investigate the semantic properties of
the two comparison constructions in the language. Data will be collected through
elicitation sessions where Mr. Bochnak will collect translations, narratives,
and judgements on constructed examples to arrive at a more complete picture of
comparisons and degree-related constructions in Washo. Of particular interest is
the interpretation of scalar properties in comparison constructions, as well as
their (un)acceptability with modifiers and measure terms. All data collected
will be digitally recorded and transcribed by Mr. Bochnak. The analysis of the
Washo data will inform the question of to what extent there exists a common
semantics for comparison across languages, despite divergences in morphology and
syntax.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research follows a recent and growing trend of
using data from under-studied languages to test semantic theories against a
broader range of languages. In addition, this project will make a significant
contribution to the permanent record of a highly endangered language, with the
materials collected being made available to the Washo community in the form of
annotated recordings of elicitation sessions in an online database.