* 1155734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Economy of Child Labor in the Acai Commodity Chain
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Beth Conklin, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2013
* USD 20,000.00

Vanderbilt University doctoral candidate Monte D. Hendrickson, supervised by Dr.
Beth A. Conklin, will conduct research addressing the cultural criteria of
children's roles in producing export commodities, a subject that has received
little anthropological attention. Hendrickson's study focuses specifically on
acai production in the lower Amazon region of Brazil and investigates children's
roles in the production of this commodity, which is marketed as an
environmentally sustainable and socially responsible product that enhances the
livelihoods of the rural poor. This research seeks to understand how the moral
and economic processes involved in a global commodity boom affect the lives of
children and the cultural politics of childhood in poor families at the
production end of an export-commodity chain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate
these complex links between acai and children's wellbeing, research will be
conducted in two rural communities, Gurupa and Curralinho, in the state of Para.
Research will involve multiple sources of qualitative and quantitative data to
yield insights into local concepts, understandings, and perspectives on
decision-making concerning children's health, education, and labor, and
children's contributions to acai production. Statistical data from official
records and findings from household surveys will be complemented and
contextualized by ethnographic participant-observation, open-ended interviewing,
semi-structured and structured interviews, participatory photo interviews with
children, and life histories collected in each community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is significant in that it contributes to an
under-theorized dimension of human rights concerns: the question of the moral
and ethical evaluation of children's labor activities in family/household
contexts. This investigation will produce a rich case study of work conditions,
effects on income, education, and health, and attitudes toward children and
childhood in these rural Amazonian communities. The dissertation based on this
field study will juxtapose this local case study against discourses at the
regional and international levels concerning the benefits of acai, fair trade,
rural household production, and child labor.