* 1155715
* The Impact of Radio on Democratization in Islamic Africa
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Jaimie Bleck, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2015
* USD 24,999.00

In many African countries, particularly those in the Islamic Sahel, traditional
and religious authorities exist in tandem with recently created democratic
institutions. In these environments, characterized by low rates of literacy,
widespread poverty, and sparse information, these leaders play a vital role as
information brokers between rural constituents and the democratic process. Can
increased access to independent information liberate citizens from reliance on
traditional information brokers? Specifically, this study seeks to understand
the impact of increased access to radio programming on political knowledge,
efficacy, participation, nationalism, and pluralism among rural citizens in
Mali, a nascent Islamic African democracy. Since democracy requires that
citizens are able to act according to their independent political preferences
and desires, this research is of critical importance as we seek to understand
the democratization processes in Islamic Africa.

Following the democratic transition in 1991, the Malian government and
international donors funded the expansion citizens' access to national radio
signals in hopes of fostering citizenship, nationalism, and development
outcomes. While increasing numbers Malians own a radio and have access to
programming, there are strong gender and age-cohort disparities. While
household-heads frequently own a radio, women and men under the age of 40 have
very limited access to radio. Initial research also suggests that such
individuals have much lower rates of political knowledge, opinions, or
participation in village-level decision-making.

The intellectual merit of this research is linked to its investigation of
radio's effects on individuals and its use of field experiments. This study
examines whether an experimental treatment, the distribution of solar crank
radios, can increase citizens' democratic agency and liberate them from
traditional information brokers in the context of the 2012 elections. A baseline
study collected data on 5 pairs of "matched" villages in a remote, Northern
region of Mali. Each pair was selected in order to control for factors that
might determine its level of political information such as proximity to a major
road, cell and radio signals, linguistic competence, access to markets, and
population size. In each pair, one village received a treatment and the other
served as a control. In treatment villages, one man and one woman completed a
two-step baseline survey and received a solar crank radio. The same demographic
completed the survey and received flashlights in the control villages. The
survey collected demographic information, baseline assessments of political
participation, political knowledge, pluralistic attitudes, efficacy, as well as
attitudes towards more sensitive questions such as gender parity and village-
level democracy. The project also includes qualitative interviews of village
chiefs and coding or radio programming. Respondents will be re-interviewed after
the national elections and constitutional referendum to determine attitudinal
and behavioral change.

The broader impacts of this study extend from its contribution to our
understanding of democratization. This study offers donors and the policy
community an evaluation of their investment in radio as a tool for democracy
promotion. The focus on rural women and youth highlights the precarious position
of some of the most marginalized citizens. Recent threats to stability in
Northern Mali, including kidnappings, illicit trafficking, and attacks on Malian
military installations, underscore the urgent need to understand how to
incorporate all Northern citizens into institutional channels and engage them in
the democratic process.