* 1155162
* Psychological Causes of Criminal Confessions: The Role of Interrogation Myopia
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Max Guyll, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* scott barclay
* 02/28/2017
* USD 255,503.00

DNA exonerations and laboratory experiments reveal that criminal suspects will
sometimes falsely confess to crimes when interrogated by the police. This
research will advance understanding of the processes that underlie suspects'
decisions to confess by testing the predictions of a new theorietical model of
confessions. The model proposes that stress elicited by police interrogation
causes suspects to focus narrowly on the events and conditions operating in the
immediate interrogation situation while simultaneously diverting their attention
away from factors that are temporally remote, such as the future consequences
that they may face if convicted. Ultimately, this narrowing of attentional focus
is hypothesized to create a psychological state of interrogation myopia whereby
suspects' choices are driven too much by the social and situational influences
that are operating during the immediate interrogation situation, and too little
by their long-term interests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three experiments will
examine whether stress, elicited through an accusation of cheating in an
academic setting, influences how much people attend to and remember information
that is directly relevant to consequences of academic misconduct, how vulnerable
they are to social pressures that encourage them to confess, and whether their
confession decisions are influenced more by immediate consequences (e.g.,
escaping an unpleasant situation now) than future consequences (e.g., avoiding
punishment for wrong-doing in the future). The experiments are unique in that
they assess stress in terms of physiology indexed by cardiovascular activity, a
response to police interrogation that has received almost no empirical attention
to date. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings of this research will advance
understanding of the psychological processes that lead suspects to confess to
crimes during custodial police interrogations, thereby aiding reform efforts
that are designed to improve the diagnostic value of confession evidence.