* 1155800
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Social History of Access to Online Media by People with Disabilities
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2012
* Jonathan Gray, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 09/30/2012
* USD 3,100.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Social History of Access to Online Media by
People with Disabilities

Accessibility is necessary for full inclusion in online spaces, and is thus a
critically important dimension of increasingly technologically mediated
contemporary democracies. Yet despite the existence of regulations to ensure
accessibility by people with disabilities, access disparities, particularly for
people with visual impairment, still exist. This study uses archival documents,
open-ended interviews, and policy documents to explain the formation of
accessibility policies in the United States between 1985 and 2010. It also uses
analysis of media representations, including popular press and fictional
portrayals, to demonstrate how disability was understood in relation to online
technology during the same period. Finally, participant observation of a
disability blogosphere and open-ended interviews with bloggers illustrate the
continuing challenges for people with disabilities in having their accessibility
needs met. Findings illuminate gaps between intended audiences, technical
knowledge, disability rights, and the consumption and production of online
content.

By highlighting these tensions among stakeholders, and the resulting incomplete
implementation of accessibility policies, this project challenges media studies'
optimistic notions of participatory culture, contributes to debates about an
online public sphere, and augments critical disability studies research on
accommodation and equity. This project also provides a theoretical linkage
between studies of the social construction of technology, and disability studies
scholarship.

The results of this project benefit policymakers, web developers, and web users
with disabilities. In addition to contributing to the completion of a doctoral
dissertation, this research will result in the creation and dissemination of
policy documents to assist policymakers in closing gaps in accessibility.
Findings also enable web designers to identify ways of remedying problems of
differential access, and assist people with disabilities in strengthening and
implementing policies and practices that further the production of accessible
online media.