* 1155663
* Group-Specific Diatom Silica Production in a Coastal Upwelling System
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Jeffrey Krause, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2017
* USD 453,487.00

This study will examine the distribution of silica production among diatom
species, using a novel combination of existing approaches, to evaluate the
contributions of specific species or genera to total diatom silica production.
Specific hypotheses regarding the distribution of silica production among
species of diatoms will be tested by exploiting the strong contrasts in diatom
community structure and silica production between a coastal upwelling system and
in an oligotrophic subtropical gyre. Several lines of evidence support the idea
that the diatoms responsible for the majority of silica production shifts from
the most numerically abundant species in coastal systems to relatively rare, but
very large, cells in offshore oligotrophic environments. This shift alters the
role of diatoms in regional food webs and because many processes determining the
role of phytoplankton groups in biogeochemical cycles are a function of cell
size, such a shift has strong implications for regional differences in the
contribution of diatoms to upper-ocean carbon cycling and the biological pump.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study also seeks to understand of the role of silicon
limitation in regulating diatom silica production at the species level. Si
limitation of silica production has been detected in every system examined to
date, ranging from the high Si waters of the Antarctic, to coastal upwelling
systems and the oligotrophic subtropical gyres. Field studies of Si limitation
are rarely accompanied by examination of the species present. When studies do
have taxonomic data the lack of information on the performance of individual
species makes it impossible to allocate the measured rates among cells,
potentially leading to erroneous conclusions about the contribution of specific
diatom groups to community composite rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will test five hypotheses. Each is related to the general theme of using
species-specific data to improve understanding of the factors regulating
diatoms' role in marine food webs. By combining bulk measures of silica
production using the radioisotope 32Si with quantitative measures of silicon
deposition rates by individual cells using the fluorescent probe
2-(4-pyridyl)-5((4-(2-dimethylaminoethyl-aminocarbamoyl)-methoxy)phenyl)oxazole,
or PDMPO, the following will be determined: species-specific diatom
contributions to total community silica production, regional differences in the
distribution of silica production among diatom species as a function of cell
size, species-specific kinetic parameters governing the ability of species to
compete for dissolved silicon, and whether dominance of a particular diatom
group or species can be explained by knowledge of their capacity to utilize Si
and their numerical abundance (as opposed to other factors such as grazing or
limitation by other nutrients).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Specific-specific knowledge from field assemblages will
improve the understanding of the major biological and ecological drivers of
organic carbon and silica production by diatoms in the sea. This dataset will
also help identify key species for inclusion in food-web and biogeochemical
models in coastal and oligotrophic gyre ecosystems, and test whether knowledge
of diatom nutrient uptake capacity from laboratory studies are representative of
diatoms in mixed communities in the field. This project will also provide
research experiences for undergraduates in both the laboratory and field
settings, and will include a K-12 outreach program designed in collaboration
with scientific-outreach personnel from UCSB's Marine Science Institute's Oceans
to Classroom (O2C) program for use in regional elementary schools. O2C currently
reaches over 18,000 students in &gt;800 regional K-12 classrooms annually
bringing marine science to life for students using real-life examples of marine
research by UCSB PIs.