* 1155907
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Public and Expert Understandings of Nuclear Risk in Italy
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Davide Orsini, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 09/30/2013
* USD 14,500.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expert and Public Understandings of Nuclear Risk
in Italy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how publics perceive and act on
technological risks is important for the management of technologies and for
ensuring their just governance. Given the global importance of nuclear
technologies, understanding how publics perceive their value and danger is
critical. Periodic nuclear accidents influence both public attitudes and
government policies, but they are not sufficient to explain significant
differences in how different groups perceive nuclear risks. To more adequately
these risk perceptions, this research examines how groups' claims of nuclear
contamination become objects of political debate and contestation at the local,
national, and international levels. To explain how nuclear risks come be visible
or invisible to experts and non-experts, this study analyzes three sources of
risk perception: competing scientific, military, and political epistemologies
and methods for assessing risk; forms of political mobilization; and everyday
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archival and ethnographic research will be
carried out at a U.S. Navy base for nuclear submarines that were installed in
the Archipelago of La Maddalena (Italy) between 1972 and 2008 to assess the
specific role of political supervision and military secrecy on experts?
assessments of nuclear risks, and how meanings of nuclear power were shaped by
different forms of political mobilization took place both during and after the
cold war. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to theories of how
nuclear experts and laypeople assess and understand the nature and the effects
of nuclear power; how claims of health effects from nuclear contamination and
accidents alter everyday perceptions of nuclear power and make nuclear danger
visible; and how these different factors interact in specific localities, when
there is a perceived danger of nuclear contamination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study addresses problems of interest to experts, policy-makers, NGOs, and
environmentalist groups in Italy and elsewhere. Research data is digitally
available to publics, including the local community of La Maddalena and to
experts and non-experts interested in risk communication, nuclear risk
perceptions, risk assessment and management, and U.S. military basing policies
and practices.