* 1156844
* REU Site:   Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest: Investigating and Communicating Ecosystem Change
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Timothy Fahey, Plymouth State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2016
* USD 251,156.00

An award has been made to Plymouth State University, in cooperation with the
Hubbard Brook Research Foundation, to provide undergraduate research training to
8 students over a 10-week summer period for the summers of 2013-2015. This
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program provides students
interested in ecology and environmental science a rigorous research experience
at the internationally recognized Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest (HBEF) Long-
Term Ecological Research (LTER) site in the White Mountains of New Hampshire.
The program emphasizes the societal relevance of research on ecology and the
changing environment through research overseen by teams of scientist-mentors and
science communication activities overseen by outreach mentors. Students choose
from projects distributed among four research themes (animal ecology,
biogeochemistry, hydrology and soils, and forest vegetation and carbon cycling)
that are representative of, and integrated within, the ecosystem science of the
Hubbard Brook Ecosystem Study (HBES). Each student also participates in a weekly
science communication workshop that emphasizes the interface between ecological
research and the broader society through the use of case studies in citizen
science, outreach and science ethics; interactions with professionals working
with non-profits, management agencies, and educational institutions; and writing
and speaking activities designed to emphasize the skills necessary for
communicating to broad audiences. This program places training in science
communication alongside a core of mentor-guided independent research. The
10-week program culminates with presentations at a site-wide annual
undergraduate research conference. The REU on-line evaluation tool will be used
to evaluate student learning gains in scientific inquiry and research execution,
personal growth and in communicating science to the public. The program is open
to undergraduate freshmen, sophomores, juniors or first semester seniors who are
US citizens or permanent residents and will actively recruit a diverse group of
students from cultural and ethnic groups that are traditionally underrepresented
in scientific careers. REU program participants receive a stipend, travel and
research allowances, and housing for the duration of the program. These students
will live cooperatively among a dynamic mix of undergraduates, graduate
students, and other young researchers active in summer research at the Hubbard
Brook Experimental Forest. More information is available at
www.hubbardbrookreu.org, or by contacting program coordinator Geoff Wilson
(gwilson@hbresearchfoundation.org) or project PI Michele Pruyn
(mlpruyn@plymouth.edu).