* 1156111
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Environmental Nanoscience Research at Jackson State University Serving Minority &amp; Disadvantaged Students
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Hongtao Yu, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 270,000.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program in the Department of
Chemistry at Jackson State University (JSU) will bring 8 students to campus for
ten weeks each summer to conduct research in a stimulating and supportive
research environment. The summer research project will provide opportunities for
JSU-REU participants to excel in research on environmental nanoscience and
promote the acquisition of skills necessary for scientific discovery. To
understand the applications and implications of nanoscience on the environment,
this REU site aims to form an interdisciplinary team of chemists, environmental
scientists, nanoscientists, physicists, and biologists within the REU site to
focus on research, educational and career development activities related to
"Environmental Nanoscience". REU research activity will focus on two main areas:
(1) Development and application of nanomaterials in environmental protection and
(2) Impact of Engineered Nanomaterials on the Environment. The career and
scientific activities will include: a) short courses, b) workshops on graduate
school, scientific ethic, and written and oral communication skills, c) seminar
series from prominent scientists, d) round table discussions, e) field trips and
social events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African-Americans are underrepresented in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) in the US. Since they
represent 98% of the minority population in Mississippi, an REU Site at JSU is
an excellent opportunity to address the challenge of the lack of access to
successful STEM-research careers for this demographic group. In response to
these challenges, the REU site at JSU, one of the 115 Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCU), will provide the research experience to the
underrepresented minority, female, and other disadvantaged students for a
successful career in science. An anticipated far-reaching and lasting effect of
the current REU site program is its impact on training and mentoring African
American undergraduate students in the areas of research with graduate education
and excellent job prospects as outcomes.