* 1156919
* REU Site:   Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) in Marine and Estuarine Science
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Paulinus Chigbu, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 05/31/2015
* USD 264,356.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Maryland Eastern Shore that will provide research training for 8
students each year, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. The program
is supported by the Directorate for Biological Science, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, the Directorate for Geosciences, Division of Ocean Sciences, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Human Resources
HBCU-UP program. The program focuses on marine and estuarine science. Students
are offered a broad range of mentorship in various areas including, but not
limited, to fish and macroinvertebrate population dynamics, marine microbiology
and parasitology, molecular biology, genetics, marine botany, environmental
chemistry, and ecotoxicology. Students, particularly rising sophomores, are
recruited by various means, including use of flyers describing the program and
by digital-based advertising. Selection of students is based on academic record,
letters of recommendation, and potential for further studies in the areas of
marine and environmental science. Students receive a stipend and travel support;
housing and board are covered. In addition to research, weekly workshops are
conducted to train students in writing a research proposal, analyzing data,
scientific ethics, and various contemporary topics such as global climate
change. Apart from weekly workshops, REU interns also participate in field trips
along the pristine Pocomoke River, and at an internationally recognized wetland
on the lower eastern shore of Maryland. At the end of the summer, REU interns
present research they have conducted with their faculty mentors during a
symposium that is held at the Paul S. Sarbanes Coastal Ecology Center. Interns
prepare a short report of their research which is compiled in form of symposium
proceedings. Students are tracked to determine if they have continued to
maintain interest in marine and environmental science, their career paths, and
the lasting influences of the research experience. The program will be assessed
using various means, including use of an REU common assessment tool. Students
with limited opportunities for research, particularly in coastal systems, and
from groups under-represented in science are particularly encouraged to apply.
Additional information on the REU internship can be found at www.umes.edu/reu,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Paulinus Chigbu at: pchigbu@umes.edu), or Co-PI
(Dr. Eric May at: ebmay@umes.edu).