* 1156187
* The Greening of Economic Development
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,01/31/2013
* David Hess, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2013
* USD 6,757.00

The Greening of Economic Development&lt;br/&gt;David J. Hess, PI, Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the United States, green jobs
promise to bring new subsidies to industry, research dollars to universities,
competitiveness to the American economy, jobs for the unemployed, and solutions
to environmental problems. Dramatic changes in energy, transportation, building
design, and other industries are underway, spurred by policy innovations and
investment at various government levels. State and local governments have
entered into an increasingly intense competition to establish their region as
the capitol of one or more clean tech industries. Meanwhile, civil society
organizations have mobilized to support green jobs programs that promise to
provide jobs for the unemployed and to revitalize distressed urban
neighborhoods, and financial services firms have created a range of new products
to serve investment in clean or green businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project offers two perspectives on the transition to a greener economy in the
United States. First, from a practical policy perspective, the research project
tracks and analyzes the progress of policy innovations in support of clean tech
and green jobs at the state and local government levels in the United States and
Canada. The project provides insight into policy innovations, hurdles, and best
practices that are emerging. It also provides some insight into which cities
have shown leadership in the transition from overall urban greening to green
jobs development, and which states are showing leadership in the creation of
industrial clusters for wind, solar, smart grid, biofuels, energy-efficient
building technologies, fuel cells, and batteries. Finally, the project charts
new financial products and investment strategies, both from governments and the
private sector, that have emerged to support clean and green business
development. The results will be of value to advocates and policymakers as they
sort through priorities and strategies for a transition toward a greener
economy, and the results will be made available publicly for their
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second, from a social science perspective, the project
studies how different understandings of development are at work in the green
economy transition. Specifically, the project develops a comparative analysis of
the history of research and practice for mainstream economic development
(leading up to the current focus on high-technology clusters, including clean-
tech clusters); community development (from the antipoverty programs of the
1960s to current efforts to link green jobs to the needs of low-income
communities); and localist development (from the debate over import substitution
to the emergence of local food and local, independent business movements).
Understanding the three approaches to development is important because there is
evidence of the influence of all three in green jobs and clean tech policies.
Likewise, the strands can also be identified in the design of new financial
products associated with the green economy transition. In exploring the
different approaches to development as they are becoming expressed in new
policies and financial products, the project will draw on and suggest a way to
integrate previously disconnected research fields of the sociology of finance,
environmental sociology, and science and technology studies (STS). It will also
contribute to broader theoretical conversations about sustainability and
development.