* 1156657
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry & Biochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* David Collard, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 270,000.00

The REU program in the Department of Chemistry at Georgia Institute of
Technology will bring 10 students to campus for ten weeks each summer to
participate in a diverse array of projects in analytical, biological, inorganic,
organic, physical, and polymer chemistry. A primary focus of the proposed NSF
REU program is to target the enrollment of substantial numbers of women and
underrepresented minority students and to provide them with skills and
motivation to embark on graduate studies in the sciences. Each participant will
work with an individual faculty member who has an active research group in an
area of interest to the student. Other components of the program include team-
building activities, regular group meetings, a seminar/workshop series (topics
include ethics, presentation skills, graduate opportunities, and research
frontiers), research symposia, and field trips to industrial and/or government
laboratories. These serve to acquaint participants with a broad array of
projects, provide them with the opportunity to enhance their presentation
skills, and provide a perspective of chemical research in a scholarly,
entrepreneurial, economic, and ethical framework. The program includes extensive
joint activities with other summer research programs on campus. It is expected
that the REU program will continue to attract the high level of participation of
underrepresented groups similar to the most recent programs that included 54%
women, 55% underrepresented minorities with most participants (84%) coming from
schools that lacked a Ph.D. program in chemistry. This goal will be facilitated
by both existing and new outreach activities with Minority-Serving Institutions
(MSIs) and other Principally Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), and a new
partnership with a local two-year college.