* 1156934
* REU Site: Addition of a Geothermal Research and Education Focus to Enhance the SAGE (Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience) REU Program
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Lawrence Braile, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2014
* USD 89,000.00

SAGE (Summer of Applied Geophysical Experience) is a 4-5 week education and
research program in field-based applied geophysics. The program has existed for
25 years and involves about 25-30 graduate and undergraduate students per year.
The program includes instruction in applied geophysics, and seismic, gravity,
magnetic, and electromagnetic field data collection. Students at SAGE
participate in every phase of a geophysical research program including data
collection, data analysis, processing, modeling and interpretation; and they
present their results in both oral and written form. This 2-year project
supports the 5 additional students per year in the summer field program (4
weeks) and in a one-week follow-up workshop designed to extend and enhance the
students' research experiences on geothermal research through additional
analyses of the data collected during the summer. REU students at SAGE come from
a variety of institutions ranging from small liberal arts colleges to large
research universities. Student career goals are solidified from information and
experiences included in SAGE through the significant participation of industry,
government, national laboratory and academic professionals. The follow-up
workshop is also used to provide additional professional development of the REU
students through assisting them in preparation of an oral or poster presentation
of research results to be given at a future professional meeting. Support for
about ten of the REU students to attend a professional meeting is included in
the project. This project is supported in collaboration with the Department of
Energy, Office of Geothermal Technologies Program.