* 1156423
* REU Site: Surface Engineering for Sensing, Energy and Nanoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Lev Gelb, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research Experience for
Undergraduate (REU) Site at the University of Texas at Dallas is focused on
surface engineering with applications in nanotechnology, energy, electronics and
sensing and is supported by the Division of Materials Research at the National
Science Foundation. Each year nine undergraduate students are recruited for a
ten-week summer research experience, with recruitment focusing on women and
under-represented groups, and students from institutions where research
opportunities limited. The research projects have been designed by an
interdisciplinary team of faculty from the Departments of Materials Science and
Engineering and Mechanical Engineering. Student research projects will include
the development of Li ion batteries, titanium dioxide nanotubes for biochemical
sensing, flexible electronics and organic hybrid solar cells, and the
characterization and modeling of materials. In addition to participating in
research, the REU fellows will also attend an introductory short-course in
surface engineering, research seminars from faculty and outside experts,
seminars on career planning and the ethics and business of science and
engineering, as well as visits to local high tech industries and informal
discussions with speakers. At the end of the program each fellow will present
their research at a half-day symposium which will be open to all undergraduate
researchers on the University of Texas at Dallas campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research
Experience for Undergraduate (REU) Site at the University of Texas at Dallas
will introduce undergraduates to research in surface engineering with
applications in nanotechnology, energy, electronics and sensingand is supported
by the Division of Materials Research at the National Science Foundation. Each
year nine undergraduate students will be selected for the program, with
recruitment focusing on women and under-represented groups, and students from
institutions where research opportunities limited. This goal is particularly
significant in Texas, where under-representation of women and minorities in
higher education is a severe problem. The proposed work will lead to new
advances in areas of great economic and societal importance, including
nanoelectronics, photovoltaics, catalysts, batteries, fuel cells,
thermoelectrics, energy-harvesting systems, heat transfer systems, and sensors.
Preparing talented students to perform research in these and related areas is
critical in maintaining the competitiveness of the United States.