* 1156774
* REU Site: Molecular and Biochemical Analysis of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* James Forney, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 231,589.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Purdue University that will provide research training for eight students for ten
weeks during the summers of 2012-2014. The program provides advanced training
for undergraduate students in the manipulation and analysis of proteins. It
facilitates deep understanding of experimental laboratory research, insights
into protein biochemistry, and contemplation of the broader context of research.
A wide range of student research projects mentored by faculty in the Department
of Biochemistry is available. Examples include the experimental analysis of
enzyme mechanisms, post-translational protein modifications, proteomics, and
protein-nucleic acid interactions studied in the biological context of cell
cycle control, chromatin regulation, and renewable energy research. Problem-
based modules presented during the first week of the program introduce key
concepts in protein biochemistry and experimental design. The remaining nine
weeks emphasize full-time research supplemented with weekly sessions on ethical
conduct in research, professional communication, GRE preparation, and the
graduate school application process. At the end of the program, students will
present their results at a departmental symposium and a university-wide poster
session. The program will recruit life science and chemistry undergraduates who
have an interest in research. Students who are members of underrepresented
groups in STEM fields are encouraged to apply. Student recruitment efforts
include direct mail pieces to selected institutions, an internet presence linked
to the websites of appropriate professional organization, and enhanced
connections with existing Purdue University programs that promote research
opportunities for students from underrepresented groups. Students are selected
based on academic performance, demonstrated interest in research, and the
potential for outstanding research careers in the life sciences. Student career
decisions will be tracked to assess the lasting impact of the research
experience. Multiple methods will be used to evaluate the program including the
REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.ag.purdue.edu/biochem/Pages/REU.aspx, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
James Forney at forney@purdue.edu).