* 1156137
* REU Site: Fabrication and Characterization of the Nanoscale Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Mohammad Alim, Alabama A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2015
* USD 274,341.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This three year REU Site program will provide
research experiences for undergraduates at Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical
University (AAMU), a Historically Black College and University (HBCU). The goal
of this REU project is to engage the students in research activities in the area
of nanoscale device fabrication and characterization. It allows state-of-the-art
research opportunities in the clean room environment associating fabrication,
evaluation, and degradation of the semiconductor-based structural and conduction
issues for the nanodevices and nanocomposites. The faculty members involved in
nanoscale device research and graduate students will provide hands-on activities
in the engineering research laboratories involving experimental and
computational areas. The primary objective of the program is to enhance research
abilities of students and creative factors. The participants will: (1) identify
research problems and conduct related literature reviews; (2) conduct research,
design, and implement plans via timeline and deadline; (3) develop and learn new
methods, analyze and evaluate procedures; and (4) disseminate research findings
through written and verbal presentations. In addition to the research students
will participate in a seminar series. Topics of the seminar series include
communication and presentation skills, the latest developments in nanoscale
devices and engineering ethics issues. During the final week of the program,
students will participate in a half-day symposium. Each participant will provide
a twenty five minute oral presentation to the engineering and other STEM faculty
members and students. The best research work for a single participant will be
acknowledged with a prize. Also three best presenters and three best report
writers will be judged for a prize. A certificate will be presented to each
participant in this REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment efforts will be directed toward students from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and other minority serving
institutions. A special emphasis will be placed on including minorities, women,
and students with disabilities in the program. Students will gain technical
abilities necessary to conduct research in nanodevices and nanocomposites in
conjunction with ethical conduct and practices in the work place. The
participants in this REU program will be encouraged to pursue higher academic
degrees and eventual careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The site
is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program."