* 1156933
* REU Site: Biological Materials and Processes (BioMaP)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Monica Lamm, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2015
* USD 419,965.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This proposed three year renewal REU site program
at Iowa State University (ISU) and the Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios
Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM), Mexico will engage 12 students for 10 summer
weeks each year in research focused in the areas of biological materials and
processes. The overall goal is to create novel research experiences at ISU and
ITESM for undergraduate students in the areas of biological materials and
processes. These areas highlight the biological strengths of ISU, institutional
units focused on biology and materials, and recent investments by ITESM in
biotechnology. The cross-disciplinary nature of BioMaP enables students to
discover the exciting biology/materials interface. The faculty team is diverse,
has broad research interests, and an outstanding record of mentoring
undergraduate students. Some students will participate in an international
research experience at ITESM, which will provide them with valuable skills in a
global environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will focus on two research
themes: (1) Biological Materials - The interface between biology and materials
can be exploited to design robust materials with unique properties. In this
context, biological materials are synthetic materials that interact with
biological molecules/systems in specific ways to promote biological function.
The students will work on projects focused on activation of immune cells, micro
patterned scaffolds for neural stem cells, and colloidal quantum dots for bio-
imaging and (2) Biological Processes - A fundamental knowledge of biological
processes will be critical in the future chemical industry. Students will be
exposed to this area through projects on protein recovery from transgenic
plants, molecular modeling of peptide mimics, and metabolic engineering of
alkaloids. ITESM faculty has established research collaborations with ISU
faculty that will be used to offer exciting projects to students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will be active members of inter-disciplinary
groups and will interact with faculty, post-docs, and graduate students. The REU
students will also participate in educational activities such as short courses,
joint seminars/meetings, workshops, tours of research facilities, and field
trips. At the end of the program, the students will participate in a joint
poster symposium together with students from other ISU undergraduate research
programs. Program evaluations will provide feedback on fundamental concepts
learned, attitudes regarding the topics, and program
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;A talented and
diverse group of students will be recruited; special efforts will be made to
attract women and minorities by publicizing the program at national meetings of
minority organizations, by working with ISU programs that recruit women and
minorities, and by utilizing the university's extensive relationships with
community colleges and Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The
impact of the REU will be further broadened with the following components. The
first is an integrated program with community colleges in Iowa in which
community college students, who have completed two years of pre-engineering,
biotechnology, or pre-medicine and who have declared to transfer to ISU, will
participate in the BioMaP REU. The second component is new and is focused
providing research experiences for undergraduates who are preservice teachers in
chemistry, physics, biology, and math. Involving preservice teachers in research
discoveries will enable these students to effectively stimulate young minds
towards careers in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from
these studies will be broadly disseminated. The experience of working in a
global environment where their research will evolve from dependent to
independent status will enable the students to walk away with life-long learning
skills that will impact their contributions to science and engineering and to
society.