* 1156960
* REU Site: Soft Materials at Penn State
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Coray Colina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 315,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the renewal of the Soft
Materials REU at Penn State. A project-centered and team-oriented educational
and research program is proposed to complement the training of a new generation
of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers capable of crossing traditional
academic boundaries. This REU in Soft Materials will continue to train
undergraduate students with knowledge, perspective, and teamwork experience to
inspire them to become Ph.D. candidates in Engineering and Sciences.
Undergraduate students across Materials Science, Chemical Engineering, Energy
Engineering and Chemistry will be trained in research areas organized around
three themes: ion conduction in ion-containing polymers, biomaterials including
function of biomacromolecules and self-assembled bio-structures, and
thermodynamics and transport in polymer mixtures. &lt;br/&gt;The overarching
theme of this REU is the study and development of novel soft materials. Specific
objectives are to: 1) Provide students with hands-on experience on a variety of
sophisticated analytical, (nano) fabrication, and computational techniques,
while working in a project-centered collaborative research environment. 2)
Produce a cadre of future scientists and engineers who have the ability to
contribute across traditional disciplines and appreciate the wide-ranging
scientific and engineering issues related to soft materials. REU students will
participate in general activities, such as career development seminars, several
social activities, and the final symposium. The REU program is envisioned as
nucleating a "center-of-excellence for undergraduate research" in the field of
soft materials, while considerably strengthening the education and research
experience of our future materials leaders. We anticipate that more than 50
undergraduate students will participate over the three years of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site is funded by the NSF Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt; The REU in Soft Materials
at Penn State will provide the scientific training for the generation of
interdisciplinary scientists and engineers capable of crossing traditional
academic boundaries. A special emphasis on outreach to individuals from under
represented groups (such as women, Hispanics and African Americans) and persons
with disabilities will be pursued, with the intent of attracting them to
scientific/engineering careers. The program will train undergraduate students
with knowledge, perspective, and teamwork experience to inspire them to become
Ph.D. candidates in Engineering and Sciences. Research is organized around
polymers, biological macromolecules and self-assembled bio-structures which have
potential use in pharmaceutical, agricultural and other industries.
Additionally, REU students will participate in general activities, such as
career development seminars, several social activities, and the final symposium.
Finally, graduate (as mentors) and undergraduate students will actively
participate in the design and performance of experiments (including virtual
experiments), and they will benefit from the interaction and immersion in a
global collaborative research with international peers that complement the
intensive training in theory, simulation, and/or experiment that they receive at
their US home institutions. The REU program is envisioned as nucleating a
"center-of-excellence for undergraduate research" in the field of soft
materials, while considerably strengthening the education and research
experience of our future materials leaders. We anticipate that more than 50
undergraduate students will participate over the three years of the program.
&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site is funded by the NSF Division of Materials Research.