* 1156841
* REU Site: Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education - Emerging Interface Technologies (SPIRE-EIT)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2015
* USD 358,135.00

SPIRE-EIT (Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education -
Emerging InterfaceTechnologies) at Iowa State University is a 10-week summer
program for undergraduates that integrates research and education in emerging
interface technologies. Students gain hands-on research experience using
cyberinfrastructure and take brief focused classes in computer programming and
graphics, and human computer interaction. For the remaining time, students
conduct interdisciplinary research projects in groups. The research projects are
presented at an end-of-the summer campus-wide research symposium in the form of
posters, demos, and a five-page research paper. Intellectual Merit: Two major
trends are driving research in Emerging Interface Technologies: a dramatic
increase in interface technologies themselves, and the ubiquitous permeation of
technology into everyday lives. Correspondingly, research questions focus on
four broad areas of EIT: information visualization, mobile/ubiquitous
interfaces, intelligent agents, and enabling infrastructure. Faculty in ISU's
HCI graduate program compete to participate in the SPIRE and cite strong
benefits from participation afterwards. Broader Impact: Both the HCI program and
SPIRE-EIT recruit with an emphasis on underrepresented groups, preparing
students for graduate education in the interdisciplinary area of HCI, an area of
importance to the US economy. By including instruction on ethics and on
research-based evaluation techniques, the SPIRE gives students skills that are
useful lifelong, independent of discipline, and which students might not
otherwise encounter in a traditional engineering or computer science curriculum.
Each year, the SPIRE projects typically result in one-two professional academic
conference presentations with SPIRE students as co-authors, disseminating its
research results.