* 1156681
* Stopping Rule Selection Theory
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Mario Fific, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2016
* USD 123,743.00

In this project the Principal Investigator will develop a new theoretical
framework for understanding stopping rules in decision making. The stopping rule
is thought to be a crucial component of successful decision making. Over the
years, several unconnected explanations have been proposed to account for some
observed violations of optimal stopping rules. The current research proposes a
unifying explanation for these violations based on a new stopping rule selection
(SRS) theory. This theory is innovative in that it proceeds from the assumption
that for any given decision problem, a decision maker draws from a large set of
different kinds of decision strategies and stopping rules. The SRS theory
hypothesizes that there is a storage area for stopping rules -- the so-called
decision operative space (DOS) -- and a retrieval mechanism that is used to
select stopping rules from the DOS. The SRS theory has shown good fit to some
challenging data previously published in the relevant literature. The fits were
achieved using pattern analysis, which is a novel approach based on fitting the
relative frequency of observed data patterns to the predicted response
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the
knowledge gained in the study should be useful to those who seek to develop or
improve prescriptive decision aids. Decision aids are commonly employed to
improve human performance in complex endeavors, including medicine, aviation,
defense and business.