* 1156796
* REU Site: Field Ecology at the University of Virginia's Blandy Experimental Farm
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2012,12/31/2017
* Mary McKenna, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 12/31/2017
* USD 514,613.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Virginia that will provide research training for 10 students, for
11 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2016. The program focuses on field biology,
encompassing the application of field research, experimental design, data
analysis, and synthesis to the main research areas of plant-insect interactions,
pollination biology, ecosystem ecology, conservation, invasive species, aquatic
ecology, and applied insect ecology. The students have a choice of mentors from
a pool of about 7 resident and visiting faculty at Blandy Experimental Farm. In
addition to carrying out research projects, students are required to participate
in weekly seminars given by visiting scholars as well various workshops, such as
the ethical conduct of research, getting into and surviving graduate school, and
how to communicate scientific research effectively. Students are provided tours
of the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History and take
advantage of numerous biological and cultural opportunities in Northern
Virginia. Blandy Experimental Farm is an ecological field station (not a farm)
at the northern edge of the Shenandoah Valley. It is rural in character, but not
isolated: it lies within 10 miles of the Shenandoah River, the Blue Ridge
Mountains, and the Appalachian Trail, and only 60 miles from Washington, DC. REU
students have access to a new laboratory building, a greenhouse and screenhouse,
and a variety of habitat types for field research. Recruitment of students is
carried out through campus visits, poster mailings, and online advertising.
Students are chosen based on their prior academic performance, recommendations,
and interests. Student outcomes are evaluated throughout their attendance in the
program. The program will be evaluated through several approaches including the
use of an REU common assessment tool. Post-program follow-up surveys of students
gauge long-term impacts on their interests in scientific research and science
education outreach, academic performance, and career advancement. Information is
available at www.virginia.edu/blandy/ReuWebPage/HomePage.php or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Haynes at haynes@virginia.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. McKenna at
mmckenna@howard.edu).