* 1156788
* REU Site:  Chemistry Research at Georgetown University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* YuYe Tong, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports the renewal of a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Georgetown University.
This award seeks to renew the REU program in the Chemistry Department at
Georgetown University (GU). The 10-week program runs from Memorial Day through
early-August of each year, and will include a minimum of 15 participants - 9
non-GU students recruited from across the country, as well as 6 internally-
funded participants. Recruitment efforts will target students without
significant prior research experience, with special consideration given to
creating a diverse participant group drawn largely from institutions without
graduate-level research programs, underrepresented groups, and "first
generation" college students. The primary research and education goals are to:
(1) Provide a positive hands-on research experience for undergraduates that
leads to engagement with the broader chemistry community either through
conferences or publications, (2) Develop and implement an effective cross-
disciplinary program for training mentors of undergraduate researchers, and, (3)
Positively influence student attitudes towards professions in chemistry so that
they will pursue careers in the field. As members of actively funded research
groups, all REU participants will acquire skills in designing and conducting
experimental work and analyzing scientific data. REU students will participate
in a series of weekly workshops covering a variety of professional development
topics, seminars, and field trips. Exposure to the research of many different
scientists and to other departmental and inter-departmental social events, will
provide significant opportunities for student-student and student-faculty formal
and informal exchanges. A comprehensive evaluation plan, which uses pre- and
post- program surveys as well as small focus group interviews, will be used to
assess both the student and mentor experiences with the program, as well as its
long-term impact on the career paths of the REU participants. Modifications to
the previous program cycle focus largely on implementing an expanded mentoring
program, creating more opportunities for interactions among students and with
local scientists, and targeted efforts to expand the pool and yield of minority
and "first generation" applicants.