* 1156061
* Conference:  Advances in Lubrication: Linking Molecular, Meso, and Machine Scales; Puntarenas, Costa Rica; 8-13 January 2012
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Gary Fischman
* 09/30/2012
* USD 12,000.00

This grant provides funds to support graduate students and junior researchers to
attend a conference entitled "Advances in Lubrication: Linking Molecular, Meso,
and Machine Scales," to be held in Puntarenas, Costa Rica, January 8-13, 2012.
The objective of this conference is to establish links from the nanoscale up
through the machine scale so that major advances in lubrication science may be
achieved and disseminated. All mechanical systems with moving, contacting parts
are subject to tribological interactions, and therefore lose energy. It has been
speculated that energetic and mechanical losses annually in the USA alone are at
least a few percentage of its GDP which corresponds to billions of dollars, and
that about 5% of the energy in an automobile is lost to friction. The control
and understanding of friction, lubrication, and wear is thus of extreme
importance, especially as energy, sustainability, and the environment become
major global concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together
approximately 70 scientists from a wide variety of fields (microscopy, molecular
modeling, surface science, automotive and space systems), disciplines (physics,
chemistry, materials science, biology, mechanical engineering), and interests
(biotribology and bio-inspired lubrication, tribochemistry, and even consumer
level tribology, such as shampoos, skis, and tissues) to stimulate discussion
and that will lead to major advances in the field. Two plenary speakers, six
additional invited speakers, and numerous contributed talks and posters will be
presented. The format is designed to allow ample time for discussion, questions,
and networking. Participants will range from academia to national laboratories
to industry. Pending further discussions with the publisher, a conference
proceedings will be published in the journal Tribology Letters. An executive
summary and final report will be prepared for the sponsor to document the
outcomes of the conference.