* 1156941
* CAREER: Health, Environmental Issues, and Price Effects in Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2011,01/31/2017
* Seema Jayachandran, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 01/31/2017
* USD 402,900.00

This proposal outlines an empirical research and teaching agenda in development
economics, focusing on three areas: price effects, human capital, and the
environment. In each of these areas, the proposed research models common
features of developing countries such as missing credit markets or limited
integration with world markets and then tests the predictions using household
data.&lt;br/&gt;The first area addressed by this proposal is price effects in
rural economies. The starting point is that villages are often isolated, semi-
closed economies. Thus, prices are determined by local supply and demand, and
policies that affect supply and demand can have important indirect effects
through prices. The proposed research examines the price effects of government
transfers to the poor in Mexico, comparing cash versus in-kind transfers. Inkind
transfers add supply to the economy, so they should reduce the price of the
transferred goods relative to if cash transfers were used. This pecuniary effect
can significantly enhance or diminish the net transfer to the poor, depending on
whether the poor are consumers or producers of the transferred
goods.&lt;br/&gt;The second area is human capital, with an emphasis on the
determinants of health. The themes of this research are how health is jointly
determined with fertility and marriage; how missing markets affect health; and
gender gaps in health. One proposed project examines the unintended effect that
access to contraception has on breastfeeding. The effect could be positive or
negative: Breastfeeding temporarily reduces fecundity so is a substitute for
modern birth control, but better birth control also allows women to space births
further apart and breastfeed the older child longer. This has important health
implications in poor countries because breastfeeding protects infants from
contaminated food and water. A second project examines the effect of cousin
marriage, which is common in Muslim societies, on the health of offspring. The
project also examines the economic benefits of cousin marriage; for example,
informal contracts between the bride and groom's families may be more
enforceable within extended families. Another project tests the hypothesis that
the reason mothers often invest more in children's human capital than fathers do
is that they receive more old age support from their children and hence earn a
higher return on investment in their children's human capital.&lt;br/&gt;The
third area addressed in this proposal is environmental degradation. Reducing
deforestation in developing countries is possibly one of the most cost-effective
ways to reduce global carbon emissions; forests store a large amount of carbon,
and the opportunity cost of averted deforestation in poor countries (e.g., less
land to cultivate crops) is relatively low. This research uses a randomized
experiment to study one approach to reducing deforestation: paying private
forest owners for avoiding deforestation on their land. In addition to assessing
the overall program effect, the research examines how the effectiveness of
incentive payments depends on the time profile of forest owners' opportunity
costs, which theoretically should be quite important when credit markets are
imperfect.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact&lt;br/&gt;This research has important policy
implications. The pecuniary effects of transfer programs are an important
consideration for policy makers choosing whether to deliver transfers in cash or
in-kind, particularly when the targeted communities are isolated from larger
markets. In the research on contraception, if we find that birth control
discourages breastfeeding, then as birth control becomes more available,
campaigns to encourage breastfeeding may become more important. Alternatively,
if contraception leads to a longer duration of breastfeeding, then the benefits
of family planning services may be larger than previously thought. The project
on cousin marriage will help policy makers to assess the health risks facing
Muslim populations and to design policies on genetic counseling in these
communities. Finally, the research on deforestation speaks to an important area
in environmental policy-making. Recently, the United Nations launched a major
initiative through which rich countries will pay poor countries for avoided
deforestation. This research will provide evidence on one promising way to
reduce deforestation, namely cash transfers to individuals that are conditional
on their not clearing their forest land.