* 1156582
* REU Site: MAA National Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* William Anthony Hawkins, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2015
* USD 566,484.00

In this award, the Mathematical Association of America (MAA), through its
Strengthening Underrepresented Minority Mathematics Achievement (SUMMA)
initiative, proposes to support the National Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Program (NREUP). NREUP fosters participation of mathematics
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in focused and challenging research
experiences. The need for increased participation of U.S. citizens in the
mathematical sciences requires that we identify and nurture students from
underrepresented groups, both to serve as professional mathematicians and to
serve as role models and mentors for future generations. With support of faculty
mentors and the focused peer-group experience shared by students participating
in this program, the MAA National Research Experience for Undergraduates program
encourages and supports broadened participation of these students in graduate
studies and careers in mathematics. Moreover, by supporting faculty at a diverse
group of institutions to direct summer research programs, this project
simultaneously supports the development of a community of skilled faculty
mentors who are expected to provide ever-increasing opportunities for
undergraduate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NREUP will continue its track
record of increasing students' interest in obtaining advanced degrees in
mathematics. SUMMA proposes to build on its experience in conducting NREUP in
Summers 2003 - 2011, which supported 368 student researchers at a total of 86
sites. NREUP is designed to reach minority students at a critical point in their
career path - midway through their undergraduate programs - through an
undergraduate professor with whom they have a strong connection. The program
reaches students at the transition point between lower division and upper
division studies. NREUP provides key components to encourage students to pursue
graduate studies and careers in mathematics: enriching and rewarding
mathematical experiences, mentoring by active researchers, and both intellectual
and social networking with peers.