* 1156890
* REU Site in Algebra, Analysis, Geometry, Matrix Theory and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Sivaram Narayan, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2015
* USD 283,537.00

The students in the REU Sites program at Central Michigan University will be
presented with open questions in several areas of mathematics, including
algebra, analysis, geometry, matrix theory, and statistics. Only a modest
mathematical background at the sophomore level will be needed to understand
research projects that will be investigated by teams of two or three students in
collaboration with a faculty advisor. We provide a brief overview of several of
the project topics. In the area of Combinatorial Matrix Theory, there is a
natural way to associate graphs to symmetric or Hermitian matrices. The general
problem is to determine the minimum rank among various classes of matrices
associated with a given graph. In the area of Linear Algebra, we present a
project called "Frames in Finite Dimensions." Frames are redundant spanning
sets. The open question is to find a method to construct frames with desirable
properties such as symmetry or sparsity or a given distribution of their angles
and lengths. A project in geometry studies the relationship between a surface
and its associated graph, as well as properties of its embedding into a
projective space. A project in statistics aims to classify the hazard
flexibility of parametric lifetime distributions based on total time on test
transform curve and to rank the well known one- and two-shape parameter lifetime
distributions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will learn mathematics beyond
what is needed for their research work. For example, students will be exposed to
some of the applications of frames. When a signal is transmitted over a channel
it is possible that some information may be lost during transmission and the
original signal cannot be recovered. The redundancy in frames makes it possible
to "reconstruct" the original signal. In the geometry problem students will come
to know the deep connection between Riemann surfaces, which are difficult to
understand, and combinatorial objects such as graphs, which are easier to
understand. Statistics projects will help students understand how to model data
and how to estimate certain parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this REU site is based on the challenging mathematical problems
students will attempt to solve. The students will tackle unsolved problems whose
solutions (or partial solutions) will improve human understanding of the very
structure of mathematics and its applications. Eleven faculty members will be
active in the three-year program. Four faculty mentors will coordinate the
effort each summer. Students will work in groups of two or three with one
faculty mentor. Students will make presentations of their progress during weekly
seminars. Each student will submit a written report at the end of the program.
Students will be encouraged to publish their work and make presentations at
professional meetings. The broader impact of the proposed REU site include
training undergraduates in research in fundamental mathematics, increasing the
participation of women and minorities in science and math activities, and
involving undergraduates as young professionals in the broader disciplinary
field.