* 1156703
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site: Ecology in Human-Dominated Landscapes
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Ann Rypstra, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/29/2016
* USD 392,617.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Miami University that will provide research training for 12 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2012-14. The program focuses on collaborative
research emphasizing ecological questions in landscapes influenced by human
activity. Students will conduct individual projects with the guidance of faculty
mentors and be part of research "clusters" consisting of 3-4 students and
mentors. Clusters form collaborative teams focused on themes that tie together
their individual research topics. Thus, students will have the opportunity to
work in multi-disciplinary research teams, structured similarly to research
groups solving real-world problems. One workshop will be offered in
collaboration with the Myaamia Project, a tribal initiative to enhance the
understanding of and appreciation for the history, language, and culture of the
pre-European people that occupied SW Ohio, which will enable students to explore
alternative relationships with the land that result in different approaches to
environmental problems. Another workshop will examine aspects of the scientific
profession, including careers in ecology, preparation and delivery of scientific
presentations, and responsible conduct in research. Students will also
participate in sessions on scientific and environmental ethics and field trips
to sites of local ecological interest. Finally, each student will present his or
her research as an oral presentation, an electronic poster, and a written paper
that will be developed into a manuscript for publication. The project will
recruit a diverse group of students including underrepresented minorities,
first-generation college students, and students from colleges with little
research opportunities. Students are selected based on academic record as well
as their interest in and potential for research. Students are tracked to
determine their further participation in academic study, their career paths, and
the lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common assessment
tool. Miami has a long and excellent history of involving undergraduates in
research and has excellent facilities for executing this REU site, including a
diverse array of human-dominated ecosystems (including a nearby field station),
and state-of-the-art laboratory facilities. More information is available by
visiting http://www.muohio.edu/ecoreu or by contacting Ann L. Rypstra
(513-785-3238 or rypstral@muohio.edu).