* 1156701
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Mathematics Research
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Fadil Santosa, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2015
* USD 244,126.00

This REU is an intensive six-week program on Research in Interdisciplinary
Mathematics. The program will be held at the Institute for Mathematics and its
Applications (IMA) at the University of Minnesota (UMN). Each summer, 12
students (9 NSF supported, 3 supported with non-NSF funds) will work in groups
of 4. Students will apply mathematical ideas to problems arising in other
disciplines. Three faculty members will be associated with each team: a Problem
Poser (PP), a Faculty Advisor (FA) and a Research Mentor (RM). The PP, who will
set the research question, will be a UMN researcher from a field such as
biostatistics, computer science, or electrical, biomedical or chemical
engineering. The FA, who will guide the research effort, will be a member of the
Macalester Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science. The RM,
who will consult with the group for two hours per day, will be a post-doctoral
fellow at the IMA with relevant domain expertise. Potential topics include
dynamics of laser systems, robotics pursuit algorithms, instability of thin
liquid films, modeling orthodontics, cell adhesion dynamics, and on-line
recommender systems. Students will employ techniques drawn from mathematical
modeling, differential equations, graph theory, discrete geometry, probability
and statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to allow the
students to experience, first hand, the excitement of doing research that is
relevant to another field. With problems coming from another discipline, the
students will need to learn how to formulate domain-specific questions in
mathematical ways. Students will work closely with three different faculty
members with diverse research experience. In addition to performing mathematical
research, students will also be immersed in the language of the other
disciplines, and they will assimilate the ability to communicate across
disciplines. The program will develop domain knowledge, mathematical skills and
expository argumentation. By the end of the summer, each team will produce a
written report, an oral presentation, and a poster. Each group will submit their
poster to the Joint Mathematics Meetings, or another appropriate national
conference. Additional information about the REU program can be found on the IMA
website: http://www.ima.umn.edu/