* 1156413
* NEESR-CR:  Seismically Induced Rock-Slope Failure: Mechanisms and Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/04/2010,08/31/2015
* Joseph Wartman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2015
* USD 950,713.00

&lt;br/&gt;This award is an outcome of the NSF 09-524 program solicitation
''George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
Research (NEESR)'' competition and includes Drexel University (lead institution)
and Montana Tech of The University of Montana (subaward). This project will
utilize the NEES equipment site at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
(RPI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide, seismically induced rock-slope failures
have been responsible for approximately 30% of the most significant landslide
catastrophes of the past century. They are among the most common, dangerous, and
still today, least understood of all seismic hazards. Rock-slope failures differ
fundamentally in two key respects from landslides in unconsolidated, soil
materials: (i) rock-slope stability is controlled principally by discontinuities
in the rock mass and (ii) owing to their potentially large volumes, high
velocities, long travel distances, and impact forces, the consequences of rock-
slope failures can be severe. These consequences routinely include burying of
roadways and canals, collapse of structures, and formation of landslide debris
dams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While earthquake-induced soil landslides have been
well studied, there is remarkably little fundamental research on the more common
and often more significant problem of rock-slope stability under seismic
conditions. The limited understanding of this topic largely relates to the
challenges of interpreting these complex, large displacement landslides in order
to gain a better understand the triggering processes. As a result, the current
state-of-the-practice for assessing the seismic stability of rock-slopes lags
behind that of soil slopes and typically involves either qualitative assessments
(i.e., relative hazard assessment using descriptive parameters) or highly
simplified quantitative analyses (i.e., pseudostatic methods). Neither of these
approaches captures the key mechanisms driving rock-slope failure, or the
consequences of failure. This research seeks to substantially advance the
fundamental understanding of the rock-slope failure process under seismic
conditions through a fully integrated program of physical and discrete element
method numerical simulations. The resulting improved knowledge will drive the
development of improved rock-slope failure assessment guidelines, analysis
procedures, and predictive tools. In addition to markedly improving the basic
understanding of seismic rock-slope failures, this research will drive the shift
from currently employed qualitative assessment procedures to modern performance-
and risk-based methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails
collaboration and student exchanges between a primarily undergraduate
institution, a research university, and an international partner, the
Universidad Polit√®cnica de Catalunya (UPC) in Barcelona, Spain. Other impacts of
this work include development of educational materials aimed at improving the
understanding of engineering and science among the general public, preparation
of modules for incorporating physical models in the engineering curriculum. Data
from this project will be archived and made available to the public through the
NEES data repository.&lt;br/&gt;