* 1156990
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Computer Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Mubarak Shah, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2015
* USD 359,770.00

This project represents a continuation of a Research Experience for
Undergraduates site in Computer Vision which has operated successfully at the
University of Central Florida for the past twenty four years. Approximately two
hundred and forty undergraduate students from forty-five institutions all over
the country have participated in this program over the years. The research focus
area is Computer Vision. The current proposal is to have 10 participants per
year, for three years. Each year, students will participate in a 12-week
duration full-time Summer program. From lessons learned in prior years, the
proposed model includes round-the-clock mentoring by a team that includes a
professor, and a post-doctoral fellow or a graduate student; a streamlined short
course that lets participants start their research projects sooner; daily
meetings with mentors to plan activities throughout the day; training in MatLab
for quick turnaround of research ideas. Participants take the short course,
match themselves to a project topic that they most desire, and spend sufficient
time in focused research. They then can opt for follow-through over the year by
working with the professors to write a technical report on their project, to
prepare for the GREs and to apply to graduate programs. In past years, a
substantial fraction of our REU participants have been able to prepare a paper
for submission to a refereed conference, have the paper accepted and then attend
the conference to present the paper.