* 1156627
* REU Site: Biological Responses to the Environment from Genes to the Ecosystem
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Richard Thomas, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2015
* USD 216,471.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to West
Virginia University that will provide research training for 10 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2012- 2013. West Virginia University has about 20
faculty who will serve as mentors. Participants have opportunities for research
training in ecology, environmental biology, geography, molecular biology or
genomics. Upon completion of the REU program, students will be better prepared
for future opportunities as graduate students and researchers in environmental
biology and ecology. Students are expected to do full-time research, as well as
participate in seminars and various workshops, such as the responsible conduct
in research, professional communication skills, career opportunities and the
graduate school application process. At the end of the 10-week program, all REU
students will present their research during a poster session that is similar in
many aspects to poster presentations at scientific meetings. REU participants
will have access to a rich array of individual mentor?s facilities, as well as
many interdepartmental labs with core facilities, such the WVU Core Genomics
facility. The program's recruitment effort consists primarily of digital-based
advertising, including using directed emails to faculty at regional colleges and
universities teaching in related fields. The program is open to all
undergraduate students enrolled in biology, geography, plant science or related
fields. Participants must be a rising junior or senior, and students are
selected based on academic record and potential for outstanding research in
environmental biology and ecology. Students are tracked to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the
lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common assessment
tool. More information is available by visiting http://biology.wvu.edu/nsf-reu,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Thomas at rthomas@wvu.edu).