* 1156550
* REU Site:  3D Invertebrate Herbivory and Biodiversity in Deciduous North American Forest Canopies: Inspiring Students with Physical Disabilities to Pursue Field Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* William Miller, Baker University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2015
* USD 189,251.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to Baker
University in collaboration with the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences
to provide research training for 8 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of
2013 &amp; 2014. The research focus is on the three dimensional spatial and
temporal variability of plant-invertebrate interactions in a temperate deciduous
forest canopy. The PI team will train and supervise the students' accent into
the canopy and their collection of tardigrades and leaves which will be
measured, tested, and analyzed in the new Baker Ecology Laboratory. Students are
trained in field ecology from the experimental design stage to a publishable
manuscript. Students will participate in classes, seminars, and workshops on
subjects such as responsible conduct in research, scanning electron microscopy,
geographical information systems, professional communication skills, single rope
technique climbing, exposure to career opportunities in academia, museums, and
industry, and the graduate school application process. Students will also be
exposed to local industries, governmental agencies, and the Konza Long-Term
Ecological Research site. REU students will learn to use remote access tools to
monitor the environment, communicate with experts, and develop scholarly
publications. The program's recruitment effort includes traditional "hard copy"
formats, e-mail and Facebook digital advertising, and direct contact with
organizations for students and veterans with disabilities. The program is
designed to accommodate students with ambulatory disabilities, expected to
comprise about 50% of the cohort. Students will be selected based on academic
record, desire to learn field biology, and potential for outstanding research in
field or ecological biology. Students will be tracked to determine activity in
their academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of
the research experience. The program will be assessed by the REU Common
Assessment Tool in addition to other tools. More information is available by
visiting http://canopy.naturalsciences.org , or by contacting PI (Dr. William
Miller at William.Miller@BakerU.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Meg Lowman or Dr. Elzie
McCord at canopymeg@gmail.com).