* 1156407
* REU Site:  Research Experience for Undergraduate Minorities in Marine and Environmental Sciences.
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Peter Kingsley-Smith, South Carolina Department of Natural Resources
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2014
* USD 58,550.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the South Carolina
Department of Natural Resources located in Charleston, SC will host five
students during a 12-week summer internship program. The Minorities in Marine
and Environmental Sciences (MIMES) Program will provide a great breadth of
laboratory and field-based research expertise to these undergraduate students
who will be recruited from across the nation. This site has a proven track
record of incorporating expert mentors, facilities, equipment and experiences
from the closely situated Federal and state research institutions that comprise
the Marine Resources Center at Fort Johnson, Charleston, South Carolina.
Students will be required to design and complete rigorous, independent mentor-
guided research projects. Furthermore, students will attend classes on
statistics, scientific writing, and presentation skills to train them for
successful future careers in the marine and environmental sciences. As final
products of the program, students will be required to prepare both a written
final report and an oral presentation on the findings from their projects. Oral
presentations will be given as part of a day-long research colloquium. Following
the program, students are encouraged to attend a professional meeting or
conference to present their work.