* 1156761
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Computational Algebraic Geometry, Combinatorics, and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* James Brown, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2015
* USD 238,691.00

This REU is a collaborative effort between Clemson University and Spelman
College. Undergraduate students who have a solid background in mathematics are
invited to apply for an eight-week research experience in computational
algebraic geometry, number theory and combinatorics to be held at Clemson
University. Preference for up to four of these positions will be given to
qualified applicants who have roots in the Southeastern United States. In
addition, two of the participants will be undergraduates from Spelman College.
The participants will be offered up to $500 in travel support, a dorm room to be
shared with other participants in the REU, up to $800 for meals and a stipend of
$3,400 in return for their participation in this program.

Participants will be introduced to various tools, techniques and problems from
computational algebraic geometry, number theory, and combinatorics. Faculty will
present several potential research problems the first week of the REU. The
participants will divide themselves into teams of two to four participants and
pick one of the problems presented on which to focus for the remainder of the
REU. The goal of the program is to help students attain a higher level of
independence in mathematical research by giving them the opportunity to take
part in a significant and interesting research project. Guidance will be
provided on giving effective presentations, applying to graduate schools, and
other topics of interest to the participants. The teams will write up a final
report summarizing their research findings before leaving the program. They will
also be encouraged to publish papers based upon their work when appropriate.
Students will be encouraged to attend appropriate conferences and present their
work. In addition to the faculty research mentors, our program provides vertical
integration as graduate students will help mentor the undergraduate students. As
a complement to working on their research, students will attend a weekly lecture
series. These lectures will be given by faculty that been recognized as leaders
in the various fields related to the students' research problems and who have
demonstrated the ability to clearly communicate mathematical ideas to audiences
of varying levels of mathematical maturity.