* 1156741
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary REU in the Structure and Function of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Cherie Dotson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2013
* USD 101,124.00

The University of Michigan Interdisciplinary REU Site will provide a research
program for ten undergraduates during the summer of 2012. The students will
participate in a ten-week interdisciplinary research program focused on studies
involving the structure and function of proteins. Student participants will
engage in intensive hands-on experimental training and independent investigation
in the areas of biochemistry, biophysics, marine biology, molecular biology and
plant biology. In addition to research, students will participate in a series of
weekly enrichment seminars focusing on scientific communication, graduate school
application process, the ethical conduct of research, and scientific career
options. Opportunities for integration into the university research community
will be provided through periodic networking activities and field trips -- with
REU faculty mentors, graduate students, and undergraduate students from other
campus summer research programs. The overall REU experience will promote student
persistence in the STEM disciplines at the undergraduate, graduate and post-
graduate levels. Students will be recruited from across the nation while
maintaining an emphasis on providing research opportunities to women,
underrepresented minorities, and students from institutions with limited
resources for research. Rising sophomores, juniors or seniors majoring in
biochemistry, biology, and biophysics or a related discipline will be eligible
for participation in the program. Students from outside the host institution
will be given priority, as University of Michigan students have ample
opportunities to conduct research outside of the REU program. All participants
will receive on-campus housing, meal and travel allowances, and a stipend. The
program will be assessed by using the common REU assessment tool available at
the BIO REU website (www.bioreu.org). Students will be tracked annually over at
least five years after completion of the program to determine the long term
impact of the REU experience. Additional information is available at:
http://pharmacy.umich.edu/reu, or by contacting the Program Co-Directors: Dr.
Cherie R. Dotson (crdotson@umich.edu / 734-615-6562) or Dr. Ronald W. Woodard
(rww@umich.edu / 734-764-7366).