* 1156229
* STTR Phase II:  Using Nanoparticle Oxide Coatings to Extend Cycle Life of Cathode Materials in Lithium-Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Walter Zeltner, SolRayo, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2014
* USD 555,991.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to
increase the cycle life of cathode materials used in lithium-ion batteries by a
factor of ten in high-temperature applications by applying protective nanoporous
ceramic coatings. SolRayo will investigate the effects that changing several
variables that control the nanoporous structure of ceramic coatings have on the
cycle life of cathode materials. Such variables include the amount or thickness
of the coating, the pH of the suspension of the coating material, the deposition
of layers of different ceramic materials on the cathodes, and different methods
for depositing the coatings on the cathodes. The materials to be investigated
will include TiO2, ZrO2 and others proposed by our industrial
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are that, if
successful, this project will improve the cycle life of lithium-ion batteries
and allow inherently safer and less expensive materials to be employed. Although
lithium-ion batteries have gained wide acceptance in consumer electronic
products, their use in other markets has been limited by their lifetimes and
safety concerns, particularly in applications at higher temperatures. Improving
the lifetime and safety of the materials used in these batteries will enhance
their market penetration. Preliminary cost estimates indicate that licensing the
coated materials to industry could provide approximately $100 million annually
in royalties on sales. This work will also benefit the nation by improving our
understanding of nanoparticle coating techniques suitable for a variety of
energy storage applications.