* 1156273
* REU Site: California State University, Fresno Research Experiences in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Oscar Vega, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2016
* USD 237,307.00

The Department of Mathematics at the California State University, Fresno (CSU
Fresno) will host an eight week long REU for eight students during the summers
of 2012 and 2013. During both years, two faculty mentors will be working with 4
students each. The research topics for each summer will be selected from the
following: the location of zeros of analytic functions, stability preserving
operators, and multiplier sequences; knot and link labelings; embeddings of
graphs in finite planes; and survival analysis and modeling survival data. To
equip the students with the necessary tools, they will be given a series of
introductory lectures related to their research topic. Students will then work
on the assigned research problems individually, as well as in groups.
Participants will be required to write a summary research report suitable for
publication, and will give weekly oral presentations while maintaining
increasingly strict professional standards. Research activities will be
complemented by guest lectures, excursions and informal gatherings.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Students will be working on open research problems in mathematics.
The mentoring faculty is actively involved in research in the proposed areas and
has extensive experience in mentoring undergraduate research projects. Many of
the past projects have led to conference presentations and publications in
research journals. The REU aims to have at least half of the participants be
underrepresented minority students, as two of the faculty are also mentors for
the National Alliance for Doctoral Studies in the Mathematical Sciences, which
promotes minority participation in doctoral programs in mathematics. By
providing all participants with a research environment cognizant of different
cultural backgrounds, students will have a meaningful and encouraging experience
to supplement their undergraduate education. In addition, the REU will provide
all students with computer and research skills, which are widely applicable in
the scientific workplace.