* 1156475
* REU Site: Research in Networking and Networks with Applications to Sustainability
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Brendan Mumey, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 02/29/2016
* USD 359,640.00

This funding establishes a new CISE Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site at Montana State University focused on networking and networks with
applications for sustainability. Each summer a cohort of undergraduate students
will participate in a ten-week summer research program at the host institution.
The project includes mentoring by the experienced computer science faculty
members, technical seminars and workshops, student presentations, and field
trips and other professional development opportunities. The REU Site program
will target high-quality undergraduate American Indian students, students from
tribal colleges, and students from small colleges with limited resources.
Recruitment efforts will focus on computer science and engineering students as
well as students from environmental science and other related disciplines. This
site is co-funded by the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in
strong research basis and the expertise of the faculty. The projects are in
research areas that are current and address national priorities such as
networking and sensor networks. The students participate in a full range of
research activities from preparing research literature reviews to production and
dissemination of research results. The project has the potential to add to the
research base of networking systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of the project include providing a quality research experience to undergraduate
students, particularly students from underrepresented groups. The project team
is committed to including under-represented minority students in their research.
Thus this project has the potential to produce new computer science graduate
students and faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding while
promoting learning.