* 1156372
* Advances and Applications in Bayesian Density Regression
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Victoria Chou, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2016
* USD 280,000.00

In many areas of empirical research, regression models often are used to make
predictions in order to answer questions that aim to advance research and
society. Such advancements hinge critically on accurate predictions. Commonly
used regression models, however, can yield inaccurate predictions because they
make questionable assumptions that often are violated by data. Questionable
assumptions include that the dependent variable has linear relationships with
the predictor variables, that the variance of the dependent variable does not
change with the predictor variables, and that the dependent variable and random
predictor effects are normally distributed. This research will investigate and
develop a Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) regression model that allows the entire
distribution (density) of the dependent variable to change flexibly and
nonlinearly with the predictor variables. The BNP model will be defined by a
predictor-dependent infinite mixture of unimodal distributions, with each
unimodal distribution modeled by an infinite mixture of uniform distributions. A
prior distribution on all parameters will complete the specification of the BNP
model. The BNP regression model and a multi-level version of the model will be
applied to analyze at least three large data sets: (1) to evaluate the effect of
a new teacher education curriculum on the basic skills of its students; (2) to
study the conditions under which urban school students find texts meaningful to
read; and (3) to study the predictors of heritability of antisocial behavior in
a meta-regression analysis. Furthermore, the performance of the BNP regression
model will be evaluated through the analysis of many simulated data sets for a
wide range of data-generating conditions. For all the real and simulated data
sets, it is expected that the BNP model will show better predictive accuracy and
will provide more scientific insights when compared with other regression models
in common use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will advance
statistical science through the development and thorough investigation of a
novel BNP regression model. This model is expected to outperform other
regression models that currently are used for making predictions. Through the
analysis of the three large data sets, the research will advance knowledge and
scientific understanding of important societal issues, including best practices
for K-12 math, science, and literacy education and the treatment of youth with
emotional and behavioral disabilities. Finally, for a broad audience of
researchers, this project will provide user-friendly software for performing
data analysis with the BNP regression model. This will help further promote more
accurate answers to research questions that are important to society.