* 1156274
* Risk Management and Governance Issues in Shale Gas Development
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Paul Stern, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2014
* USD 300,019.00

People and their communities, as well as animals and the environment, face many
potential risks from the process of hydraulic fracturing (fracking) to extract
natural gas. Risk characterization for shale gas development may fuel mistrust
because it does not now follow best risk-analytic practices, which involve
representing the perspectives of the range of interested and affected parties
throughout the process. The nation may be headed toward a pattern of
confrontation over fracking that could undermine goals for both energy
production and environmental protection. Moreover, current governmental
environmental protection institutions may be unequal to the tasks of managing
the risks presented by fracking. The research that has been done so far on these
risks is almost entirely technologically oriented, but this project will bring
together researchers from a range of environmental, health, economic, social,
and decision sciences to analyze the governance challenges of shale gas
development. New synergies and ideas are urgently needed in the design of
governance systems that can work in an era of declining capacity in government
institutions. This study will draw on research on the governance of newly
emerging risks and will expose ideas from that research to critiques from
practitioners and stakeholders who can bring practical experience to
bear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This National Research Council project involves two
workshops that address (1) the characterization of the full variety of risks
(social, environmental, and technological), and (2) the governance issues
associated with those risks. This project will point the way to a risk-analytic
approach aimed at more adequately informing public choices; suggest governance
models that hold promise for meeting the challenges of environmental protection
in an era of declining regulatory capacity; and direct attention of the energy
policy community to the need to include fundamental social challenges (not just
technological ones) in the development of policies and best practices. Papers
and presentations from the workshops are publicly available; additionally, a
report identifies the range of risk analysis and management questions worthy of
future evaluation and research-based options for governance that could be
applied to meet those risks.