* 1156900
* REU Site:   Undergraduate Research Program in Genomics, Proteomics and Bioinformtics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Ramesh Katam, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2017
* USD 269,172.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Florida A&amp;M University that will provide research training for 8 students
for 10 weeks, during the summers of 2012-2015. This program focuses on the use
of basic tools in genomics, proteomics and bioinformatics to address important
biological questions. A multidisciplinary team of faculty from the disciplines
of biology, agricultural sciences, and chemistry will serve as mentors. REU
students will conduct full time lab research, as well as participate in seminars
and workshops on topics like the responsible conduct of research, professional
development, career opportunities, and the graduate school application process.
The program also includes visits to the University of Florida core facility and
others to broaden student's exposure to cutting-edge instrumentation and
techniques. Example projects include the genetic engineering of plants to impart
resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses, the molecular and cellular studies to
understand plant defense mechanism against attack by pathogens, using proteomics
to elucidate protein functions, the study of gene expression in plant
development, and others. Recruitment of students will utilize "hard copy" as
well as digital-based advertising. Students will be selected based on their
academic record, faculty recommendations, and research interest. Students will
be tracked to determine their continued interest in their area of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influence of the research experience. The program
will be evaluated using the REU common assessment tool found at www.bioreu.org.
More information can be found by visiting http://www.famu.edu/index.cfm?REU, or
by contacting the PI, Dr. Virginia Gottschalk (virginia.gottschalk@famu.edu,
850-561-2750) or the co-PI, Dr. Ramesh Katam (ramesh.katam@gmail.com,
850-559-3134).