* 1156145
* Collaborative Research: Determining the Field Metabolic Rate of Marine Predators: Integrating Accelerometry and Respirometry to Bridge the Gap Between the Laboratory and the Field
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Samuel Gruber, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 03/31/2015
* USD 127,621.00

Energetics is a central theme in ecology, and metabolism may be the primary
factor determining the structure of biological systems as a whole. Despite the
importance of top level predators in marine ecosystems and the need to
understand the impact of their global population declines, surprisingly little
is known about energy flow in upper trophic levels. This gap in knowledge is due
to the difficulty of assessing the metabolic rate of marine predators and our
inability to link experimentally derived metabolic rates to those of free-
ranging animals in their natural habitat. Novel accelerometry technology is now
making this link possible for the first time. Because Overall Dynamic Body
Acceleration (ODBA) has been shown to correlate closely with oxygen consumption
in numerous vertebrate taxa, we can use this potentially transformational
technique to derive time-energy budgets for free-ranging marine
predators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This study will integrate
the use of respirometry and accelerometry technology to bridge the gap between
laboratory- and field-based metabolic rates for three species of sharks with
different behaviors. The PIs will conduct respirometry experiments on
accelerometer-equipped animals in the laboratory to determine the relationship
between metabolic rate and ODBA for each species over a range of swim speeds and
water temperatures. Using these relationships, the PIs will then conduct field
experiments using accelerometry to calculate the absolute energetic expenditure
of sharks in their natural habitat over several days. Because accelerometers
also provide data with which specific shark behaviors can be quantified, the PIs
will be able to partition between standard and active metabolic rate and
determine how the relationship changes at varying temperatures. This aspect will
have implications for predicting how seasonal or long-term changes in sea
surface temperatures are likely to affect the impact of ectothermic predators on
their prey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will provide data
and a new methodology for estimating energy demands of sharks in their natural
environments following natural patterns of behavior. This is an important step
in calculating the trophic effects of sharks on other components of ecosystems,
and thereby also calculating the consequences of shark declines. This work will
be the basis of student intern projects through the Mote Marine Laboratory's
(MML's) ongoing NSF-REU Program, which provides research experiences to U.S.
college students with a special focus on minority groups underrepresented in
science and engineering. The PIs are involved in a unique collaboration with
Untamed Science to film their work and use it to illustrate science concepts for
chapter-specific films which will allow their work to reach millions of K-12
students nationwide. This project will also fund a creative way of connecting
with the general public through a new exhibit at MML's public aquarium (with
approximately 400,000 visitors per year). This capitalizes on the broad public
interest in sharks and allows visitors to control a digital shark using an
accelerometer-based videogame controller. Shark energy level will be depleted by
excessive tailbeats and replenished by feeding events, and visitors will have to
balance the value of feeding success against the cost of higher ODBA and rapid
energy depletion.