* 1156588
* Safe Global Water(SGW): Building Partnerships for Sustainable Global Access to Safe Water and Sanitation
* ENG,EFMA
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Benito Marinas, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2013
* USD 49,000.00

ABSTRACT The international workshop on Safe Global Water(SGW): Building
Partnerships for Sustainable Global Access to Safe Water and Sanitation will
address the global challenge of fostering the economic growth of the most
impoverished one billion people of the world by improving their quality of life
and productivity through access to safe water for human consumption and food
security, and sanitation for resource recovery (energy, nutrients) and revenue
generation. To achieve this, the SGW workshop will bring together an
unprecedented global coalition of researchers from social and natural sciences,
and engineering coupled with global stakeholders and practitioners from
government and international agencies, non-governmental organizations, and
industry. The following workshop objectives are highly resonant with EFRI: (1)
Explore effective strategies based on cutting edge research co-located at U.S.
and target nations to make revolutionary advances in science and technology in
safe water and sanitation while simultaneously building capacity into higher
education institutions; and (2) Explore innovative approaches to impact
technology design, acceptance, and sustainability through integrated
multinational teams of engineers partnered with social and natural scientists.
The SGW international workshop will bring stakeholders from around the world to
address the challenges of providing safe water and sanitation to developing
countries and emerging communities. This challenge can only be addressed with
transformational advances in safe water and sanitation technologies that are
developed for the socio-cultural contexts in which they will be used. Such
advances require a global coalition of strategically selected academic,
entrepreneurial, industrial, practitioner, governmental, and NGO partners. This
workshop will form the foundation upon which existing and new partnerships can
be grown. Having all of the stakeholders, academic and otherwise, together for
an intensive workshop will allow a new paradigm in safe water and sanitation
solutions that will be technically and socially sustainable. This international
gathering of research and policy leaders with a vested interest in Safe Global
Water will represent: universities, national agencies, international
organizations, non-governmental organizations, industry, and graduate students.
This workshop will have at its focus an unprecedented engagement of basic
scientists, engineers, social scientists, policy makers, and stakeholders to
create a plan to solve the technical SGW needs of the target countries while
simultaneously building human capacity and micro-marketplaces within locally
sustainable socio-cultural contexts. The targeted outcome of the workshop to
formulate and initiate research on safe global water and sanitation at the
boundaries of basis science, engineering, and social sciences through higher
education based international collaborations is a paradigm shift that will lead
to fundamental advances in the understanding of safe water and sanitation issues
while also producing an interdisciplinary and international education
environment that will better prepare U.S. students for working in the ever
growing global research context.