* 1156740
* REU Site:  Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences - Undergraduate Research Experience in the Gulf of Maine and the World Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,09/30/2015
* David Fields, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2015
* USD 322,668.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)Site program is located at the
Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences (BLOS), West Boothbay Harbor ,ME. The
program will support eight students during a ten week summer research program.
The goals of this REU Program are i) to provide undergraduate students from
around the United States mentoring and access to high quality, hands on research
opportunities in lower trophic level Oceanography, ii) expose students to skills
and knowledge required for a successful professional science career, and iii) to
increase the participation of underrepresented minorities in marine science
careers. Bigelow Laboratory scientists have expertise in chemical and biological
oceanography, mathematics, bio-optics, satellite-oceanography, microscopy,
genomics, molecular, organismal and population biology, fisheries and air-sea
gas exchange. REU students will be incorporated into a research group consisting
of technicians, post-docs, and junior and senior scientists, gaining exposure to
the suite of activities and responsibilities involved in a science career.
Students will be housed at the McKee House on campus and conduct research in two
new buildings that are currently under construction. The program is structured
as a "hands-on" research opportunity for motivated young scientists in their
last 2 years of formal undergraduate training. REU students at Bigelow conduct
independent research projects on a broad array of topics in ocean science and as
a group they receive training in scientific ethics, laboratory safety and
oceanographic sampling techniques. The program includes weekly meetings during
which students develop and discuss all stages of their research projects, from
identifying a tractable research question, posing testable hypotheses, drafting
a proposal, and conducting their study, to communicating their findings both
orally and in writing. At the end of the summer, REU students present their
results during the last week at a student research symposium and a research
poster session. All students are encouraged to present their results at
professional meetings in the year or two following the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support provided by NSF includes funding for student
stipends, student travel to and from the site, student housing and meals and
some administrative costs.