* 1156745
* REU site: Advancing polymer materials by integrating chemistry and chemical engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Stephen Boyes, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2015
* USD 327,905.00

Intellectual Merit This three year REU site program at the Colorado School of
Mines will engage 10 undergraduate students each year in research focused in the
area of novel polymer materials related to cutting-edge technologies like fuel
cells and solar materials. The overall objectives of the REU site program are:
1) engage and educate students in polymer science and engineering; 2) emphasize
diversity in research teams with respect to experience (from faculty to
freshmen, non-Ph.D. granting institutions, etc.), gender, and ethnicity; and 3)
quantify successes of the program through assessment, including number of
participants earning their Bachelors degrees; presentations at national and
regional meetings, and publications in peer reviewed journals.

A unique feature of this REU program is the exchange program which will allow
the students to experience another research lab during the second half of the
summer. Additionally, a series of technical workshops will provide the students
with a broad introduction to polymer science and engineering. Furthermore, a
complimentary set of workshops will cover professional skills development. At
the end of each summer, the students will prepare and present posters on their
research accomplishments.

Broader Impacts This REU site program will encompass research in polymer science
and engineering while targeting highly qualified chemistry and chemical
engineering students from diverse backgrounds. The student-learning outcomes of
the project focus on engaging and creating enthusiasm for science and
engineering. The research has direct ramification to the Army's fuel cell
program. The proposed REU site program will target highly qualified chemistry
and chemical engineering students from diverse backgrounds.