* 1156666
* REU Site:  Fundamental Research in Chemistry Addressing Biological Problems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* John Snyder, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) at the National Science Foundation support a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by Professors John K. Snyder and
Linda H. Doerrer both at Boston University (BU). The research projects supported
in this site are in areas of basic chemical research that addresses biological
problems. REU students can choose from among 27 groups in BU's Departments of
Chemistry, Biology, or Physics. They will work in newly renovated laboratories,
have access to the synthetic and computational resources of BU's leading
research centers, and be trained on state-of-the art instrumentation. The goal
of the program is to provide undergraduates from 4-year colleges and community
colleges who have limited or no research opportunities at their home
institutions with an intensive, interdisciplinary research experience. The
demographic aim is to have at least 50% of the students to be underrepresented
minorities and at least 50% to be women. The program will also give preference
to veterans applying from the target institutions. By fully integrating the REU
students into the daily life of the laboratories and through mentoring by
faculty, graduate students, and postdoctoral research associates, the REU
students will fully experience the breadth of chemistry
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research theme of basic research in
the chemical sciences addressing biological problems represents one of the most
important interdisciplinary scientific fields today. Advances in this area have
implications for the life sciences, medicinal discoveries, and, ultimately,
quality of life. The objective of this REU program site is to motivate students
to pursue careers in the chemical sciences addressing societal problems in
biology and molecular biology. It will especially focus on offering research
opportunities for underrepresented minorities. Boston University has the
necessary personnel and infrastructure to allow REU participants to be immersed
in a genuine research environment. BU also has dedicated faculty who are eager
to devote the necessary time and energy to mentor students from 4-year colleges
and community colleges who do not have such research opportunities at their home
institutions.