* 1156870
* REU Site: Intensive Mentored Research Experience for Undergraduates in Clinical, Cognitive, and Behavioral Neuroscience at an Urban Public College
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Deborah Walder, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2015
* USD 291,209.00

The objective of the Neuroscience Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at Brooklyn College (BC) is to immerse diverse students in innovative
research on clinical, cognitive, and behavioral neuroscience. Twelve students
are selected annually for mentored research projects, especially undergraduates
at ethnic-minority serving, public two-year and four-year institutions in the
New York metropolitan area where the PIs have identified a need for such
programming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central component is a semester-long laboratory immersion under the close
supervision of BC Psychology Department faculty mentors who have experience
working with diverse students, which results in a completed research project.
The Department offers a vibrant and highly collaborative research and teaching
environment, and the faculty utilizes multiple approaches to understanding
brain-behavior relationships. The REU site students are exposed to a variety of
behavioral, neuroscientific, and computational methods to address their
individual research topics. Students attend a weekly seminar that presents an
overview of basic neuroscience principles and domain-specific topics relevant to
research conducted in laboratories of core REU faculty. The seminar also address
professional issues, including a module on ethics. In addition, students
participate in a journal club and attend colloquia in which speakers from
outside the Department present cutting-edge neuroscience research and
applications. As a capstone experience, students present a poster at the annual
Brooklyn College Science Research Day, where they compete with other
undergraduates for awards based on the quality of their work and ability to
communicate their findings. Some students also have the opportunity to assist in
the preparation of a poster for presentation at a national scientific research
meeting and/or a peer-reviewed manuscript. The PI team emphasizes the generation
of high quality research and integration of psychological theory with the
design, execution, and interpretation of neuroscientific data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site
advances neuroscience discovery for the scientific and broader communities while
promoting mentoring, learning, and professional development. The specific
objectives are to: (1) increase participation of students from underrepresented
groups (e.g., women, racial minorities, first-generation college students,
veterans returning from active duty) in the field of neuroscience; (2) guide
students through the scientific process, from generation of viable research
questions to communicating study results; (3) immerse students in relevant
didactics that complement their laboratory work and highlight its relevance and
applied value; and (4) provide knowledge, skills, and exposure to leading
neuroscience research, as well as opportunities for students to make
contributions to this research, to enhance their competitiveness for graduate
school or professional positions. Strong institutional support from BC of the
City University of New York and clearly defined criteria for self-evaluation
ensure that the PI team meets their stated goals. Importantly, this REU Program
enables BC faculty members to supervise talented undergraduates, who might
otherwise miss out on mentored laboratory and professional development
experiences, and contribute to the training and advancement of the next
generation of neuroscientists.