* 1156906
* REU Site: Simulation and Analysis at South Dakota State University
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Jung-Han Kimn, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 10/31/2016
* USD 311,869.00

The South Dakota State University Simulation and Analysis REU program will focus
on simulation and analysis techniques in the context of mathematics and
statistics, electrical engineering, and mechanical engineering. Participating
undergraduate students will gain a broad perspective of the theory and
application of simulations, including the generation and validation of realistic
physical models, the estimation of model parameters, and the prediction of
salient physical phenomena. The student scholars will engage in research in
computational fluid dynamics, photovoltaics, statistics, and computational
sciences as they learn how mathematical models represent physical phenomena, how
simulation methods are selected and implemented, and how simulation results are
analyzed, interpreted, and utilized to gain insight into theoretical and applied
problems. Research projects will involve 1) simulation tools in the context of
engineering design and analysis; 2) state-of-the-art research tools in
electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, nanoscience, and computation; 3)
statistical analysis based on real datasets and simulations; and 4) advanced
numerical methods including parallel algorithms. This program will foster
critical capabilities in young researchers through its emphasis on
interdisciplinary research, publication, and scholarly presentations, as well as
the responsible conduct of research. Skilled graduate assistant mentors will
assist REU student scholars while advancing their own research agendas. In
addition to conducting state-of-the-art research on current concerns, each
undergraduate student will participate in a series of four integrated research
ethics seminars and have the opportunity to attend at least one conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to construct, simulate, and analyze physical
models is a critical aspect of modern scientific research and a skill of
significant value in the 21st century workforce. Despite this need, many recent
graduates do not possess the skills necessary to create and implement models
appropriately. Competencies that students find particularly challenging include
the generation and validation of realistic physical models, the estimation of
model parameters, and the prediction of salient physical phenomena. This REU
program will cultivate such competencies by engaging undergraduate students in
hands-on research under the guidance of graduate student mentors and faculty
advisors. The objectives of the program are to enhance undergraduates? abilities
to conduct innovative and ethical research and to learn and think independently,
thereby improving their preparation for professional careers. This program will
further contribute to workforce development by not only encouraging
undergraduate students to pursue graduate degrees in STEM fields, but also by
increasing participation from under-represented populations. The program
director will recruit a diverse pool of talented undergraduate participants from
minority groups, veterans returning from active duty, and students enrolled in
smaller regional colleges with limited research opportunities. The training,
mentoring, research experience, and professional development provided by this
REU program will attract and retain talented students to the STEM fields and
will contribute to the development of an internationally competitive science and
engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly sponsored by
NSF's Division of Mathematical Sciences and Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).