* 1156633
* US-Jordan Cooperative Science: Chaos Theory on Micro-Inverters for Photovoltaic (PV) Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

Research Objectives and Approaches: The objectives of this research are to
develop key enabling technologies that will facilitate the design of three-port
micro invertors which are able to convert DC power from conventional
photovoltaic (PV) grid-connected systems into acceptable AC power. The approach
is three-fold - (1) Investigating circuit operation and power stage design
considerations of three-port micro invertors (2) Performing digital control
design and studying the stability of the proposed three-port micro invertors by
means of modern nonlinear theory (bifurcation and chaos theory), (3) Developing
proper modeling procedures tailored to derive the small signal model of the
three-port micro inverter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
research focuses on creating new concepts of three-port micro inverters,
topology optimization, small signal modeling techniques, digital control, and
nonlinear analysis. The aim is to reduce power losses and generate clean energy
with greater efficiency. The research aims to investigate novel approaches to
current energy conversion challenges, while satisfying the standard requirements
of regular utility grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Renewable energy
sources and associated energy conversion technologies are imperative for a
sustainable and prosperous future. The proposed research would improve the
fundamental understanding of key technologies in power converter design,
manufacture, and application. Not only would this research offer an innovative,
cost-effective method for the generation of power anywhere in the world and thus
contribute to universal economic and social development, but would also
strengthen the power electronics curricula at the University of Central Florida
(UCF) and Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) and attract the
best students to the promising field of alternative energies.