* 1156625
* REU Site Proposal: Environmental research supporting management of coastal barriers and estuaries in North Carolina altered by human activities and climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Charles Peterson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2015
* USD 264,580.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the University of
North Carolina's Institute of Marine Sciences (IMS), located in Morehead City,
NC will support a total of 8 students each year during a 10 week summer research
program. Students will design, conduct, and interpret individual research
projects that articulate with research focusing on environmental studies in
coastal North Carolina. Sustaining ecosystem services of coastal habitats, while
maintaining social and economic uses of these areas, requires a thorough
understanding of the relevant natural processes as well as the consequences of
specific anthropogenic activities. Extensive human habitation and visitation to
coastal barriers and nearby estuaries has illustrated the problems associated
with uses of these habitats without providing insight in choosing among
alternative management strategies. IMS has a decades-long history of conducting
research in coastal regions that has proved useful to policy makers. Students
will continue that effort at several locations in coastal North Carolina
including the U.S. Marine Corps base at Camp Lejeune where environmental
management of the base faces all the problems seen in other coastal regions,
with the added challenge of maintaining military training activities without
degrading the integrity of the base's natural resources. At the end of the
summer, REU students present their results during a student research symposium
and write a research paper. Support provided by NSF includes funding for student
stipends, student travel to and from the site, student housing and meals and
some administrative costs.