* 1156688
* REU Site: Complex Human and Water Dynamics - An Interdisciplinary Research Experience at the Virginia Tech StREAM Lab
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* William Hession, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2015
* USD 314,289.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This three year REU site program at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute will provide students with a unique interdisciplinary
research experience within an urbanizing watershed system in southwestern
Virginia. Virginia Tech's Stream Research, Education, and Management Laboratory
(StREAM Lab) will serve as the focal point for several interconnected group
research projects dealing with issues of water sustainability and environmental
stewardship. The Town of Blacksburg and Virginia Tech's campus are the primary
upland sources of pollutant loadings to this otherwise largely forested and
agricultural receiving water, providing students with the opportunity to
directly observe the effects of urban stormwater on stream hydrology and water
quality. As the REU participants address their specific research questions, they
will be mentored by interdisciplinary faculty groups, which will provide them
with a rich perspective on their target issues, as well as extensive networking
opportunities. The undergraduate students will be encouraged to develop critical
thinking and communication skills through a series of "Society and Science"
evening lectures and discussions, and through the guided design of outreach
activities intended to engage minority young children in summer science
camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This REU site program will
provide students with the interdisciplinary background necessary to address
complex water sustainability issues during their future careers. In addition to
exposing students to the diversity of related research in this area, this
project will provide students with opportunities to communicate and interact
with various stakeholders and the general public. Recruiting efforts will be
guided by Virginia Tech's Center for Enhancement of Engineering Diversity (CEED)
with a focus on recruiting students from non-research intensive institutions.