* 1156056
* SHINE: Injection, Acceleration and Transport of Solar Energetic Particles Produced by the Coronal Mass Ejection (CME) Shock
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Ming Zhang, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 03/31/2017
* USD 362,407.00

The Principal Investigator's (PI's) team will calculate the injection and
acceleration of solar energetic particles (SEPs) caused by shock wave events
associated with coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The proposing team will use a
three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic model of CME shocks to trace the evolution
of these shock waves in a realistic manner and to calculate the SEP source
particle distribution in space. The team will obtain the temporal and spatial
variation of SEP source intensity and spectra in the solar corona, and input
this data into their three-dimensional interplanetary particle transport model
for calculation of SEP intensity at Earth and other locations in the solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI states that the results of this study will
assist the development of improved space weather tools to forecast the near-
Earth space radiation environment resulting from solar events. The PI also notes
that particle injection and acceleration by shock waves is one of the great
unsolved problems in space physics and astrophysics. This investigation of
particle acceleration and transport in the solar system will enhance our
understanding of many other high-energy astrophysics phenomena in the universe
(such as cosmic rays, supernova remnants, and gamma-ray emissions). In addition,
the project will provide training to a young postdoctoral scientist.