* 1156643
* REU Site:   CSHL NSF-REU Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Summer Undergraduate Program
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Doreen Ware, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2015
* USD 350,854.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL) that will provide research training for 8
students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. The program trains
participants on the present and growing need to integrate biological research
with sophisticated computational tools and techniques. CSHL has over 40 faculty
members, including members of a newly established Quantitative Biology
Department, who will serve as bioinformatics and computational biology mentors
in fields ranging from plant biology to machine learning for biology. Through
this NSF-REU support, students are afforded the opportunity to conduct full-time
research in an appropriately matched lab based on mutual interests and goals.
CSHL REU participants have access to individual and shared laboratory facilities
such as flow cytometry, high throughput sequencing and analysis, imaging, and
proteomics facilities. Participants attend multiple seminars and workshops, such
as the responsible conduct in research, professional communication skills, the
graduate school application process, and introduction to science careers. REU
participants also are invited to attend the CSHL summer courses or meetings,
which cover a range of topics such as Computational Neuroscience and Single Cell
Analysis. All students are housed on campus within walking distance of their
laboratories and the CSHL cafeteria, where they receive the majority of their
meals. The multilayer recruitment effort consists of both traditional and
digital mailings to potential students and their professors, as well as
recruitment visits to universities throughout the country. Students are selected
based on academic record, motivation for the proposed program of study, and
potential as future researchers. Alumni successes are monitored to determine
their continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths,
and the long-term impact of their research experience. Information about the
program will be assessed using faculty and student evaluations, as well as the
use of an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.cshl.edu/education/urp/nsf-sponsored-reu-in-bioinformatics-and-
computational-biology, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Zachary Lippman at
lippman@cshl.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Doreen Ware at ware@cshl.edu).