* 1156053
* Conference:  2012 Microbial Stress Response Gordon Research Conference to be held July 20-25, 2012 in South Hadley, MA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 conference will continue its tradition of
improving the scientific knowledge and technical capability of scientists who
are studying stress responses of isolated microbes and microbial communities.
More specifically, the 2012 conference emphasizes two new direction that are
consistent with the Networks and Regulation cluster priorities. First, the
conference focuses on an integrated perspective of stress response biology
across scales of complexity from single to multicellular to microbe-host
interaction systems. Second, the organizers make a concerted effort to include
computational and systems-levelapproaches to study stress biology in
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The meeting offers
numerous informal opportunities for young investigators to interact with senior
researchers. Students and junior scientists will be selected for presentations
based on their submitted abstracts. A particular effort will be made to recruit
underrepresented minorities and participants from diverse geographical regions.
Diverse participation is reflected also in the organizing committee with one of
the two chairs being a female. Eleven of 32 invited and confirmed
speakers/discussion leaders are females and two are members of an under-
represented minority group.