* 1156789
* REU Site: Operation ETank: Moving Toward a Sustainable World
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* David Changnon, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2015
* USD 292,940.00

The goal of this REU project is to operate an interdisciplinary research-based
think tank (i.e., Operation ETank) to engage undergraduates on perspectives of
sustainability with individual expertise in environment, energy, economy, and
ethics. To accomplish this goal, students spend eight weeks conducting research
with scientists on environment and energy issues, participating in weekly
seminars and collaborative activities where sustainability will be viewed
through the lens of ethics and the economy, and being introduced to issues
related to personal development as a research scientist. At the end of Operation
ETank, students make poster presentations of their results to their peers and
are expected to provide a draft of a manuscript that could be submitted to a
refereed journal for review. The recruitment efforts are targeted toward
students from underrepresented groups in science through partnerships with
regional educational institutions. Expected outcomes from participation in
Operation ETank include a greater understanding of the complexity associated
with sustainability issues, an ability to initiate, complete and communicate
results from a research project, and to collaborate with peers and scientists on
various research-related activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Students participating in Operation ETank get hands-on research experience with
faculty mentors on complex research problems. Results from their efforts are
expected to advance what is understood as it relates to environmental and energy
sustainability. Individual projects are enhanced through collaborative
experiences. Students are expected to investigate what they learn about other
disciplines related to the research projects they undertake with faculty
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: A primary objective of Operation
ETank is to prepare the next generation of interdisciplinary practitioners in
the area of sustainability. Through research training and personal development
student participants will be provided with the practical and intellectual tools
to tackle pertinent issues and current problems from the holistic perspective of
the 4 Es (energy, environment, ethics, and economy). Every student activity
planned for the 8-week period is related to the identified outcomes (i.e.,
research design, effective written and oral communication, critical thinking,
collaboration with others, etc.) associated with Operation ETank. Although
student projects focus primarily on environmental and energy sustainability,
other issues related to ethics and economy are integrated into the broader
sustainability discussion. The goal is to introduce students to the use of basic
research skills and tools that help prepare them for future scientific endeavors
including graduate school. Having them develop an understanding that most
scientific issues involve great complexity and results that are often uncertain
greatly enhance their ability to communicate research results to a broader
audience.