* 1156799
* REU Site:   Global Change Ecology at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Anson Hines, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2017
* USD 519,735.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
Smithsonian Institution Environmental Research Center (SERC) on the Chesapeake
Bay, Maryland that will provide research training for 10 students for 12 weeks
during the summers of 2012-2016. Over the last few centuries, human activities
have dramatically altered the planet's biota through habitat fragmentation,
increased greenhouse gases, species introductions, excess nutrient loading, and
native species extirpation. Determining and ultimately mitigating the
consequences of these global transformations is a major goal in ecology and
evolution and the primary focus of this REU Site. SERC is one of the Smithsonian
Institution's largest research and education-based facilities and has an overall
mission of revealing the biological and physical processes that sustain life on
earth. The REU program focuses on how aspects of global change, including
climate change, biological invasions, altered biogeochemical cycling, and native
biodiversity loss, are altering the ecological goods and services provided by
natural ecosystems. Particular attention is paid to the Chesapeake Bay, the
nation's largest and most commercially valuable estuary. The program includes
field research, laboratory work, and educational training to: (1) identify an
unanswered question in global change biology, (2) devise a testable hypothesis,
(3) conduct a research project, and (4) share the discovery with the
professional community. Interns also take a series of short courses describing
scientific methods, ethics, and careers, participate in graduate-level
discussion groups, attend seminars by visiting scientists, and take field trips
to affiliated research institutions. At the end of their internship, each intern
will present a formal research seminar describing their project to the SERC
science community, and many will present their research at conferences and
publish their results in peer-reviewed journals. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including use of a common REU assessment
tool. More information on the SERC REU program is available by visiting
https://serc.si.edu/pro_training/internships/projectmenu.aspx or by contacting
the REU Fellowship Coordinator (Mr. Dan Gustafson at gustafsond@si.edu).