* 1156412
* ANTS-X: Algorithmic Number Theory Symposium 2012
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Kiran Kedlaya, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* tara smith
* 01/31/2013
* USD 30,000.00

The tenth Algorithmic Number Theory Symposium (ANTS) meeting will be held July
9-13, 2012, at the University of California, San Diego. It will include
approximately 5 invited lectures, about 25 contributed lectures chosen through a
competitive review process, and a poster session. It is expected that 100-150
mathematicians will attend, including a sizable fraction of graduate students
and postdocs and some scientists from nonacademic institutions. There will also
be a proceedings volume issued shortly after the conclusion of the meeting. The
ANTS meetings, held biannually since 1994, are the premier international forum
for new research in computational number theory. They are devoted to algorithmic
aspects of number theory, including elementary number theory, algebraic number
theory, analytic number theory, geometry of numbers, arithmetic algebraic
geometry, finite fields, and cryptography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an
established conference series, ANTS attracts invited and contributed lectures of
the highest quality, and serves as a forum for dissemination of new ideas and
techniques throughout the research community in the area of computational number
theory. The review process for contributed lectures and the subsequent
production of a proceedings volume provides documentation of the presented
results at the level of quality of an international research journal in
mathematics. The ANTS meeting also serves an important training function, by
drawing (with partial funding) many US-based graduate students and postdocs (for
whom partial funding will be available), who will benefit both from exposure to
the latest work in computational number theory and from the opportunity to
present their own work. In addition, the interaction between academic, industry,
and government researchers should prove mutually beneficial to all sides.