* 1156269
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Consumers' decisions about tradeoffs between food safety and quality: an experimental auction analysis of artisanal cheese
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* John Kerr, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2014
* USD 7,000.00

The research examines how individuals make choices involving tradeoffs between
health risk and product quality. In cheesemaking, pasteurization of milk can
eradicate pathogenic bacteria that can cause illness as well as beneficial
bacteria, which contribute to ripening and flavor development in aged cheese.
This research studies consumers' attitudes toward bacteria and associated risk
and how consumers respond to different types of information about food safety
and quality through a combination of methods including analyzing individual
hedonic preference rating of product attributes, experimental auctions, and
hedonic price analysis of retail data in the market for artisan cheese in the
US. The unique product context provides an opportunity to study a more
continuous tradeoff between the variables of health risk and production quality
than prior contexts have allowed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research generates
information useful for food and agriculture policymakers. There are proposals to
require cheesemakers to reduce bacteria in their products in order to reduce
health risks, but these new requirements might also reduce the quality of the
products in the minds of consumers. Producers of artisenal cheeses come from a
wide diversity of backgrounds and are part of a fast growing sector of the
agricultural economy focusing on local production, value addition and farmers
markets.