* 1156065
* 2012 Aspen Winter Conference Growth and Form: Pattern Formation in Biology; Aspen Center for Physics; Aspen, CO.; January 2 - 7, 2012
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2012
* Susan Coppersmith, Aspen Center For Physics
* Standard Grant
* David A. Brant
* 10/31/2012
* USD 7,000.00

ID: MPS/DMR/BMAT(7623) 1156065 PI: Marchetti, Christina ORG: Aspen Center for
Physics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: 2012 Aspen Winter Conference Growth and
Form: Pattern Formation in Biology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The
quantitative understanding of the origin of the complex variety of patterns
found in nature has challenged scientist for centuries. Such patterns range from
the morphology of embryonic and adult organisms to vein structures in plants, to
the organization of birds in large flocks that exhibit coordinated behavior.
Thanks to advances in imaging techniques on various scale and computer modeling,
we are now making progress in connecting the cellular or single individual scale
to the organism or large group scale. The goal of the conference is to bring
together physicists, chemists, mathematicians, engineers, and biologists who are
using physical principles, statistical mechanics, and modeling to approach
problems such as developmental biology, biomineralization, and flocking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: The organizers of this Aspen Winter
Conference have made a special effort to increase the diversity of the group of
invited speakers. Currently nine of the twenty invited speakers are women and
six are junior scientists. The organizers will also work to attract a large
number of junior participants. Several will be selected to give contributed
talks. The conference will host an Aspen Winter Public Lecture on some aspect of
pattern formation in biology. The lecture will be held on Wednesday evening at
the Wheeler Opera House, in downtown Aspen and preceded by a ?Meet the
Physicist? session where members of the Aspen community will meet informally
with two of the conference participants for a question and answer session. The
Winter Public Lecture will also be broadcast on local television GrassRoots TV
12 and streamed over the internet. Finally, to ensure broad dissemination of
conference material slides and other content of the conference will be posted on
the conference website.