* 1156243
* Collaborative Research: Macro-Financial Linkages in an Era of Globalization
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Christopher Otrok, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 05/31/2013
* USD 70,652.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study how different types of
macroeconomic and financial disturbances, or ?shocks?, are propagated across
countries in a highly integrated world economy. These shocks could have their
origins either in policy actions of national governments or as outcomes of
market forces. The implications of these shocks for business cycle comovement
across countries are of considerable interest from both analytical and policy
perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is motivated by a few empirical
observations. First, there have been enormous changes in the global economic
landscape since the mid-1980s. These changes include the sharp increases in
cross-border trade and financial flows, and the rising prominence of emerging
market economies. Second, spillovers of shocks across financial markets and real
economic activity have intensified, both within and across economies. Third, the
recent global financial crisis has dramatically highlighted the linkages across
economies that acted as channels for spillovers of shocks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address two key questions concerning
macro-financial linkages, which refers to the increasingly close ties between
macroeconomic variables, such as GDP and employment, and financial market
variables, such as stock market indexes and interest rates. First, what are the
implications of rising macro-financial linkages for the synchronization of
business and financial cycles? Second, are common shocks or the propagation of
country-specific shocks the key to synchronicity of business and financial
cycles across countries? If it is the latter, what are the main channels for the
propagation of shocks across different groups of countries?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these issues, the project will involve the
development of a new econometric model that captures different aspects of
international business cycle comovement and permits differentiation between true
?shocks? and their propagation effects. Another innovation is that the model
will be used to study the roles of financial shocks and their spillovers in
driving business cycle comovement of real macroeconomic
aggregates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will transform the growing debate
on the implications of globalization with new evidence on how this phenomenon
has affected the nature of cross-country economic and financial relationships.
The results generated by the study will provide guidance for policy makers in
evaluating the propagation channels for major shocks/crises that originate in
one country but affect others. This is essential for designing effective
stabilization policies at the national level and for coordination of policies at
the international level.