* 1156123
* Fundamental Lower Tropospheric Processes in Observed and Simulated Supercells
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Matthew Parker, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2017
* USD 484,935.00

Supercells (long-lived rotating thunderstorms) have great impact on our society,
accounting for the vast majority of tornadoes and very large hail, and also
often producing intense local rainfall and damaging non-tornadic winds. Recent
climatologies and process studies have revealed that cold pool (outflow)
properties, lower tropospheric vertical wind shear, and lower tropospheric
stability are fundamental to processes such as supercell maintenance and
tornadogenesis. However, true "cause and effect" remains elusive because there
are still a number of unknown physical links. This lack of knowledge is
important because, without it, the ability to forecast and produce timely
warnings (and avoid false alarms) for supercellular hazards is unlikely to
improve. This research seeks to address gaps in the knowledge base by continuing
our hypothesis-driven research on fundamental supercell processes. This study
includes both analyses of recently-collected data from the Verification of the
Origins of Rotation Experiment 2 (VORTEX2), as well as numerical simulations
that are motivated by and compared to those measurements.

The goal of this application is to analyze the lower tropospheric outflow
processes and storm-environment feedbacks in tornadic and non-tornadic
supercells. To accomplish the goal of this application, the project will pursue
three specific objectives: 1) explain the downdraft processes that produce
surface vorticity beneath supercells; 2) establish the comparative importance of
low-level vertical wind shear vs. low-level stability in the maintenance or
demise of supercells; and, 3) identify the near-storm environmental
modifications produced by supercells.

Intellectual Merit This study directly addresses three of the VORTEX2 scientific
foci: tornadogenesis, relationships between supercell storms and their
environments, and storm-scale numerical weather prediction. The research is
innovative because it exploits the cutting edge VORTEX2 dataset to attack gaps
in the knowledge base, and because it addresses a number of novel hypotheses for
production of surface vorticity in supercells. The outcomes of this effort will
include advanced understanding of low-level processes in supercells, including
dynamics associated with tornadogenesis, storm maintenance, and storm-
environment interactions. The research is expected to be significant, because it
will provide additional insight into severe storms that threaten citizens' lives
and property.

Broader impacts Given the considerable initial outlay of public funds for the
VORTEX2 campaign, continued support for analysis of VORTEX2 data is a well-
leveraged investment. In the face of 2011's historic number of tornado
fatalities, advances in supercell and tornado forecasting and warning would be
in the public interest.

This project will support training and mentoring for graduate students as well
as a postdoc. The PI also continues to incorporate data and results from VORTEX2
into his routine courses. The high profile of the experiment and unprecedented
datasets make the results extremely appealing to students. The PI also has an
ongoing commitment to involving underrepresented groups in his research and
field work. The PI agrees to restriction-free share VORTEX2 mobile soundings
data with the community, and is committed to helping the community fully exploit
those data. In addition to the routine venues of conferences and journal
articles, the PI will interact with operational forecasters from the National
Weather Service, teach operational short courses, and present public research
talks on VORTEX2.