* 1156755
* REU Site: Addressing Social and Environmental Disparities through Community Geography and Geographic Information Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 02/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Katherine Hankins, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 12/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit: The six-week summer REU site engages a diverse group of
students, faculty and community members in community-based geographic inquiry of
social and environmental disparities in Atlanta neighborhoods, including
examinations of neighborhood change, property markets, air quality, urban green
spaces, and neighborhood visioning. With an explicit focus on community
geography, university-community partnerships and participatory methodologies,
the research training program is among the first of its kind for undergraduates
in the United States. The REU aims to develop well-prepared, ethical researchers
who are committed to community-based research for addressing social and
environmental disparities. The site also seeks to develop a new conceptual
framework for community geography, an emerging subfield of geography that draws
from Participatory GIS (PGIS), mixed methodologies, and critical urban theory.
Community geography places explicit emphasis on identifying the spatial thinking
and local knowledges that emerge from neighborhood residents' experiences and
seeks to affect positive community change, in a variety of ways, whether it is
to visualize challenges and assets, improve service delivery, or more accurately
identify geographic disparities. Undergraduates and faculty mentors in this
project investigate the spatial thinking and local knowledges of residents who
seek to address social and environmental disparities in
Atlanta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The most important impact is that
the site is among the first U.S.-based undergraduate training programs
explicitly focused on community-based geographic inquiry where undergraduates
develop their interests in community geography. Second, there is an opportunity
for knowledge discovery to identify and mitigate social and environmental
disparities in urban neighborhoods. Third, each student will be confronted with
real-life examples/conflicts in research ethics. Fourth, there is practical
significance for local communities as shared products and data are developed in
the forms of maps, datasets, an online GIS server, non-technical reports, oral
histories and multimedia. Finally, knowledge and practices gained from the site
can lead to disciplinary transformation as the team develops a new conceptual
framework for community geography.