* 1156512
* REU Site:   Research Opportunities in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2016
* Jonathan Levitt, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 12/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
City College of New York, which is part of the City University of New York. This
grant will provide research training for 36 early-stage students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2013-2015. The Department of Biology has a dynamic group
of 22 research-active faculty members who will serve as research mentors. Their
research interests span the biological spectrum, ranging from molecular biology
to population biology; some representative research projects include host-
parasite interactions, modification of genes to modulate behavior, mechanisms
underlying bacterial division, and molecular pathways in blood cell formation.
In addition, students will attend research seminars, where they will be exposed
to the diversity of research projects being conducted in the department, and
various workshops, where training in responsible conduct in research, scientific
writing, and scientific communication will occur and where panels will inform
students about different career opportunities in industry and academia. Students
will also take field trips to local industries, such as biotechnology companies,
and research institutes, such as the American Museum of Natural History, Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratories, and the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, with
which the City College has a partnership agreement. The program's multi-phase
recruitment effort within City College and among City University community
colleges will consist of traditional "hard copy" formats, digital-based
advertising, and campus recruitments. Students will be selected based on
academic record, research performance, motivation, and potential for outstanding
research in biology. Students will be tracked to determine their continued
interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting
influences of the research experience. Information about the program will be
assessed by various means, including use of an REU common assessment tool. More
information is available by visiting www.sci.ccny.cuny.edu/biology/REU or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Chris Li at cli@ccny.cuny.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jonathan
Levitt at jlevitt@ccny.cuny.edu).