* 1156454
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Training and Research Experiences in Nonlinear Dynamics (TREND)
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Michelle Girvan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/29/2016
* USD 354,043.00

This award supports the continuation of the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program at the University of Maryland College Park. The
main goal of the program will be to introduce undergraduate students to the
university research environment through participation in frontier research.
Participating undergraduates become members of research groups and are mentored
by faculty members, post-docs and graduate students. Students see first-hand and
participate directly in the research process. Past research topics have
included: nano-photonic devices, spatio-temporal chaos and synchronism of
chaotic systems, chaotic microwave circuits, dynamics of granular media,
development of singularities in fluids and solids, nonlinear dynamics in optical
systems and charged particle beams, magnetic reconnection, and turbulence and
nonlinear phenomena in plasmas. Seminar series will complement and reinforce the
learning experience. Student projects and presentations will be judged on the
final day of the program, and winners will be funded to present their work at a
relevant national conference. In addition, the summer program offers seminars
and trips that expose students to a wide variety of subjects and opportunities.
This will likely include trips to nearby government research laboratories, and
lectures on topics such as applying to graduate school.