* 1156847
* REU Site: The Rice University Summer Institute of Statistics (RUSIS)
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Javier Rojo, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2014
* USD 137,686.00

This award provides continued support for a successful 10-week summer REU site
within the Statistics Department at Rice University for the study of Statistics
and its applications. As the number of domestic graduate students in the
Mathematical Sciences continues to decline, there is a critical need to develop
human resources to continue supporting the United States' advantage in the world
of science and technology. The Rice University Summer Institute of Statistics
(RUSIS), now in its 10th year and fourth funding cycle, has been successful in
encouraging students to pursue graduate degrees in Mathematics and Statistics.
Roughly 85% of the students who have attended RUSIS and have graduated, are now
doctoral students in Ph.D. programs around the country, and roughly 61% of them
are members of underrepresented populations in Mathematics. RUSIS has
accomplished this through intensive courses, close supervision of research
projects, and visits to various research institutes and agencies in Houston.

The program will train and mentor 12 (7 NSF- and 5 NSA-supported) selected
underrepresented minority students and students with no easy access to a
research experience at their institution, including community college students,
through intensive core courses in probability, stochastic processes, and
statistical inference, with special emphasis on areas of current interest; e.g.
multiple comparisons, extreme value theory, multivariate survival analysis,
risk-reliability-sustainability of complex infrastructure systems, artificial
intelligence, statistical learning, statistical genetics, and general
biostatistics. The RUSIS engages the students in research projects under close
collaboration with faculty mentors, and with the objective of producing joint
publications, when the summer work merits it. Students present their results at
national meetings and they are mentored in the preparation and presentation of
their talks. In addition, students meet with an advisory committee composed of
top scientists and present their work to them. The RUSIS also teaches short
courses on the use of Unix platforms, LaTeX, and software to be utilized for
research purposes such as Mathematica, Splus and/or R, and Matlab. In addition,
the program organizes student and faculty visits to scientific facilities (e.g.,
Biomathematics and Biostatistics at MD Anderson Cancer Center, NASA). Through
informal meetings, the program discusses a variety of topics ranging from
applying to Graduate School to career experiences by outstanding scientists, and
discussion of cutting-edge topics in Statistics. The program evaluates and
monitors the progress of students for seven years (expected time for them to
finish graduate school) after their participation, and an annual evaluation of
the program by the participating students and an external advisory committee is
an integral and valuable part of the program. The investment is starting to
produce concrete results. The first RUSIS alumnus received his Ph.D. during the
summer of 2011 and is now an assistant professor of statistical sciences in a
Ph.D. program. Several more are due to obtain their PhDs in the next few years.