* 1156840
* REU Site:  Summer Undergraduate Research Experience in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Thomas Kawula, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 309,761.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill that will provide research training
for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. The program
focuses on molecular biosciences - the application of biochemistry, genetics,
molecular biology, cell biology, genomics, proteomics, and computational and
structural biology - to solve complex problems in biology in a highly
collaborative and interdisciplinary environment. Numerous faculty from several
relevant departments will serve as research mentors. A wide variety of
interesting projects at the cutting edge of molecular bioscience will be
available for the students. In addition to working full-time in their chosen
research labs, students will participate in professional development activities
including training in the responsible conduct of research, reading and
presenting reports from the primary scientific literature, poster preparation
and presentation, career opportunities in academia, industry and government, the
graduate school application process, an optional GRE Prep course, writing an
effective personal statement, and effective interviewing skills. Students will
have ample opportunities to interact with students from additional programs
hosted by the university during the summer, as well as with graduate students
and post-doctoral fellows who assist in professional development activities.
Students are recruited via a dedicated web site, visits to local universities
(especially those with a large number of underrepresented minority students),
during national meetings such as ASBMB and SACNAS, and targeted e-mails.
Selection of participants is based upon GPA, lack of availability of
concentrated research experiences at the student's home college or university,
interest in research as indicated through a Personal Statement, and perceived
potential for, and interest in, a career in biological research. Students are
tracked to determine their continued interest in their academic field of study,
their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience.
Information about the program will be assessed by various means, including use
of an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.med.unc.edu/oge/stad/sure, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Gwen Sancar
at gsancar@ad.unc.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Miriam Braunstein at
miriam_braunstein@med.unc.edu).