* 1156640
* US-Mexico International Collaborative Program on Photothermal Imaging and Photothermal Microscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Aristides Marcano, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/2013
* USD 14,893.00

The Delaware State University Center for Research and Education in Optical
Sciences and Applications (CREOSA), in response to OISE Solicitation NSF 11-508,
Catalyzing New International Collaborations (CNIC), is awarded funding to
support planning visits to Mexico. The trips facilitate a new research
collaboration with the Centro de Investigacion en Ciencia Aplicada y Tecnologia
Avanzada (CICATA) at the Instituto Politecnico Nacional (INP-Mexico) in Mexico
City. The subject of the collaborative research is the development of
photothermal infrared and visible imaging and especially near-field microscopy
for nanometric systems. Photothermal imaging offers an interesting approach to
high-resolution microscopy because it offers high sensitivity with scatter-free
image acquisition for non-destructive testing. The expertise and experimental
facilities at CICATA complement those of CREOSA. Both Centers emphasize student
education and industrial technology transfer. This award supports students from
Delaware to visit the laboratory in Mexico to initiate the collaborations, and
Mexican students will subsequently visit CREOSA to strengthen the
partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning visit aims to establish an
international research collaboration that can contribute new experimental
techniques required to overcome scattering problems in the non-destructive
imaging of nanoscale structures, including biological and physiological systems,
and thus to provide cleaner, high-resolution images. New and improved imaging
technology can have broad impact in medical applications as well as supporting
research on new materials. The proposed program will actively involve students
in both the initial planning and exploratory activities as well as in the
subsequent joint research. Delaware State University is an HBCU so the program
will contribute to enhanced diversity in the research community.