* 1156515
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics in Indiana University
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Kevin Pilgrim, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 05/31/2015
* USD 265,659.00

Continuing a forty-six year old tradition, the Department of Mathematics at
Indiana University will offer summer intensive research experiences for talented
undergraduates. Working one-on-one or in small groups with faculty, eight
students will spend eight weeks on our campus working on research problems
selected by faculty members. Typically, these problems are open, accessible, and
mathematically significant. Topics in pure mathematics include the dynamics of
billiards, logic, complex dynamics, combinatorial topology, and tilings of
surfaces. Topics in applied mathematics emphasize the growing relationship
between mathematics and biology and include population genetics and molecular
evolution, polymer organization and cell function, evolution of phenotypes,
genome evolution, and phylogenetics. Housed together in a dormitory and sharing
common office space, students benefit from being immersed in mathematics.
Frequent presentations by local faculty give the cohort a broader and deeper
understanding of mathematics. Students disseminate their findings by giving
brief presentations at a statewide undergraduate mathematics research
conference, giving an hour-long formal lecture to peers, faculty, and graduate
students, and writing a formal self-contained research report detailing their
findings. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fast pace of technological innovation is
creating not only new types of jobs, but also new types of problems. Many of
these problems require quantitative analysis. In biology, imaging,
telecommunications, medicine, finance, and dozens of other fields, our ability
to collect large amounts of data is leading to enormous new analytical
challenges. How does one train an individual to work on these large, unsolved,
complex problems? By exposing them, early in their career, to the thrill and
challenge of mathematical research. Our summer research experience will give a
small group of talented students the opportunity to develop abstract problem-
solving skills, intellectual stamina, creativity, perseverance, communication
skills, and work ethic. Our students emerge better prepared to meet the future
challenges they will face and to maintain the important intellectual
infrastructure of our nation.