* 1156659
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Coastal Biology on Florida's First Coast.
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Matthew Gilg, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2016
* USD 373,211.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) program at the University of
North Florida (UNF) is focused on the field of Coastal Biology. The overall goal
of this program is to enhance the training and career development of
undergraduate science students who have not yet had significant research
experience by engaging them in the research and culture of this popular and
important field. Ten students will be recruited each summer from a variety of
urban universities to participate in a 10-week research-training program
conducted at UNF. Because of the focus of this program on younger students with
only limited research experience, all students will complete a two-week
orientation during which they will receive hands-on training in basic skills of
conducting scientific research projects. Afterwards, students will be paired
with biologists from UNF or two collaborating institutions and conduct mentored
research projects on major threats to coastal biological resources in north
Florida waters. Students will develop short research proposals on their projects
and deliver an oral presentation on their proposed study to faculty mentors and
other REU participants. In Week 10, students will present the results of their
mentored projects at a REU poster session open to the entire UNF community.
Following the REU period, students will be encouraged to present their research
findings at professional conferences and/or in manuscripts submitted to
professional journals. Additional career guidance on topics such as developing
effective poster presentations, scientific writing, and presenting scientific
information to public audiences will be provided in student workshops. Students
will also be exposed to a broader range of topics in Coastal Biology by
attending research seminars presented by UNF faculty, graduate students, and
visiting scientists. Last, participants will complete a research-ethics training
component geared towards improving their moral reasoning abilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support provided by NSF includes funding for student
stipends, student travel to and from the site, student housing and meals and
some administrative costs.