* 1156085
* Collaborative Research: The Economic Origins and Ramifications of the Great Migration
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Marianne Wanamaker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2017
* USD 234,902.00

Abstract

Title: "Collaborative Research: The Economic Origins and Ramifications of the
Great Migration" PIs: Marianne H. Wanamaker and William J. Collins

This project will study the origins and ramifications of the internal migration
of southern-born U.S. workers between 1900 and 1940. Social scientists widely
view the "Great Migration" of southerners, especially the high rate of migration
by African Americans, as one of the most important events in American economic
and social history. A key aspect of the project is the development of new
datasets that link individuals across census years in the early 20th century,
greatly improving the ability to observe and analyze internal migration for both
white and black workers. The project will focus on four main areas of inquiry
that have been limited by shortcomings of existing datasets: 1) identification
of early-life factors, both household and location-specific, that raised or
lowered the likelihood of migration and affected occupational choice; 2)
measurement of the economic gains that accrued to inter-regional migrants,
including differences by race and skill; 3) identifying the role of migration in
fostering intergenerational mobility and racial convergence in labor market
outcomes; and 4) estimating how social networks, geographic distance,
environmental shocks, wage differences, and other factors influenced migrants'
selection of destinations. The results and datasets of the project will allow
deeper documentation and analysis of American labor markets in the early 20th
century than was previously possible. This, in turn, will facilitate comparisons
with other times and places, where different institutional and technological
contexts prevail (e.g., internal migration in China or the E.U.). It will also
demonstrate at a micro-level how migration fueled the structural transformation
of the American economy, as agriculture declined in importance, cities grew
rapidly, and the South began its economic convergence on the rest on the U.S.
Finally, analyses produced in the project will shed light on the economics of
discrimination, human capital, intergenerational change, and migration in this
important period.