* 1156594
* REU Site: Access to Global Biodiversity Studies for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Petra Sierwald, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/28/2015
* USD 286,234.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
Field Museum of Natural History that will provide research training for eight
undergraduate students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012-2014. The
program focuses on the unique insight that biological specimens from natural
history collections can provide into topics such as taxonomy, phylogeography,
biogeography, paleontology, conservation biology, and evolutionary biology,
using phylogenetic systematics as a unifying theme. The Field Museum's life
sciences departments include 21 curators that are involved in evolutionary
biology and systematics research, and who will serve as mentors for the program.
Students will conduct full-time lab research as well as participate in seminars
on collections-based research in the biological sciences and responsible conduct
in research; attend a phylogenetic workshop series; contribute taxon pages to
the Encyclopedia of Life; and participate in introductory tours of collections
and research facilities throughout the museum. A variety of research topics,
such as Ant Diversity in the Rainforests of Australia Through Time or Using
Systematic Traits of Teeth to Test Trophic Niche Evolution in Theropod
Dinosaurus, are available to students, reflecting the breadth of research
carried out by the museum's curators. In addition to their individual mentor's
equipment and facilities, students will have access to core museum facilities
such as the research collections, the Pritzker Laboratory for Molecular
Systematics and Evolution, two scanning electron microscopes, the Collaborative
Invertebrate Laboratory, and the museum's extensive research library. The
program will be advertised on the Field Museum website, with additional targeted
advertising taking place at Chicago-area colleges and universities, particularly
those that serve underrepresented communities. Applications will be accepted via
an online system. Students will be selected based on academic record, previous
research performance, potential for outstanding research in evolutionary and
systematic biology, and potential for broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups in science. Program components will be tracked and
updated using the USRAA common assessment tools, as well as our own pre- and
post-internship surveys. More information is available by visiting
http://fieldmuseum.org/about/research-experiences-undergraduates-reu, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Petra Sierwald; psierwald@fieldmuseum.org) or the co-PI
(Dr. Kenneth Angielczyk, kangielczyk@fieldmuseum.org).