* 1156916
* REU site: Experiences in Neural Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Bryan Pfister, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2015
* USD 303,471.00

Intellectual Merit This three year REU site program at the New Jersey Institute
of Technology (NJIT)will engage ten undergraduate students each year in research
focused in the area of neural engineering. The objectives of the REU program
are: 1) to facilitate broad interaction, the program will have scheduled
meetings with student researchers, faculty mentors, and graduate student coaches
twice a week and 2) to ensure consistent interaction, the PIs will work with
graduate student coaches to initiate impromptu meetings with student researchers
in their laboratory environment. These interactions should ultimately facilitate
more self-directed learning on the part of the student, as a level of
independence is certainly critical to professional development. In addition, a
schedule of seminars, workshops, and activities are planned to promote
professional development in the areas of career plans and industrial research,
graduate student research, ethics, preparing poster and manuscripts, and
information literacy. Participants will be encouraged to attend regional
conferences such as the IEEE Northeast Bioengineering Conference, a premier
local venue for student research presentation and larger conferences such as the
Biomedical Engineering Society annual meeting that features dedicated
undergraduate summer research presentations. Finally, at the faculty mentors
discretion, publications will be targeted to scientific journals when projects
excel to that level.

Broader Impacts Recruitment efforts will target undergraduate students from
colleges that are focused primarily in undergraduate education. Special emphasis
will be placed on recruiting at least two students each year who are disabled.
Students from institutions without Biomedical Engineering (BME) programs will be
encouraged to apply as long as they have completed fundamental engineering
coursework and express research interests relevant to the proposed projects.
Relationships have been fostered with Primarily Undergraduate Institutions
(PUIs) to facilitate recruitment of students with few research opportunities. In
particular, the Principal Investigators have arranged to recruit from Rose-
Hulman, Bucknell University, and the College of New Jersey.