* 1156853
* REU Site: Chemistry Summer Enhanced Experience Discovering Science, Chem-SEEDS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Patricia Muisener, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 270,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
University of South Florida. Through the Chemistry Summer Enhanced Experience
Discovering Science (Chem-SEEDS) program in the Department of Chemistry at the
University of South Florida (USF), the participant's experience will be enhanced
by a pedagogical approach to facilitating development of scientific skills
through mentoring and apprenticeship. Each student will be assigned a faculty
advisor and a graduate student mentor and together they will explore a broad
spectrum of cutting edge chemistry research projects. In addition to being
immersed in lab work, the program will offer seminars and workshops on various
topics (ethical issues, instrumentation, socio-scientific issues, career
opportunities, etc.), informal research lunch talks, and weekly REU research
discussion meetings where participants will rotate and present every other week.
This peer-centered, collaborative environment will promote collaborative and
reflective discussions. To culminate the ten-week summer program the students
will present posters at the USF-organized REU Research Day that currently brings
together four NSF-sponsored USF REU sites. Student publications and
presentations at national and regional meetings are expected outcomes of this
program and will be actively encouraged. Chem-SEEDS will incorporate a sound
multi-dimensional and multi-instrument evaluation plan that will generate
empirical evidence and knowledge regarding the effectiveness of the enhanced
experience and may inform the design of other REU programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the nine undergraduates each summer comes from USF
and takes the role of host-participant. Chem-SEEDS recruits two-thirds of its
participants from STEM-underrepresented groups and will maintain a balanced
female-to-male ratio in each of the three years of the program. Recruitment has
a special focus on targeting students who lack access to research opportunities,
have not considered pursuing science as a career, and are first-generation
college students. Partnerships with Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs), as well as the Florida/Georgia
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (FGLSAMP) program and community
colleges, will insure the recruitment of underrepresented groups of students.