* 1156861
* REU-Research Experiences in Chemistry and Structural Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Craig Grapperhaus, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2015
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the EPSCoR Office at the
National Science Foundation supports a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) Site led by Professors Aleeta M. Powe and Craig Grapperhaus at the
University of Louisville. The research projects supported in this site are in
broad areas of chemistry and structural biology. Undergraduates will be
recruited to this site primarily from institutions that lack infrastructure to
support undergraduate research, including students from underrepresented groups.
The site will support the selected students each summer in a ten-week program.
Faculty mentors are divided into two groups based upon their research foci,
namely chemistry of life processes, measurement and imaging, chemical catalysis,
and synthesis. Weekly enrichment seminars focus on laboratory safety, laboratory
techniques, scientific communication, scientific ethics and scientific career
options. To stress synergism and collegiality among the group, REU students
engage in weekly interactive activities led by faculty mentors of the two
groups. Weekly activities include team-building exercises, diversity/mentoring
workshops, field trips and several informational workshops, namely, Constructing
a Bibliography, Writing an Abstract and Preparing a Research Poster. A technical
writing component ensures interactive peer critique, mentor/mentee dialogue and
student comprehension of scientific writing. REU participants present their
research results at the end of the summer in a campus-wide symposium featuring
posters that display their progress and findings. Collectively, these organized
activities provide REU Participants the training and professional development to
pursue research careers or graduate degrees in the chemistry sciences. Young
scientists need exposure to modern research methods and tools as part of their
training. This REU site aims to provide research training using state-of-the-art
facilities in a broad range of topics in the chemical sciences. Undergraduate
researchers participating in this site will have significant, hands-on access to
sophisticated research tools. The diverse student cohort participating in
research at this site will be well prepared for graduate school, and eventual
employment as part of the country's technical workforce.

The Program is designed to give research opportunities to undergraduate students
who are from underrepresented groups in the sciences and/or first-generation
college students. Although advertisement and marketing for the REU site will be
nationwide, targeted recruitment will be facilitated via partnerships with
several regional Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), and
numerous undergraduate institutions with limited research resources in the
states of Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, Indiana and Kentucky.