* 1156266
* Nonparametric and Semiparametric Methods for Econometric Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Yuichi Kitamura, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2016
* USD 281,461.00

This project consists of two sub-projects, each of which aims at developing new
tools for econometric analysis. The first proposes a practical procedure for
moment condition models. Moment condition models have been extensively studied
over the last few decades, though relatively little is known as to how to
estimate them using the Bayesian approach, which is convenient if one wishes to
incorporate prior beliefs into her analysis.&lt;br/&gt;There exist at least two
significant challenges associated with applications of the Bayesian approach to
moment condition models. First, a flexible way to express one's beliefs needs to
be used. Second, a general moment condition model induces complicated
interdependence across unknown parameters that are being estimated. This project
proposes a new approach to address them. It is applicable in many areas across
diverse disciplines, since moment condition models are fundamental to general
statistical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The second sub-project proposes econometric
tools for analyzing economic rationality while taking account of heterogeneity
across individuals. In particular, it empirically examines the concept of
stochastic rationality, which has been considered in various branches of
economics and psychology. The empirical content of stochastic rationality is
expressed in terms of a high dimensional system of inequalities stated in an
indirect manner. This feature poses challenges both theoretically and
computationally, and a set of novel econometric methods are proposed to overcome
them.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, these methods provide means to conduct policy
analysis without imposing arbitrary assumptions. This has direct implications
for evaluation of actual economic policies. Both sub-projects will produce
computer programs for the proposed procedures, and they will be made available
to the public at no costs. Also, the proposed activities are expected to provide
educational benefits to students through research assistantships supported by
the grant.