* 1156867
* REU Site: Nanoscale Science Undergraduate Research Experience (NanoSURE) at UNC Charlotte
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Banita Brown, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2016
* USD 270,000.00

This award by the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation and
the Department of Defense's (DOD) "Awards to Stimulate and Support Undergraduate
Research Experiences" (ASSURE) Program supports a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of North Carolina - Charlotte for
the summers of 2012-2014. Nine students will be selected for the REU program
each year. Participants will join interdisciplinary research teams which focus
on ongoing collaborative projects with faculty members from the
Interdisciplinary Ph.D. Program in Nanoscale Science. Targeted student
participants will range from rising freshmen through rising seniors and include
students who belong to undergraduate populations where research opportunities
are limited, or who are from underrepresented groups. Activities include a
10-week undergraduate research experience, workshops and seminars, outreach
training and activity, and various social/cultural activities. The primary
broader impact of the NanoSURE program is the advancement of nanoscale science
research opportunities at the undergraduate level and the development of a
diverse workforce able to meet the multi-disciplinary challenges of the
nanotechnology field. The REU site will provide a mentor-guided research
experience to students from underrepresented groups (women and minorities) and
students from institutions in which access to research training is limited;
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), Principally Undergraduate
Institutions (PUI), and community colleges. The direct involvement of rising
freshmen in the research experience will stimulate this group of students to
pursue college degrees in STEM disciplines. The NanoSURE REU site will partner
with the Discovery Place Museum in Charlotte, NC to provide training in
scientific outreach and an opportunity for REU students to disseminate science
to the general public.