* 1156016
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Functional Morphology of Mammalian Sacra and Caudal Vertebrae: Implications for tail loss and positional behaviors in extinct primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Gabrielle Russo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 02/28/2014
* USD 20,000.00

Doctoral candidate Gabrielle Russo (University of Texas, Austin), under guidance
of Dr. Liza Shapiro, will investigate evolutionarily significant aspects of
primate functional morphology. The focus will be on features related to
taillessness and upright posture, features which are important in understanding
ape origins, evolutionary relationships and locomotion. Despite extensive study
of the ape postcranial skeleton, researchers continue to face difficulty
identifying taillessness and trunk posture from fossil material, in part because
appropriate living primate analogs for comparison are lacking. This has
compromised testing functional hypotheses focused on the evolution of such
features as they are represented in the fossil record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will 1) identify anatomical correlates of tail length, posture and
locomotion from the external and internal bony morphology of sacra and caudal
vertebrae in a taxonomically and morphologically diverse mammalian sample, and
then 2) apply the identified anatomical correlates to a reconstruction of tail
length, posture, and locomotion in extinct hominoids and other primates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate an extensive dataset and test
explicit hypotheses about tail length, posture and locomotion. External
morphometric data will be collected from more than 73 species belonging to five
mammalian orders. Using high resolution X-ray computed tomography, sacra
representative of 18 living primate species will be scanned in order to analyze
trabecular and cortical bone parameters. This study will produce the largest
known CT scan sample of mammalian sacra, which will be made freely accessible to
biological anthropologists, comparative mammalogists, and clinicians. This
project also provides educational and research opportunities to undergraduate
students by soliciting interns though a University of Texas at Austin program
that targets first-generation and minority students.