* 1156240
* Inequality and Taxation: Evidence from Data, Experiments, and Tax Policy Variation
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Emmanuel Saez, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2018
* USD 319,550.00

Inequality and Taxation: Evidence from Data, Experiments, and Tax Policy
Variation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Income inequality has increased sharply in the
United States, as well as in many OECD countries in recent decades. Therefore,
it is valuable to develop better and more timely measures of inequality to
enlighten the policy debate. Tax and transfer policy can potentially play a key
role in curbing inequality. Therefore, it is valuable to understand the rise in
inequality affects the public preferences for more redistribution through taxes
and transfers, and estimate the economic costs of increasing redistribution
through taxes and transfers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to use administrative data as well as experimental data to make
progress on those questions in four related contexts. (1) Use population tax
return data posted in real time on Internal Revenue Service (IRS) databases to
create early but accurate distributional statistics that could be produced
almost one year earlier than current final statistics published by the
Statistics of Income division of IRS, (2) Use a randomized survey experiment to
analyze the effects of providing interactive information about the US income
distribution on preferences for redistribution through progressive taxation and
political involvement, (3) Use population US tax return data and geographical
variation in knowledge about gaming the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) to
evaluate the real labor supply responses to the EITC and the efficiency costs of
the program, (4) Use Danish population tax and migration administrative data to
evaluate the effects of a special tax scheme offering a time limited low income
tax rate to highly compensated foreigners migrating to Denmark.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The potential intellectual merit of the proposed activity is to
significantly advance our knowledge in the analysis of inequality and taxation.
Such an understanding is crucial to evaluate the costs and benefits of
government tax and transfer policies and hence to help policy makers design
better tax and transfer systems. The proposal offers four innovative research
designs in order to make progress on this question. There is relatively little
work that credibly identifies the effects of inequality on preferences for
redistribution. Our proposed randomized survey experiment is an innovative way
to use new online survey technology that can provide randomized treatments and
collect information about preferences for redistribution at relatively low cost.
The effect of information on behavioral responses to taxation has hardly been
explored before and could be a significant determinant to the size of such
behavioral responses. If such effects are large, the government could increase
information of programs designed to promote certain behaviors at a modest cost.
The Earned Income Tax Credit information project offers a great opportunity to
make progress in that direction. The issue of tax induced migration is looming
large in public policy debates both within the European Union but also across US
states. There is remarkably little evidence in the literature about this issue.
The Danish special tax scheme offers a promising avenue to break new ground in
this important but under-explored issue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact resulting from the proposed activity is to develop a model for
partnerships between government statistical agencies (the Danish statistical
agency and the Statistics of Income division of the IRS) and researchers that
could be fruitful both for advancing scientific knowledge but also for improving
the design and the practical implementation of tax and transfer policies. In the
case of the EITC project, lessons from our research could be used to further
improve the design of the EITC program. In the case of the early statistics, the
goal is to propose new methods and products that could later on be adopted by
the Statistics of Income division of IRS or other government agencies to provide
higher quality and timely income statistics to the public. A broader goal behind
this NSF grant application is to promote the experiences for data access for
research purposes from the most advanced countries such as Scandinavian
countries in order to improve data access in countries such as the United States
where access for research is currently more restricted.