* 1156205
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Informal exchange and political power
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Alberto Alesina, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 12/31/2013
* USD 15,646.00

This study examines the private benefits enjoyed by political leaders of small
jurisdictions in rural China, and the effect of democracy on these benefits.
Village leaders in poor settings are often "big shots;" their position affords
them social status, kickbacks and other gifts from citizens, the value of which
may be large in aggregate. The extent to which democracy can mitigate these
private gains by making leaders accountable to citizens is of great
interest.&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the effects of local democracy by
constructing a unique data set on social networks in Chinese villages. In the
studied villages, major life events (births, weddings and funerals) are
commemorated by large gatherings where gifts are exchanged, and their content is
recorded in an account book held by the family. The research project digitizes
these account books, spanning gifts given over the last 40 years, and
reconstructs the history of the village social and gift network from them. Such
detailed, accurate data on historical gift transfers in a poor setting,
including to and from village leaders, is very rare to find.&lt;br/&gt;The main
contribution of the research is to examine the effect of a democratic transition
on informal authority. China instituted local elections in all villages between
1985 and 1995. By analyzing data on gifts received and given by politicians and
leaders, it is possible to identify the effect of more democratic institutions
on the informal power of village authorities. If the democratic transition
creates a genuine shift in the source of authority of village leaders (from
Communist Party to the citizens of the village), the flow of gifts to leaders
should diminish, and leaders should reciprocate gifts further. The study tests
whether local democratic institutions are successful in transferring some of
leaders' informal power to citizens.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the detailed gift
record will allow an in-depth examination of the institutions of reciprocity and
gift exchange in a poor rural setting.