* 1156307
* EAGER: Exploratory and novel mechanisms of cytoskeleton-induced regulation of Sirt1 in smooth muscles
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Aladin Boriek, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2015
* USD 145,193.00

1156307/ Boriek&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award funded by the
Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program will use engineering
tools to explore a novel and controverial hypothesis about the mechanism of
signal transduction in smooth muscle cells. The hypothesis involves the role of
the cytoskeleton in regulating mechanosensing genes in these cells. Exploratory
data generated from the proposed experiments in this developmental research
project could provide for the first time fundamental innovative information on a
novel signaling role of specific cytoskeletal elements in the regulation of the
silent information regulator 1 (Sirt1) in smooth muscle cells. The research will
engage an interdisciplinary team of experts in bioengineering, physiology,
biophysics, and molecular biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term objective
of the work is to contribute to the understanding of the molecular physiological
mechanisms modulating airway smooth muscle dysfunction in asthma, and to uncover
innovative molecular mechanisms that could potentially alter interventional
approaches for preventing and treating asthma. Results from the proposed EAGER
may provide novel exploratory data that could potentially contribute to guide
interventional approaches for preventing and treating asthma, and improve the
quality of life in asthmatics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will integrate
research and education in science, molecular biology, and biochemistry, and
physiology by directly engaging undergraduate, graduate, and possibly medical
students. It will encourage students to participate as well as organize
scientific&lt;br/&gt;meetings. The PI will attract undergraduates through Baylor
College of Medicine SMART Program that supports under-represented students to
pursue research careers initially as undergraduates. The PI will also contribute
to the training of graduate students at the interface between engineering,
biology and medicine.