* 1156984
* Research Experience for Undergraduates Site on Sustainable Land and Water Resources
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Diana Dalbotten, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2015
* USD 717,280.00

Global climate change and associated impacts on our national inland waters have
led to new pressures for better land and water resource management. This is true
to an even greater extent on native reservations, which deal with complicated
resource management issues and lack young native scientists to meet current
needs. A better understanding of biological, chemical, ecological and physical
processes is needed to form a solid foundation for predictive approaches to
resource management. The Research Experience for Undergraduates Site on
Sustainable Land and Water Resources will engage 14 undergraduate students per
year for three years in the key elements of sustainable land and water resources
research that are essential to improving management practices. Resource
management is interdisciplinary in nature requiring knowledge of biological,
chemical, ecological and physical processes that continuously shape and alter
the Earth's near-surface environment. Improving resource management practices is
socially relevant and of acknowledged national importance. Students in this REU
program will be engaged in research projects that have immediate social
relevance to US communities, including native reservations. Students will work
on one of three teams on projects that integrate Earth-surface dynamics,
ecology, geology, hydrology, neolimnology (study of inland waters) and
paleolimnology principles and techniques. The program takes an interdisciplinary
team-oriented approach that emphasizes quantitative and predictive methods. One
team will focus on an experimental approach to one of two problems at St.
Anthony Falls Laboratory: (1) improving stream restoration practices for
ecosystem health and fish habitat or (2) debris flow hazards; one team will
examine the effects of surface water management practice on groundwater
resources in Montana; and one team will investigate past and present habitat
conditions of wild rice lakes in northern Minnesota. An All-Team Gathering at
the conclusion of the program will expose all students to an ethics program that
considers student research in the context of the community and students will
present their research to a large group of faculty and students.