* 1156832
* REU Site: Engineering Education Research: Understanding and Improving Student Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Debbie Chachra, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* olga pierrakos
* 05/31/2016
* USD 423,565.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site is providing engineering
undergraduate students the opportunity to engage in research in engineering
education. Olin College is committed to understanding and improving
undergraduate engineering education, and many of the faculty have active
research programs in this area. Ten undergraduate students and two high school
teachers each summer are working closely with Olin faculty on a wide range of
research projects. For example, some teams are researching how engineering
content is taught in colleges and universities, which is resulting in new
educational materials and practices. Others are focusing on how to better
develop professional and interpersonal skills, such as communication and
teamwork, that complement technical engineering training. Still others are
examining how being in an engineering program affects students' self-confidence,
identity, and interest in engineering careers. The outcomes of the research are
improving the recruitment, retention, and preparation of engineering students.
The REU students are learning about educational research through their
participation, which is also increasing their likelihood of continuing in
engineering. All program participants, including teachers and professors, are
reflecting on their own experiences in engineering and are becoming stronger
advocates for improving engineering education at their institutions.