* 1156436
* Experimental Measurements of Stresses and Strains of Granular Materials Using 3D Non-Destructive Technologies
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/14/2011,09/30/2013
* Khalid Alshibli, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 09/30/2013
* USD 153,930.00

Granular materials have been the subject of extensive research with the
objective to capture their constitutive behavior and deformation
characteristics. There are two approaches to describe the behavior of granular
materials that can be broadly classified as continuum-mechanical and
microstructure-based models. The literature lacks a systematic experimental
investigation to measure contact forces of compressed/sheared granular particles
and their fabric evolution. The proposed research utilizes three-dimensional
(3D) nondestructive technologies to capture stresses and strains between sand
particles. 3D x-ray diffraction (3DXRD) and Synchrotron Micro-computed
Tomography (SMT) scans will be conducted to measure strains and stresses at
particle contacts as loading increases for specimens composed of silica sand.
Stress-strain relationship, elastic modulus, and stiffness of individual sand
particles will be also measured using nano-indenter. Experimental measurements
will be compared with discrete element and with microstructure-based
constitutive models.

If successful, the results will be used to provide critical measurements,
validate and calibrate constitutive discrete and continuum models to better
understand the behavior of granular materials. To the best of the PI knowledge,
the 3DXRD measurements will be conducted for the first time ever to capture the
relationship between stress and strain of individual grains within a bulk mass
of natural sand, map the crystallographic orientation, and quantify stresses
that cause particle crushing. SMT and 3DXRD are new technologies that have the
potential of yielding break-through experimental measurements of stresses and
strains of individual particles. The educational plan will include broadening
the participation of minority undergraduate students in conducting engineering
research, providing enriching research experience for undergraduate engineering
students, and developing educational materials tailored for middle and high
school student.