* 1156976
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Program in High Performance Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Nagaraj Neerchal, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2015
* USD 460,000.00

The REU Site: Interdisciplinary Program in High Performance Computing in the
Department of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of Maryland,
Baltimore County (UMBC) is an eight-week residential summer program for
undergraduate students majoring in mathematics, statistics, or computer science.
This REU Site uses activities that can be grouped into three principal
components to develop skills of the future workforce: (i) A transferrable three-
credit senior undergraduate level course teaches fundamental skills in high
performance computing through lectures and TA-supported computer labs, with
specific tools of Linux, C, MPI, MATLAB, and R. (ii) The skills in scientific,
statistical, and parallel computing are applied to interdisciplinary research
projects posed by scientists from industry, government agencies, or departments
outside of mathematics and statistics. (iii) The teaching and research are
supported by a complete set of highly integrated professional development
activities, including team work experience, presentation skills (poster, oral,
project update, and 'elevator pitch'), writing skills (abstracts, webpage, and
technical report), discussion of professional integrity in the sciences, topical
field trips to local employers or computing centers such as the NSA, NASA, or
NIH, information on graduate school application and GRE preparation course, and
plenty of opportunity for informal contact with faculty, graduate students, and
all visitors to the program. All aspects of the program are conducted by student
teams, which one of the most important experiences to take away from the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific, statistical, and parallel computing
skills are critical to the 21st century workforce. Equally crucial are skills in
interacting and communicating in teams and in interdisciplinary projects. This
REU Site will provide a comprehensive program integrating these elements under
the guidance of the two co-directors and several graduate assistants and
undergraduate peer mentors, many of whom have extensive experience with client-
focused interdisciplinary consulting through the Center for Interdisciplinary
Research and Consulting (www.umbc.edu/circ). The high performance computing
environment will be provided by a state-of-the-art distributed-memory cluster in
the NSF-supported UMBC High Performance Computing Facility (www.umbc.edu/hpcf).
The REU Site participants will benefit from a complete professional development
experience involving scientific, statistical, and parallel computing,
interdisciplinary research projects, and integrated development of professional
skills. These skills are of vital importance to the workforce of tomorrow and
for the national competetiveness of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation and the National
Security Agency.