* 1156072
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Qualitative predictions from intertemporal choice models
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Gretchen Chapman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hantula
* 01/31/2014
* USD 14,125.00

In this project the Principal Investigators will exam the qualitative
differences between discounting functions in intertemporal choice. Mazur (1987)
proposed the hyperbolic discounting function. This type of function implies
frequently observed dynamic inconsistency - a preference reversal whereby the
agent initially prefers the larger later reward but later changes to prefer the
smaller sooner reward . Subsequent researchers have proposed alternative
discounting functions to explain this and other empirical regularities. The
hyperbolic discounting function is still the most widely accepted model;
however, comparisons of different models have not convinced all researchers that
it is the best descriptive theory. This may be because previous model
comparisons have focused on quantitative differences among models, especially
the curve fits between each model and data. Strictly speaking, a curve fit does
not provide a decisive conclusion about whether the model is qualitatively
correct or not. It only tells which function fits the data better than others.
The current research aims to provide more decisive evidence by highlighting
qualitative differences between models. To investigate the qualitative
predictions of different models of intertemporal choice, the investigators have
developed a new modeling framework that can analyze choice patterns across
different delays, reward magnitudes, and individual parameters based on the
specific mathematical models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts,
this research will benefit the general public and practitioners who want to
promote self-regulation by providing a better understanding of the conflicts
between short-term temptations and long-term benefits. It has implications in a
variety of arenas, such as retirement planning, addiction treatment, healthy
behavior change, and procrastination.