* 1156128
* Conference:   Bacterial Cell Surfaces Gordon Research Conference being held June 24-29, 2012 in Mount Snow Resort, West Dover, Vermont.
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Kevin Young, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 03/31/2013
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The study of bacterial cell surfaces is a topic of
intense interest, and the Bacterial Cell Surfaces Gordon Research Conference has
been one of the most useful and productive venues for bringing together new
blood and old practitioners to keep this area vitally alive and to advance it in
new and unexpected ways. The Bacterial Cell Surfaces Gordon Research Conference
will be held June 24-29,2012 in Mount Snow Resort, West Dover, Vermont. The
organizers of the conference include Kevin Young, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences and Tracy Palmer, University of Dundee, Scotland. The Gordon
Research Conference on Bacterial Cell Surfaces has been one of the largest and
most&lt;br/&gt;successful of the Gordon Conferences since its establishment in
1971. This conference will focus on the biogenesis, structure and function of
bacterial envelopes and surfaces, including bacterial membranes, cell walls,
surface appendages and polymers. The conference will include a diverse program
of topics, model systems and approaches, combining biochemistry, molecular
genetics, structural biology, biophysics, imaging and modeling. Oral
presentations will be grouped into nine sessions: 1) Protein localization, 2)
Secretion, 3) Cell morphogenesis, 4) Motility, chemotaxis and surface
structures, 5) Special surface interactions, 6) Stress, transduction and
transport, 7) Outer and inner membranes, 8) Cell wall, and 9) Cell division.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;With regard to educational
value, the conference has a long history of showcasing investigators who are
leaders in their field, while at the same time introducing new, young and early
stage scientists. In addition to those young investigators scheduled for oral
presentations, up to six poster presenters (typically postdoctoral fellows or
graduate students) will be selected to give short talks during the morning
sessions. The current program includes 31 speakers and is diverse in nationality
(11 international), gender (12 female) and seniority (15 established
investigators, 6 intermediate career, and 10 young and emerging scientists).