* 1156580
* Research experiences in Estuarine and Coastal Science for Undergraduates at Mote Marine Laboratory: Developing a New Generation of Leaders in Ocean Sciences.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Catherine Walsh, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 11/30/2016
* USD 378,388.00

The goal of Mote Marine Laboratory's (MML) Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Program is to provide research experiences in estuarine and
coastal sciences to undergraduate students in colleges and universities
throughout the United States. MML, which is located in Sarasota, FL, will
support 10 students to participate in a 10-week research training program. The
broader impacts of the program are that it specifically advances understanding
and discovery in estuarine and coastal sciences while promoting the education
and career development of future ocean science professionals, including
underrepresented minorities. This is accomplished by: 1) providing students with
direct, "hands-on" experiences in conducting research in diverse research areas
within ocean sciences; 2) developing meaningful relationships between students
and ocean science professionals; and 3) exposing undergraduates to a variety of
skills necessary to pursue a successful career in science. Students are paired
with Mote researchers from six research centers and conduct mentored research
projects on one of four major threats to coastal habitats: 1) natural toxins, 2)
habitat alteration, 3) animal behavior due to habitat change, and 4) coral reef
decline. The focus of this program on ocean health is responsive to new calls
for a national agenda focused on restoring and protecting aquatic habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to improved research skills, students gain
invaluable experience in scientific communication by developing and presenting
research proposals on their independent projects and reporting their findings in
research grant report format and science poster presentations. Career guidance
on grantsmanship, scientific writing, presenting poster and oral research talks,
and pursuing graduate study in the Ocean Sciences is provided in student-
centered discussion groups. Students are also exposed to a broader range of
topics in coastal and estuarine sciences by attending research seminars
presented by Mote scientific staff, visiting scientists, and Mote REU Program
alumni. Participants are encouraged to present research findings in peer-
reviewed literature and/or at professional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support provided by NSF includes funding for
student stipends, student travel to and from the site, student housing and
meals, and some administrative costs.