* 1156077
* Price Discrimination and Competition in Many-to-Many Matching Markets
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Alessandro Pavan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 266,808.00

This project develops a new theoretical framework for studying many-to-many
matching markets, that is, markets where the product sold by a platform firm is
access to other agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research team first
investigates how platforms can engage in second-degree price discrimination to
sort agents into multiple (possibly non-exclusive) networks. Despite the fact
that these practices are common in many-to-many matching markets such as the
provision of health care, cable TV, internet services, and online advertising,
the theoretical analysis of such practices is limited. They use a mechanism
design approach. This allows them to shed light on the platforms' profit-
maximizing practices and on the allocations that they induce, without imposing
ad-hoc restrictions on the network architecture (e.g., single-homing) and on the
pricing strategies (e.g., two-part tariffs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The starting
point of the analysis is the recognition of the fact that agents in such markets
typically have private information both about their willingness to pay to reach
other agents as well as about idiosyncratic characteristics that determine their
attractiveness for those agents they are matched to. For example, in the contest
of health care, patients have private information both about their willingness
to pay to join different physician networks, as well as about various
idiosyncratic characteristics (health status, life style, risks) that determine
the profits that the physicians expect from having such patients in the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The analysis sheds light on (i) the distortions
associated with the private and public provision of matching services, (ii) how
such distortions depend on the degree of platform competition, (iii) how the
government can increase welfare by correcting such inefficiencies using
instruments such as subsidies and taxes (and, in some cases, imposing universal
service obligations), but also (iv) what network structures are more likely to
emerge under private and public provision (e.g., single-homing vs multi-homing),
(v) the effects on profits, network structure, and welfare of various shocks
that alter the distribution of valuations and/or the attractiveness of the two
sides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The team also studies how the dispersion of
information affects the equilibrium prices and the network allocations in two-
sided markets where multiple platforms compete to attract users on each side.
The researchers develop a model where agents are allowed to have horizontally
differentiated preferences for the services of the competing platforms as well
as private information both about their utility from joining the platforms and
about the distribution of preferences and information in the cross-section of
the population. This richness is meant to shed light on how the familiar effects
that emerge in two-sided markets due to network externalities interact with the
novel (and unexplored) effects coming from the dispersion of information. The
analysis uses techniques from the literature on "global games" to obtain the
convenience of equilibrium uniqueness while at the same time permitting the
outcome of such equilibrium to depend on the endogenous pricing strategies of
the competing platforms. Understanding the role that the dispersion of
information plays in such markets is instrumental, for example, to understanding
the effects of platforms' advertising campaigns on network structure, profits,
consumer surplus, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed activity is
expected to be relevant both for the various branches of economic theory
interested in matching problems (two-sided markets, health care economics,
school assignment problem, network economics), but also for practitioners in
such markets who can use the theoretical analysis for experimental and empirical
work. The results will be useful for competition policy, policy to promote the
adoption of new technologies, and health care policy.