* 1156635
* Sixth Conference on Mismatch Negativity (MMN) and its Clinical and Scientific Application
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Elyse Sussman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 04/30/2013
* USD 25,000.00

The mismatch negativity is an electrical brain response that is recorded using
electrodes placed on a person's scalp. These brain responses are the consequence
of neural activity related to processing stimuli or events. A response referred
to as the "mismatch negativity" is often used to evaluate brain responses to a
sound change within the context of an ongoing background sound pattern. With
support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Valerie Shafer, of the City
University of New York, in collaboration with Dr. Elyse Sussman, of Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, is leading a four-day conference to bring together
a diverse group of scientists, clinicians, postdoctoral fellows, and students
who use, or who are interested in using, the mismatch negativity brain response
to sounds such as speech and music. They are interested in such fundamental
questions as, to what extent does perception of speech differ from perception of
non-speech sounds? How do people use environmental sounds to identify and
localize objects? And how do people separate multiple sounds into different
objects (e.g., a trumpet and a saxophone in music)? Mismatch negativity research
is revealing how the properties of the sounds (e.g., pitch or timbre) compared
to what a listener does with the sounds (e.g., pays attention to or ignores
them) influence perception of sound objects. Research problems also include
sound processing by individuals with clinical conditions, such as dyslexia,
schizophrenia, autism, and coma. Work with clinical populations assists in
understanding normal auditory functioning. For example, a longstanding question
concerns the relationship between auditory processing and language learning, an
issue that can be addressed by studying perception in individuals with hearing
losses. Other areas being discussed include questions about how people learn
sound patterns early in life compared to later in life (e.g., in second-language
learning), and the extent to which plasticity for learning changes across the
lifespan. This forum allows attendees, including students, to exchange ideas and
foster collaborations, and to discuss and share recent research advances in
using this brain response as a tool for scientific investigation. The conference
comprises nine symposia, six keynote addresses,140 poster presentations, and
workshops for professional skill development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Conference on Mismatch Negativity serves as a forum for building a community of
researchers with interests in how our brains work in directing how we interpret
the sounds that we hear. This is the first time that the conference is being
held in the United States, and a major goal is to increase the involvement of US
researchers in this community. Bringing together this community of scientists
has potentially broad consequences for advancing scientific theories of how we
hear and interpret language, music, and environmental sounds. Research on
clinical disorders that may be partially caused by or may have an impact on how
we hear and interpret sound will also serve to refine theories of how brain
mechanisms underpin normal processing. Through the workshops and the web blog,
the conference provides training and encouragement for students and young
researchers to engage in this area of important research. Publication of a
special issue containing invited contributions that focus on neurodevelopment of
auditory processing will make conference content available to a wider audience.