* 1156952
* REU Site: Ocean Sciences and Engineering at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* James Yoder, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2016
* USD 540,461.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) that will
support ten undergraduate Fellows (rising seniors) annually for a 10-12 week
summer internship program. Individual student research projects and the
associated one-on-one mentorship with one or more members of the WHOI scientific
and senior technical staff are the heart of the WHOI REU program. Another
component of the program is the summer lecture series, which is designed for the
Fellows and attended by all of them. The talks provide an introduction to the
wide range of current research at WHOI, and an appreciation of how individual
research efforts and interdisciplinary projects can advance our understanding of
the oceans. The program also includes a half-day Ethics in Science workshop, and
the opportunity to take part in the full range of academic and social activities
available during the summer in Woods Hole. Finally, WHOI provides an at-sea
experience for all Fellows on WHOI's coastal research vessel, R.V. Tioga. At the
end of the summer, each Fellow prepares a written report describing their
research, and makes a public oral presentation of their research results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support provided by NSF includes funding for student
stipends, student travel to and from the site, student housing and meals and
some administrative costs.