* 1156747
* REU Site: Hard and Soft Materials in Nanoscience Technology Driven Energy Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2016
* USD 335,172.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This three year REU site program will be hosted by
the NanoScience Technology Center (NSTC) at the University of Central Florida
(UCF). Ten undergraduate students will be engaged in research and education
activities for 10 summer weeks each year. The program will include the
following: (1) introductory coursework on the basic principles of engineering
energy, nanotechnology; (2) research seminars by faculty and industry leaders;
(3) industrial visits to the numerous industries in Central Florida; (4)
seminars, workshops and discussion sessions on ethics in engineering research,
group projects to foster interdisciplinary research; and (5) monitoring,
evaluation, and tracking of the students' progress via weekly discussion groups
and (6) preparation of students to pursue careers in STEM areas. Participants
will learn to manufacture and study new functional nanomaterials and devices for
energy applications under the guidance of faculty from multidisciplinary
programs. The research will involve experimental work as well as computer based
modeling. The students will be trained in technology commercialization of
nanomaterials for enabling technology in collaboration with UCF's Technology
Incubator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This REU site program
will engage faculty from Materials, Engineering, Optical and Physical sciences.
It will foster intercollegial relationships between STEM faculty and students
with an opportunity to investigate new teaching paradigms. This experience will
aid students in formulating their career paths in STEM areas and will create a
multicultural rich environment for the students to enable them to understand the
intercultural dynamics in a research and educational setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will encourage these students to pursue
graduate studies in science and engineering with a nanofocus. These
undergraduate students will gain the skill set to become leaders in the
development and commercialization of nanotechnology-based materials and device
technologies for the energy economy of tomorrow, which is of strategic
importance to the Central Florida area as well as to the United States to
support its position as a global economic and technological leader.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program."