* 1156564
* CAREER: Resolving Turbulence-Chemistry Interaction Using Novel Laser Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/19/2011,02/29/2016
* Lin Ma, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 02/29/2016
* USD 301,878.00

0844939&lt;br/&gt;Ma&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding turbulence is one of the
great challenges of physical science; understanding the complicated interactions
of turbulence and chemistry is scientifically even more challenging, but it is
also ubiquitous in engineering devices and processes. A sound understanding of
turbulence-chemistry interaction (TCI) can lead to fundamental improvements in
such devices and processes, contributing to the solution of societal issues such
as energy security and global warming. Mastering it calls for innovative methods
that can resolve the underlying physics to a new level. This project proposes
new experimental techniques to address both the science and applications in
fundamental and applied systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept is to
characterize both the turbulence and the chemistry, especially in two-phase
flows, by using photodissociation (PD) to create photofragments that can be
measured optically. Precursor molecules are seeded in the gaseous or two-phase
flow of interest, then photodissociated by a laser pulse. Because of the
nanosecond rapidity of the dissociation, a view of the flow is captured and the
TCI can be temporally resolved. Because the dissociation is complete, the
resulting photofragment represents the distribution of the seeded precursor.
Imaging the concentration of this photofragment can then generate
multidimensional measurements of key flow parameters like mixture fraction,
scalar dissipation rate, and rates of reaction, which are critical to TCI but
generally not measurable with existing experimental methods. This project
attempts to develop a unified diagnostic for two-phase flows based on PD, in the
sense that the diagnostic characterizes both phases based on the same tracer and
sensing technique (even the same lasers and cameras) to elucidate the rich
interactions in two-phase flows. Extensive collaborations will be established to
share and disseminate the experimental results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success in
this challenging project will have significant impact technologically, but it
also has the potential for a significant impact educationally through
integration into a range of educational activities. The ultimate aim of this
project is to develop these techniques for wide use through collaboration,
disseminating data, and teaching its concepts in the classroom and the
laboratory. The experimental research will be useful in reforming traditional
lecture-based courses, using physical and virtual laboratories to deliver
interactive learning opportunities that can also be extended beyond college
classrooms.