* 1156528
* REU Site: Research in molecular, cellular, neuro- and population biology using marine and other comparative models at the Whitney Laboratory for Marine Bioscience
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Barbara-Anne Battelle, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2016
* USD 322,330.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Florida's Whitney Laboratory for Marine Bioscience in St.
Augustine, Florida that will provide research training for 8 students, for 11
weeks during the summers of 2012- 2015. The program focuses on understanding
basic mechanisms of biology through studies of marine and other comparative
models. The Whitney Laboratory consists of a highly cooperative group of 10
faculty who guide student projects in areas of molecular, cellular, neuro-, and
population biology and bioinformatics. Students do full-time lab research,
participate in weekly research seminars and weekly workshops focusing on the
responsible conduct of research and professional communication skills. An
introductory series of lectures exposes students to basic concepts of evolution
and biodiversity which underlie the comparative approaches applied at the
Whitney Laboratory. Guided field trips into local marine estuaries, to inland
fresh water springs and to the Gulf coast of Florida also introduce students to
diverse ecosystems. Students meet with graduate coordinators of various
departments at the University of Florida to gain insights into the graduate
school application process. They also meet with former Whitney REU students to
discuss diverse career paths in science and science related fields. Students are
recruited nationwide through digital based advertising and direct faculty
contacts. Trips are made to several minority-serving institutions and
recruitment efforts also aim to attract non-traditional students from among
returning veterans and their family members. Students are selected based on
their academic record and research potential. Special attention is given to
applicants from groups currently underrepresented in the sciences and groups for
whom evidence suggests the REU experience has the greatest impact. Students are
tracked to determine their continued interest in science, their career paths,
and the lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the
program will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common
assessment tool. More information is available by visiting:
http://www.whitney.ufl.edu/index.php/education/undergraduate. Alternatively,
contact the PI (Dr. Barbara Battelle, battelle@whitney.ufl.edu) or Whitney's
Education Coordinator (Brenda Cannaliato, Brenda@whitney.ufl.edu).