* 1156707
* REU Site: Population Biology of Infectious Diseases
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2017
* John Drake, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Sakai
* 12/31/2017
* USD 326,850.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Georgia that will provide research training for 9 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. The program focuses on the population
biology of infectious diseases - the sciences that aim collectively to
understand the mechanisms by which existing and emerging pathogens spread,
evolve, and respond to environmental pressures. It is now widely perceived that
meeting the future challenges of infectious diseases will require an increasing
emphasis on inter-disciplinary training and collaboration and the quantitative
synthesis of ideas and data through modeling. A central goal of our program is
to provide students with research experiences and educational opportunities at
the intersections of the quantitative sciences (applied mathematics, statistics,
computer science) and empirical disciplines of infectious disease biology.
Students will be paired with faculty research mentors in 12 departments from
across the UGA campus, and will conduct projects focused on the ecological,
evolutionary or immunological interactions of hosts and pathogens. Students are
selected on the basis of academic preparedness, previous experiences, future
goals, and supporting letters of reference and to ensure a balance between
modeling and experimental projects within each cohort of students. Students will
be recruited through a combination of print, digital, and direct means including
a collaboration with the Peach State Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
participation (http://www.pslsamp.uga.edu/) and campus visits to a network of
supporting institutions. Undergraduate students from any institution and major
subject of study are invited to apply. Applications from students from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and/or majoring in biology,
computer science, ecology, mathematics, and statistics are especially
encouraged. Students are tracked to determine their continued interest in their
academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the
research experience. Information about the program will be assessed by various
means, including use of an REU common assessment tool. More information is
available by visiting http://reu.ecology.uga.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
John Drake at jdrake@uga.edu).