* 1156295
* Society for Risk Analysis World Congress on Risk III - Workshop (July 18-20, 2012 Sydney, Australia)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Alison Cullen, Society For Risk Analysis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2013
* USD 75,000.00

The World Congress on Risk III is an international conference gathering risk
analysts and practitioners from around the world in Sydney Australia from 18-20
July 2012. This is the third in a series of World Congresses that are
systematic, important steps toward development of the field of risk analysis,
related applications and a worldwide network of researchers, community
stakeholders, and decision makers. The theme for the 2012 World Congress is
"Risk and Development in a Changing World". Specific objectives of the 2012
Congress are to (1) stimulate dialogue and learning on risk issues of worldwide
interest, (2) share insights about analytic methods and decision processes used
in different regions of the world, (3) demonstrate and disseminate advances in
risk assessment and management, and (4) build bridges between professional
organizations and individuals worldwide to facilitate education and to transfer
science-based risk management practices across key user networks. NSF support is
for helping junior scholars from the United States and scholars from developing
countries attend the Congress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Risk assessment and
management is a field of research that provides science-based concepts, tools,
and processes (derived from both research and practice) that decision makers,
researchers, and community stakeholders can use in public and private decision
making about risk. The use of sound risk analysis methods is crucial for
intelligent choices about human health and livelihood, environmental systems,
prosperity, sustainability, and survival. Developing countries face urgent
challenges and are particularly in need of stronger capacity to employ good risk
analysis methods. The theme for the third conference focuses attention on risks
of importance to developing countries, in such domains as agriculture, food
safety, technology, water pollution and supply, air pollution, energy and
climate change, and disaster risk reduction.