* 1156767
* REU Sites: Anthropology by the Wire: Community Ethnography through Multimedia Research
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Samuel Collins, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2015
* USD 277,515.00

In this REU project, the PI-team recruits a diverse group of students drawn
primarily from area community colleges for anthropological research projects on
neighborhoods in Baltimore utilizing anthropological methods through the lens of
a public anthropology that demonstrates the relevance of anthropology to both
student researchers and to community participants. Over the course of 6 weeks in
the summer, 15 students attend seminars held at Towson University that are led
by faculty from Towson and from area community colleges. In addition,
participants attend workshops facilitated by community residents and organizers
introducing them to field sites in Baltimore's neighborhoods. While working on
their own ethnographic projects utilizing visual anthropology, participant
observation, interviews and archival work, students simultaneously collect and
analyze data with the assistance of, and in cooperation with, community
participants. These projects will take many forms, but all include multimedia
representations of the lives of people in communities that can be utilized by
people in their own efforts to develop their communities. When participants
leave Towson, they spend the next months analyzing data and completing their
projects for presentation to the community the following May. During this time,
they maintain a virtual community with other participants, including faculty and
community associates, for additional collaboration and mentorship. After the end
of the REU summer, faculty remain in contact with student cohorts in order to
facilitate transition to a 4-year university and to assist with efforts to
disseminate results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: 1) publishable
undergraduate research papers; 2) reflexive, documentary multimedia posted
online that demonstrate the benefits of university-community partnerships for
undergraduate research and for community-defined goals; and 3). a pedagogical
model for general education courses that include an original research
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: 1) multimedia presentations
created for public audiences highlighting the lives, problems and aspirations of
Baltimore residents in their home communities; 2) electronic networks of
students, faculty and community organizers interested in community-based
research and dissemination; and 3) a network of faculty from Towson and area
community colleges interested in encouraging community college students to
pursue research and post-graduate work.