* 1156935
* REU Site: Mapping Beetles, Trees, Neighborhoods, and Policies: A Multi-Scaled, Urban Ecological Assessment of the Asian Longhorned Beetle Invasion in New England (HERO)
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Deborah Martin, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 03/31/2016
* USD 329,992.00

The Asian longhorned beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis) is an invasive wood-
boring insect that is a grave threat to urban forests in New England, because it
is unique among invasive forest pests for attacking a broad array of tree
species. The 2008-present Asian longhorned beetle (ALB) infestation of central
Massachusetts poses a greater stress on ecosystem services, as well as response
groups ranging from federal/state resource managers to local residents, than any
previous ALB outbreak in other localities due to the predominance of favorable
host-species and the finely inter-connected nature of urban-rural forests as
well as the presence of a competitive interaction at the federal-stakeholder-
neighborhood level surrounding how the infestation should be treated and
understood. Unanswered questions abound regarding the level of ALB impact at
social and ecological levels. This REU Site renewal project is built on 12 years
of success engaging undergraduate researchers at Clark University with the
Human-Environment Regional Observatory--Massachusetts (HERO-MA) program on land
change/vulnerability studies, which followed the REU Site approach (Polsky et
al., 2007) since its inception, and as an official REU Site since
2008.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The Beetle Impact Assessment
stream produces validated measures of spatial and temporal changes in tree cover
composition in the ALB-infestation area. This team also evaluates impacts of ALB
on forest diversity and cover at present and in the future. The Place-Making
Assessment team assess management and policymaking responses to community
concerns in response to ALB impacts, involving stakeholders throughout the
analysis. They also evaluate ALB impacts by socio-economic status,
race/ethnicity and management/governance regime to explore how a more engaged
stakeholder group would respond to policy as a result of the ALB
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project integrally
involves undergraduate students (with an emphasis on those from underrepresented
groups in the implementation of established research design, and learning
outcomes are assessed using a proven methodology within HERO-MA. It is expected
to produce salient results that provide resources for practitioners and urban-
rural communities experiencing changes associated with loss of urban forest;
publications are expected to be produced for both scholarly and stakeholder
(e.g., UDSA-APHIS, federal/state/municipal/community groups/elected officials)
audiences.