* 1156589
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in the Mathematical Sciences and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Jay Walton, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2016
* USD 360,000.00

The Department of Mathematics at Texas A&M University will support fourteen
students per year to participate in their eight-week summer research experience
for undergraduates program in the mathematical sciences. In year one, three
parallel research thrusts are planned. The first program involves mathematical
biology with emphasis on applications to complex ecosystems, infectious and
other diseases. The second program involves the theory and application of
wavelets. Wavelets are the basis for state-of-the-art data compression
algorithms as applied to high-speed, high bandwidth communication, and audio and
video compression technologies. The third area involves computational algebra
and algebraic geometry. Applications include understanding the structure of
complex macro-molecules such as proteins and DNA, and to solving large systems
of polynomial equations which are ubiquitous in engineering and science
applications. Years two and three will include a fourth program in algorithmic
number theory.

Student participants will enhance their training as future research scientists
and mathematicians. Participants will present their research findings to a
locally held conference as well as being encouraged to present them at national
scientific meetings or publish them in journals targeted to undergraduate
research. In the selection of participants, priority will be given to students
coming from undergraduate programs offering limited access to research
opportunities and to students from demographic groups underrepresented in the
mathematical sciences.