* 1156608
* REU Site: Investigations in Geometry and Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Rolland Trapp, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2015
* USD 284,344.00

The REU Sites project, Investigations in Geometry and Knot Theory, is an 8-week
program for 8 undergraduates at California State University, San Bernardino.
There are two topics which the participants will study. The first is an
investigation of the algebraic properties of the Riemann curvature tensor on a
smooth manifold. The possible questions we intend to pose relate to the
interaction between the sorts of canonical curvature tensors one obtains from an
embedding of a manifold into flat space as a hypersurface, in particular, the
efficiency one has in exhibiting any curvature one might encounter in terms of
the linear independence of algebraic curvature tensors. While these questions
are broad in scope, another main area of study in this realm will be the
decomposability of the algebraic structures that each tangent space of a smooth
manifold is equipped with: the tangent space itself, the metric, and the
curvature tensor. While it has been shown there are certain general
circumstances when these structures decompose, there are many questions about
the nature of this decomposition in specific instances that is of interest.
Beyond that, there is ample room for the discovery of new manifolds with
prescribed curvature properties. The second topic of investigation is a study of
hyperbolic knots. The subject of hyperbolic geometry is very rich, incorporating
algebraic, geometric and topological techniques. Moreover, the theory is
developed enough to offer a wealth of problems accessible to mathematically
mature undergraduates. There are two classes of questions that will be
investigated in the knot theory portion of the program, both of which pursue the
relationship between hyperbolic geometry and braid theoretic descriptions of
links. The first involves volumes of hyperbolic closed three braids, and the
second involves classifying closed braid representatives of hyperbolic knots.
Participants will be introduced to two vibrant areas of mathematics, geometry
and knot theory, and will be actively engaged in significant research
experiences.

Experienced faculty advisors design projects in Geometry and Knot theory that
introduce participants to significant mathematics while exploring creative and
original concepts in their respective fields. A group of students will work in
each relevant field, with significant mathematical interaction occurring between
students working in the same field. Moreover, participants will work closely
with their mentors in an enriching environment to complete background reading
related to their topic, give presentations on relevant material, conduct
research, and begin writing a journal-style paper. As the summer progresses,
students will perform their own literature searches, make independent
discoveries and engage in creative mathematical research. In addition to regular
presentations and paper assignments, each student will create a poster
describing their results, give a twenty-minute final presentation to the campus
community at California State University, San Bernardino, and complete a
journal-style paper about their project. Thus participants will have a
comprehensive and cohort research experience. The program will advance discovery
through actively engaging undergraduate students in mathematical research and
strongly encouraging them to become active participants in the mathematical
community. Students from minority-serving institutions are encouraged to apply.
Further, California State University, San Bernardino's diverse student
population attends events sponsored by the program, broadening the impact it has
on underrepresented groups. Finally, the program has a multifaceted plan for
broad dissemination in order to enhance scientific understanding. Avenues for
dissemination include conference presentations, submission for publication, and
posting results on the program's web site.