* 1156713
* REU Site: Ole Miss Physical Chemistry Summer Research Program
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gregory Tschumper, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the EPSCoR Office at the
National Science Foundation supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site at the University of Mississippi. The site leaders will bring 10
students to campus for 10 weeks each summer to conduct research in the area of
Physical Chemistry. This REU Site will allow undergraduates who are recruited
from other institutions to participate in the Ole Miss Physical Chemistry Summer
Research Program, which is an established summer program that has a demonstrated
track record for fostering communication and collaboration between the members
of the physical and computational chemistry research groups at the University of
Mississippi (Ole Miss). These students will perform original research in
successful, funded, and collaborating research groups. They will also take part
in a summer-long schedule of organized academic and social activities with Ole
Miss undergraduate and graduate students, faculty, and staff. This natural
expansion of an established summer program will allow additional students to
take advantage of a developed program, while at the same time supporting
multiple NSF-funded research groups with undergraduate research students in a
collaborative environment. Undergraduate student participants in the REU program
will have the opportunity to perform original research in the laboratories of
six faculty members and at the Mississippi Center for Supercomputing Research
(MCSR). Many of the projects outlined are collaborative, with mentoring by
multiple senior personnel who will provide research experiences in many
different areas. Centered on experimental and theoretical physical chemistry,
the research projects include synthetic design of novel emissive materials,
determining the photophysical properties of newly-developed materials, the
spectroscopic study and computational modeling of important biologically
relevant interactions, and computational modeling of newly-developed materials
with energy or drug development applications. Recruitment of students from
schools with large numbers of underrepresented groups is planned, with contacts
having been made at Rust College, Alcorn State University, Mississippi Valley
State University, and Tougaloo College, all are traditionally Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCU). In addition, students will be recruited from
Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) such as Millsaps College,
Mississippi University for Women, Belhaven College, and Mississippi College.