* 1156271
* RUI: Influence of Economic Incentives on Common Property Forest Management: Rural Decision Making in the Context of REDD+
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Tanya Hayes, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2015
* USD 449,997.00

Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES), a voluntary transaction in which an
individual receives payment for provision of an environmental service (e.g.
forest for watershed protection), has emerged as a prominent international
policy tool to mitigate climate change by controlling deforestation in
developing countries.It remains uncertain, however, how effective these policies
are in encouraging rural people to voluntarily participate, and ultimately
change, their resource use behaviors. This study examines the impacts of an
Ecuadorian payment for forest conservation program implemented on common-
property forest lands. The study uses institutional analysis, quantitative
modeling and qualitative methods to empirically test if and how the PES system
of payments and contracts impacts rural and indigenous communities' decision to
(1) participate in forest conservation agreements, (2) change their forest-use
rules, and ultimately, (3) change individual forest use behaviors and the
resultant conservation outcomes. Data are gathered via questionnaire, focus
groups, and forest mensuration techniques in communities that decided to
participate in the payment program and those communities that chose not to.

The PES forest conservation program in Ecuador serves as a policy experiment to
better understand how the broader PES model of contracts and payments
corresponds to the decision-making models of rural resource users, specifically
those that share common-property rights to their lands. If PES programs do not
align with participant decision-making priorities, we may waste millions of
dollars promoting a policy that fails to support local livelihoods or conserve
the world's forests. By combining quantitative and qualitative methods, this
study explores the power of monetary incentives as compared to other non-
monetary factors in rural land-use decisions. The results provide valuable
information to policy makers and practitioners regarding the use of incentives
for forest conservation and suggestions for improving the design of PES programs
in developing countries.