* 1156801
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences  in Sensors and  Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2017
* Kambiz Alavi, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2017
* USD 338,962.00

This three year award at the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) Department
of Electrical Engineering (EE) will engage twelve students per year for a nine-
week summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in Sensors and
Applications. The program will be implemented within EE to augment existing
efforts to support undergraduate student involvement in research, but will
include other components within the College of Engineering (COE), in particular
the Nanotechnology Research and Teaching Facility (NanoFab). Some of the
research projects to be included cut across departmental boundaries within COE,
with Bioengineering and with the mathematics department, providing an additional
component of interdisciplinary experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While students
work on their particular research projects, they will participate in bi-weekly
meetings within their research group to assess and facilitate progress. Bi-
weekly general meetings with participating faculty members and their teams, REU
management (including the REU assistants) and undergraduate students are
designed to promote enhancements in the REU delivery phase, and are important
for professional and technical development. Presentations by the REU
participants will include: 1)a midterm oral presentation, to the management
group and research teams, will provide updates on their project work, delineate
their responsibilities, and present goals that the would like to achieve by the
end of program,2) a final presentation focused on individual accomplishments as
well as their role on the team and how their accomplishment fits within the
larger scope of the research, and 3)a final technical report focused on the
outcomes of the research and the process by which the overall research work was
done.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research, students will
participate in educational workshops designed to take advantage of materials
from the Environmental Health and Safety Office, Graduate School, Department of
English, and University College Student Obtaining Readiness (SOAR) programs. The
REU students will go on field trips that will help them see the outcome of
sensor technology research in daily life. Sites are selected that will be of
interest for students, and also to resonate with the general theme of this REU
program. For example, the recently completed Dallas Cowboys stadium, located
about one mile from the EE department, is a world of sensors. Thousands of
sensors control movement of the dome and manage the air quality, light, sound,
and the largest indoor LCDTV in the world. There will also be tours to one or
more of the large local industries, such as Bell Helicopter, Lockheed Martin,
Texas Instruments, and Ericsson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants will
experience the challenges and satisfaction of doing research, and will be
encouraged to pursue advanced degrees in science and engineering. The program
will increase the participation in research activities by women,
underrepresented minorities and 9/11 GI-Bill veterans. The Principal
Investigator will especially seek and encourage participation from two and four
year institutions with limited research capabilities in Texas and its
neighboring states. Diversity of the program strengthens research capability and
increases competence across ethnic, gender and socioeconomic lines, and also
helps to provide role models for talented students whose potentials may not be
fully utilized.