* 1156091
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Connections Between Economics Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Pietro Ortoleva, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 170,720.00

This award funds research in behavioral economics that will analyze the possible
relationships between economic behaviors using new data and new modeling
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past thirty years, behavioral and
experimental economists have made great strides in identifying behaviors that
are hard to explain using the classic model of economic decision making: these
include violations of expected utility theory such as the Allais paradox,
ambiguity aversion, present bias, loss aversion and the endowment effect. All of
these behaviors have been shown to affect important economic decisions, and have
been the subject of enormous amounts of attention by researchers. However, far
less attention has been paid to the links between these behaviors. This project
examines these links both empirically and theoretically.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project employs a laboratory
experiment to measure a long list of well-known behavioral phenomena, including
the ones listed above, in a single group of subjects, allowing the researchers
to estimate the empirical relationship between them. Using these data they are
then able to test the predictions of existing models about these relationships,
and can use these results to guide their theoretical model. The second project
develops part of that model, through a link between two particular behavioral
biases: the Allais paradox in choice over risky prospects (i.e. where the
probabilities of different outcomes are known) and the Ellsberg paradox in
choice over uncertain prospects (i.e. where the probabilities of different
outcomes are not known). Both behaviors can be explained by a unique behavioral
axiom -- a generalized preference for hedging. This model will potentially be
helpful in understanding behavior in environments that have both risk and
uncertainty (such as financial decision making) and to capture more precisely
the agent's attitude towards each of them. The third project extends the
empirical work from project 1 by repeating the same experiment with a different
subject pool, focusing on: (1) a representative sample of the US population; (2)
subjects who suffer from anxiety and depression; (3) subjects primed into
various emotional states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the economic behaviors
studied in this project are so ubiquitous, this grant could have a wide impact
in many areas of the social sciences. For macroeconomists, who have long
understood the impact of these biases on economic performance, understanding the
relationship between them is necessary for understanding the distribution of
economic outcomes. For policy makers, an understanding of any common cause to
these biases could prove to be very helpful for any attempt to rectify them. For
neuroeconomists and psychologists, such an understanding could aid the search
for the biological bases of economic behavior.