* 1156525
* Bridge to Research in Marine Sciences: A Summer REU Program in Savannah, Georgia
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Christopher Hintz, Savannah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/29/2016
* USD 358,403.00

Savannah State University in Savannah, Georgia hosts an 8-week, 10-student
summer REU program in marine sciences. The goal of this REU program is the early
recruitment and support of undergraduate students in the STEM pipeline. This
program is developed around a multidisciplinary collaboration between academic
and governmental partners in the Savannah, Georgia area. Savannah State
University's local partners include the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Savannah, and Gray's Reef National Marine
Sanctuary. Each has experienced research mentors and high level facilities that
provide an excellent environment for student research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase I of the REU program, or weeks 1-3, focuses on
whole-group activities including short courses, guest lectures, field trips, a
one-day genetics/biotechnology workshop and visits to marine laboratories along
the Georgia/South Carolina coast. Short course topics include introductory
marine science lectures and fundamental research skills. Lastly, students
participate on a 2-day research cruise onboard an oceanographic research ship.
The second portion, a 5-week Phase II, switches focus to the students' research
in mentor labs at SSU or one of the participating institutions. Each student
will complete a mini-research report at the end of Phase I, a log/journal of
their activities, an oral and written presentation of their research and a
completed program evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support provided by NSF
includes funding for student stipends, student travel to and from the site,
student housing and meals and some administrative costs.