* 1156549
* REU Site: Earth, Wind, and Fire: Sustainable Energy in the 21st Century
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,11/30/2015
* Larry Erickson, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 11/30/2015
* USD 316,398.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This proposed three-year REU site renewal proposal
is focused in the area of sustainable energy. This REU site builds upon the
success of an REU site in sustainable energy at Kansas State University from
2009 through 2011. The core of the program is the research the students will
conduct on sustainable energy. These research projects will involve faculty
mentors from chemistry, chemical engineering, electrical and computer
engineering, biological and agricultural engineering, and grain science. In
these projects, students will acquire research skills and become aware of the
technical skills required for addressing challenges in sustainable energy.
Students will orally present the results of their research to their peers and
the co-PIs once during the summer and through a poster presentation at a
concluding research symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to their
research, students will participate in weekly seminars on sustainability and
professional development. The sustainability seminars will cover topics such as
triple bottom line, climate change, carbon taxes and carbon trading, wind
energy, solar energy, biofuels, sustainable transportation systems, energy
efficiency and conservation, water, land, sustainable indoor environments,
population, and sustainable food systems. These seminars will be part of a
formal course, ChE 670 Sustainability Seminar, for which the students will
receive one hour of academic credit. The professional development seminars will
include topics such as laboratory safety, laboratory research notebooks, data
management, writing a scientific paper, technical presentations, graduate
education, and career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A final key component of this
project will be the inclusion of a team outreach project related to
sustainability. In this project, groups of students will interact with the
public (at the Flint Hills Discovery Center) or K-12 students (at on-campus
summer camps) about a topic on sustainability of their choosing. Students will
be trained in how to present technical information to a non-technical audience
by the head of the Center for Science Education at Kansas State. This team
project will enhance student communication skills, allow students to see the
broader implications of their research, and see how they can positively impact
society through research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The socialization amongst the
students is important in solidifying the research experience and reinforcing the
diversity of the program. To facilitate these interactions a series of social
activities will be planned to build community among the REU students and faculty
mentors. These will include weekly brown bag lunches on campus, field trips to
unique sites at and near Kansas State (ethanol plant, hydroelectric plant, wind
farm), and evening activities such as a hike on a nearby prairie.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed REU site will
provide a rich research experience focused on the personal and professional
development of the participants. Students will gain not only the technical
abilities required to conduct research in sustainable energy, but will also
become aware of the social and political issues associated with sustainable
energy. By being involved in a team outreach project on sustainable energy,
students will learn to communicate their research to broad audiences and about
how their research fits into society. The REU site will also enhance the
participation of students from underrepresented groups in research and in
graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The site is co-funded by the Department
of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program."