* 1156810
* REU Site:   Channeling Bio-Majors into Research Careers in Bio-Molecular Sciences and Informatics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Jose Garcia-Arraras, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2015
* USD 285,363.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras that will provide training for 10 students
for ten weeks, during the summers of 2012-2014. The program focuses on molecular
biosciences -- the application of molecular biology and bioinformatics to major
areas of biology like molecular genetics, microbiology, neuroscience and
evolution. The Department of Biology faculty will serve as mentors, who will
offer a wide range of interesting and exciting projects for the students.
Parallel to the research work, students will participate in a series of
workshops and seminars, such as the responsible conduct in research,
professional communication skills, career opportunities, and the graduate school
application process. The REU students have access to a rich array of individual
mentor's facilities as well as many interdepartmental labs and centers with core
facilities such as electron and confocal microscopy, sequencing, microarray
analysis, proteomic analysis, etc. In addition, students will write a scientific
report on their research project and present their work at an end-of-program
symposium. The program's multi-phase recruitment effort consists of both
traditional "hard copy" formats as well as digital-based advertising. Students
are selected based on academic record, research performance, and potential for
outstanding research in biomolecular sciences. Students are tracked to determine
their continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths,
and the lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the
program will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common
assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://biology.uprrp.edu/undergraduate/ur_research_oportunities.htm, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Migdalisel Colon at lisycolonberlingeri@yahoo.com) or the
co-PI (Dr. Jose E Garcia at jegarcia@hpcf.upr.edu).