* 1156520
* REU Site: SURFO - Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Kathleen Donohue, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2016
* USD 395,383.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program is located at the
University of Rhode Island's Graduate School of Oceanography (GSO) in
Narragansett, RI. Named the "Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in
Oceanography" (SURFO) program, the REU Site is a 10-week research/educational
program designed to expose 12 undergraduates per year to cutting-edge,
authentic, oceanographic research. Each student will work with a research
advisor and graduate student to develop/conduct a research project in an area of
oceanography appropriate to each student's background and interests. The
research or educational niche filled by the SURFO program deals with the more
quantitative aspects of oceanography, which closely parallels the strengths of
GSO. The research projects undertaken by participants are typically part of a
separately funded research program, but the student project focuses on an
interesting aspect of the research that was not anticipated. Many of the student
projects result in important initial findings for subsequent research proposals
or publications. Numerous research seminars and professional development
workshops are conducted specifically for the SURFOs. At the end of the summer,
students present their results during a student research symposium and they
write a research paper. Students and advisors are strongly encouraged to
continue the projects for presentation at national/regional meetings or
submission to refereed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is supported by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.