* 1156584
* Renewal of the Sustainable Energy Research Experience for Undergraduates in the Chemical Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Wayne Seames, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The scientists and engineers of the University of North Dakota (UND) Sustainable
Energy Research Initiative and Supporting Education Group (SUNRISE), a faculty
organized, student-centered research group located in the Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering departments at UND, will continue hosting an REU site based on
chemistry-focused undergraduate research that contributes to the advancement of
sustainable energy technologies. As the number of issues related to energy
proliferates, the next generation of scientists and engineers will be required
to understand, develop, and improve sustainable energy technologies. For three
years, a 10-week summer program will be implemented where nine NSF-funded
students conduct research in biofuels, wind energy, solar energy, clean coal,
and fuel cells. SUNRISE is committed to training individuals who will develop
innovative solutions to these problems and who can speak to the impact of these
issues to diverse populations. Native American and Hispanic students comprising
a significant fraction of each REU cohort will be recruited using bridge
programs. Weekly sessions will be dedicated to improving students' communication
skills; four weekly sessions will focus heavily on motivating students to think
about the ethical impacts of their actions and instilling in them the desire to
make the right decisions in ethical situations. A major goal of this program is
to foster team work, promote the continued interest in research, and encourage
professional development in the student participants while they are making a
real contribution to chemical research.