* 1156003
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Models of Riparian Land Use and Management: Environmental Decision-Making and Behavior in Southern Appalachia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Sakura Evans, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2014
* USD 19,500.00

University of Georgia doctoral student Sakura Evans, under the supervision of
Dr. Ted Gragson, will conduct research on the role of culture in decision-making
and behavior by examining intra-community patterns of management and decision-
making among landowners in Southern Appalachia. Riparian zones (areas near
waterways) are critical areas for habitat preservation, yet urbanization,
agriculture, and household land use practices are resulting in the degradation
of riparian ecosystems. Past research has focused on the impacts of human land
use on stream and riparian health but has overlooked the cognitive processes
informing decision-making and behavior that result in riparian degradation.
Efforts focused solely on repairing degradation without understanding the causes
will ultimately fail.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To investigate the cultural models
underlying landowners' decisions regarding their riparian property, Evans'
research will use qualitative and quantitative methods of data collection and
analysis. Ethnographic methods will include semi-structured interviews with
landowners, land-use histories, walking tours of streams and riparian zones, and
socio-demographic data collection. Textual analysis of interview material and
field notes will inform a culturally contextualized social survey designed to
elicit landowners' opinions of riparian conditions, perceptions of riparian
degradation, and support for riparian protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to a greater understanding of the variability found
within culture, while also uncovering the shared cultural models of the natural
environment within a community. The project will also support landowners'
preferences for riparian protection and management, necessary for reversing
harmful land use practices at the household level, while also protecting water
quality and quantity at the regional level. This research will also contribute
to the analysis of regional socio-ecological processes within the scope of the
2008-2014 objectives of the Coweeta Long-Term Ecological Research Program
(DEB-0823293).