* 1156999
* REU Site:  Water, Society and Health
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Garrick Louis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2016
* USD 305,245.00

This international REU Site award at the University of Virginia (UVA) is
partnering with the University of Venda (UNIVEN) located in Limpopo Province,
South Africa to host this REU Site program. This program will introduce
undergraduate students to the complexities of research at the interface between
society, water, and human health disciplines. Undergraduate students will
collaborate with faculty and graduate students to develop, design, and test
culturally appropriate systems and technologies with regard to technical
performance, benefits to human health, and local economic development potential.
Research activities will be at multiple scales, including: 1) the molecular and
antigenic characterization of Cryptosporidium and Enteroaggregative E. coli; 2)
quantification of the effects of silver and copper nanoparticles on
Cryptosporidium using a murine model, a conventional live-dead assay enhanced
through dielectrophoretic cell pre-construction, and through the development of
a new assay based on electro-rotation; 3) randomized community-level
interventions (with appropriate controls) for point-of-use water treatment
technologies and studies of their economic impact and effects on human health;
and 4) development and testing of an agent-based model (ABM) to better
understand the complex relations between water, sanitation, and human health
with particular consideration of early childhood diarrhea and malnutrition. This
research will also leverage a newly awarded grant that focuses on the relations
between gastrointestinal infection and malnutrition in the rural communities
surrounding UNIVEN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU student recruitment will focus on
colleges without, or with only limited, graduate programs, including
historically black colleges and universities in the state of Virginia. Students
selected for the program will be placed in an interdisciplinary research team
under the supervision of one or more of the principal investigators. Students
will participate in team meetings via videoconferencing using Elluminate during
the Spring and Fall semesters. Each student will participate in research
activities during an 8-week period in Limpopo Province, S. Africa. Their summer
experience will begin with a series of orientations with UVA and UNIVEN faculty
and students. A doctoral student will serve as a coordinator and mentor for the
undergraduate students throughout the summer. Student teams will be
interdisciplinary by design, and will typically include REU students and UVA and
UNIVEN undergraduates. Students will all reside in a gated facility of cottages
where they will be able to share meals and experiences. During the Fall
semester, students will be responsible for providing a written report of their
research and giving an oral presentation via videoconferencing. REU students
will be required to complete a 3-credit course at their home institution that is
outside their major department but within the theme of the research program. The
faculty team is diverse in discipline, race, and gender. Assessments of the
overall program and student learning will be conducted for each student cohort.