* 1156395
* BRIGE: Cross-layer Inter-network Cooperation for Broadcast, Cellular and Ad-hoc Hybrid System
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2011,08/31/2013
* Hongxiang Li, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2013
* USD 118,592.00

Intellectual Merit: Cooperation is an effective strategy in nature to achieve
individual or common goals by forming cooperative groups. While the wireless
communications research community has shown that cooperation techniques can
substantially increase the system performance, most of the existing work is
limited to a single network. On the other hand, the ubiquitous wireless
applications are bringing more and more new networks, making the co-existence of
multi-networks inevitable. The objective of this BRIGE research is to develop a
new network structure that integrates cellular, TV broadcast, and ad-hoc
networks using cross-layer inter-network cooperation techniques. The research
components of the project consist of two parts. The first part is a
collaborative broadcast and cellular hybrid system, which is a joint design
approach for broadcast and cellular services to be simultaneously supported in a
single platform. In this project, focus is on the more practical hybrid model
with joint coding, where information bits are coded across both time and
frequency. The second part is a collaborative cellular and ad-hoc hybrid system,
which achieves the benefits offered by both infrastructure networks (high
throughput, good reliability and quality of service) and ad-hoc networks (larger
coverage, low cost and flexibility).

Broader Impacts: The issues identified in this project are inherently cognizant,
thus the research output will likely influence and transform, rather than
follow, scientific and technological trends. In particular, the proposed hybrid
network structure will bring new wireless services to hard-to-reach, low
population density areas, typical of rural environments. The PI will also
recruit students of underrepresented groups in North Dakota, including Native
American, female, low incoming and first generation students to participate in
the project. By integrating research and education together, this project will
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in engineering.