* 1156094
* SHINE: Coronal and Interplanetary Magnetic Field: Structure, Topology, Flux Tubes, Transport, and Application to Energetic Particles
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* William Matthaeus, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/29/2016
* USD 382,341.00

As the scientific motivation for this project, the principal investigator (PI)
and his team note that the space physics community currently relies on solar
magnetic field models that assume it is meaningful to represent flux tubes as
coherent objects that extend over distances ranging from fractions of a solar
radius to many Astronomical Units. In order to place this fundamental assumption
on a firmer basis, the PI's team will examine the limitations of this "coherent
flux tube" paradigm when magnetic fluctuations are present and they will study
how to extend beyond this conceptual framework using several approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will apply magnetic field models and nonlinear
transport theory to quantify Field Line Random Walk effects, as well as the flux
tube meandering and "shredding" that causes the eventual breakdown of the
standard flux tube scenario. The team will investigate these phenomena using
"Reduced Magnetohydrodynamics" (Reduced MHD) physics models, an approach that is
well tested in solar corona studies. The PI's team will also study the often
neglected implications of isotropic field line and particle transport, where
particle trapping becomes very important. The team will examine the relationship
between field line transport and the intermittent character of real turbulent
fields, and apply this knowledge to examine the well-known "dropouts" and
"channeling" of solar energetic particles (SEPs) that have been observed. The
team will investigate the time-dependent interaction of flux tubes by
introducing the concept of "component interchange reconnection" and exploring
its consequences for the topological structure of magnetic fields in the solar
wind and in dynamical simulations of MHD turbulence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this effort include improving our recognition of the
limitations of existing flux tube models, and how these limitations apply to
research areas ranging from astrophysics to space weather forecasting. In
particular, this work will have an immediate impact on our understanding of the
propagation of SEPs in a space weather context. The PI will also provide
mentoring for several postdoctoral fellows and widely disseminate these research
results at solar physics community workshops.