* 1156422
* REU Site: EMERGE: Energy, Materials and the Environment: Researchers Gaining Experience
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Jay Benziger, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 320,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EMERGE (Energy, Materials and the
Environment: Researchers Gaining Experience) program at Princeton University
will contribute to the training of the next generation of scientists and
engineers to tackle the challenges of providing sustainable energy for the
future. A group of 8 undergraduate students and 2 high school teachers will
engage in state-of-the-art research with a specific focus on materials science
applied to sustainable energy. The EMERGE program emphasizes first time research
experiences for a diverse group of students who have limited access to research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty from Chemistry, Physics and
Engineering will mentor students and secondary school teachers on theoretical,
computational, and experimental projects associated with energy storage, energy
conversion, carbon capture and environmental monitoring. Seminars and lectures
introducing the challenges of sustainable energy will complement the research. A
series of presentations and discussion sections led by the faculty from
Engineering, the Physical Sciences and the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and
International Affairs at Princeton University, will challenge the students to
examine the role of science and engineering research against a broader global
societal context. The combination of research and seminars will provide
experience, training and professional development opportunities that are
essential to the vitality of science and technology for the next generation.
This award is funded by Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials
Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
EMERGE (Energy, Materials and the Environment: Researchers Gaining Experience)
program at Princeton University will contribute to the training of the next
generation of scientists and engineers to tackle the challenges of providing
sustainable energy for the future. EMERGE engages 8 undergraduate students and 2
high school teachers in state-of-the-art materials science research applied to
sustainable energy production. A diverse group of students will be chosen for
the EMERGE program that will emphasize giving students who have had limited
access to research opportunities a first research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty from Chemistry, Physics and Engineering
will mentor students and secondary school teachers on projects associated with
energy storage, energy conversion, carbon capture and environmental monitoring.
Projects span the range of recovering the energy of bacterial motion to
optimizing high temperature materials to confine nuclear reactions. Through a
series of presentations, lectures by the faculty from the Woodrow Wilson School
of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University, and organized
discussion groups, students are also challenged to examine the role of science
and engineering research against a broader global societal context. The research
opportunities provide students with hands-on experience to excite and motivate
them for careers in research, business or government, while the RET program
provides teachers with an improved perspective of the impact of science and
engineering for sustainable energy to pass on to their students. This award is
funded by Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.