* 1156624
* REU Site: "Hands-on Minds-on": Multidisciplinary Approaches to Understanding and Preventing Societal Violence
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Cynthia Smith, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2015
* USD 365,448.00

This project brings researchers from across several disciplines together with
students from four-year institutions and community colleges in Virginia to learn
about conducting research. The topic of violence is explored with respect to its
antecedents and consequences as well as violence prevention. Scholars from three
different colleges at Virginia Tech (Engineering, Liberal Arts and Human
Sciences, and Science) participate in this project. Student exposure to the
interdisciplinary study of this pressing social problem is supported both
through interaction with participating faculty and in conjunction with the
Virginia Tech Center for Peace Studies and Violence Prevention. In this program,
undergraduates work with faculty on one of five research studies: 1)
Socialization of Emotions, 2) Bullying Prevention, 3)Responses to Media
Violence, 4) Peace Education, or 5) Technology and Conflict Management. Students
participate in team and project based training and research activities with a
special emphasis on ethics, benefiting from working with faculty at a major
research university. Through a series of workshops and guest speakers, students
are introduced to the concept of interdisciplinary research and they learn about
the processes involved in each project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program exposes students to a complex, multi-faceted,
real-world problem that lends itself well to learning about and understanding
interdisciplinary thinking. The topic of violence demands engagement with (a)
the inherent complexity of nature and society; (b) the desire to explore
problems and questions that are not confined to a single discipline; (c) the
need to solve societal problems; and (d) the power of new technologies. Exposing
undergraduates to multidisciplinary research teams and concepts of
interdisciplinary work prepares them for the collaborative research environments
they are likely to encounter in graduate programs and research careers, as well
as provide fulfilling personal and interpersonal experiences. Together these
elements provide motivation to pursue scientific research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: Involving students in the study
of an issue that directly impacts them can create a unique level of awareness
and interest that may lead to preventing future acts of violence. Combining
science, technology, and behavioral sciences to solve societal issues can result
in new approaches and engage a new generation of technology savvy students in
real-world problems. As more and more talented students turn to community
college as an affordable way to start their education, offering opportunities
for research to this diverse population keeps them moving towards a four-year
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF REU program.