* 1156706
* High-order accurate numerical models for magma migration beneath mid-ocean ridges: Geochemical consequences and geophysical implications
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* E Parmentier, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 05/31/2015
* USD 409,541.00

The generation of magmas in Earth's mantle and their segregation deep inside the
Earth result in lavas that erupt from volcanoes on Earth's surface. How these
processes take place and how they impart geochemical signatures in the resulting
lavas is fundamental to our knowledge of how Earth behaves as a system. However,
the processes that take place and complex interplay of geochemical and
geophysicsl parameters that allow them to happen are presently inadequately
understood. This research uses state-of-the-art numerical methods and computer
algorithms and combines the expertise of both geosciences and applied
mathematics to tackle the issues surrounding the physical and chemical proceses
involved in partial melting of the mantle, melt migration, and melt-rock
reaction in the generation of magma. From geochemical evidence gleaned from
basaltic lavas erupted at mid-ocean ridge spreading centers, it is clear that
the primary mechanism of melt transport requires the focusing of melt through
channels in the mantle. However, the formation, distribution,and longieivy of
these high-porosity channels is still a matter of speculation. To shed light on
this problem, high order, adaptve, and parallel numerical models for simulating
reactive magma migration in 2D and 3D settings directly relevant to melt
migration below mid ocean ridges is being developed. The resulting simulation
software will incorporate algorithms, approaches, and parameters that allow
reactive dissolution of minerals, shear deformation, and decomperssional melting
to be taken into account in models that calculate the distribution and
segregation of melt. Additional considerations that link the geochemcial
consequences and geophysical implications of melt migration will also be
developed. The results will provide critical imput to general time-dependent
melting models that allow geochemists to relate chemical heterogenaities
observed in erupted basaltic lavas to their mantle sources. Broader impacts of
the work include the funding of researchers at an institution in an EPSCoR state
(Rhode island), building fundamental infrastructure for science via developing
software that will be part of the Computational Infrastructure for Geodynamics
software library which is publicly accessible, and training of undergraduates
and graduate students in computational methods.