* 1156449
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Bruce Ault, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The REU program in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati
will bring 11 students to campus for ten weeks each summer to conduct research
in a stimulating, supportive research environment. These students will conduct
original research projects together with participating faculty members and their
research groups. Projects will be planned in such a way as to permit tangible
accomplishments in a ten-week period, yet be sufficiently open-ended that fresh
research challenges will arise. Each student will have the opportunity to
contribute to scientific knowledge, including refereed publication and
presentation at an appropriate scientific meeting. The program will further the
development of the REU students as young professional scientists and researchers
through a series of educational and professional development activities. These
will prepare the REU students to enter the pipeline as informed, knowledgeable
professionals with a clear understanding of the challenges and opportunities
before them. In addition, a new industrial mentoring program will be established
with scientists from Procter &amp; Gamble, the Fortune 500 American
multinational corporation headquartered in downtown Cincinnati. The industrial
scientists will mentor the students, help to build their self-confidence, and
increase their awareness of the role of a chemist in industry. A focus on
minority recruiting combined with the involvement of a faculty member from an
Historically Black College and University (HBCU) in the program, and
collaboration with Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, will expand
and strengthen the pool of underrepresented minorities in the workplace.
Advancement of underrepresented students is expected to have a broad societal
impact that will be complemented by the expected positive effects of the
research outcomes.