* 1156359
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Material Culture of Conversion: Early Franciscan Religious Sites at Tula de Allende, Hidalgo
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2014
* Jennifer Brown, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2014
* USD 19,943.00

Though religion is a crucial aspect of identity for most of the world's
population and has played a major role in most historical conflicts and
conquests throughout history, archaeological research and theory has not
adequately considered religion's role in remaking social worlds. A material-
cultural perspective on this topic could augment or challenge understandings of
religious change, just as historical archaeology has challenged standard
narratives of history. To that end, this dissertation project focuses on
religious identity and agency within the unequal power structures of the early
colonial period in central Mexico. The research focuses on two early Franciscan
sites in Tula de Allende, Hidalgo (Mexico): a chapel constructed in 1530 A.D.
(at which researchers recently excavated the remains of forty-five individuals)
and a cathedral constructed in 1550 A.D. Though built within two decades of one
another, the chapel and the cathedral exhibit strikingly different architectural
styles, modes of access, relationship to the urban landscape, and may reveal
very different artifact assemblages. Under the direction of Dr. Enrique
Rodriguez-Alegr√≠a, Shannon Dugan Iverson will employ a detailed geodatabase;
fine-grained architectural, bioarchaeological, and artifactual analysis; and
archival research in order to observe the ways that religious identities were
renegotiated over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spanish conquistadors justified the
conquest of the New World because it entailed the conversion of "pagans" to
Christianity. In 1524, twelve Franciscan friars arrived in Central Mexico in the
first wave of an ambitious conversion program that would eventually spread
throughout New Spain. Secondary historical and linguistic models of Indigenous
responses to this program have tended to vary along a spectrum ranging from
"accommodation" to "conflict," terms that refer to the intentions, actions, and
misunderstandings of both the mendicant and Indigenous communities. The goals of
this project are to expand upon and challenge these models by using material
culture and landscape studies as additional sources of knowledge about the
negotiation of religious identity, to expand the notion of "religious" material
culture, and to apply an innovative theoretical framework that considers
religion as an aspect of identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tula has been the site
of nearly continuous religious and political importance in central Mexico since
the Toltec period (circa 950-1150AD), and likely had important religious
connotations for the Aztecs before the Spanish conquest (1428-1521 AD). Despite
this rich history, no study focusing exclusively on the colonial period has been
published to date. The research will therefore extend the history of a city that
is considered by archaeologists, historians, and tourists alike to be one of the
most important sites in Mexico's past and present. Iverson is committed to
fostering collaboration with international and local researchers by sharing her
results in publications in English and Spanish and by making her databases
publicly accessible. Further, she will publicize the research by giving lectures
and tours to students, congregants, and communities in Tula. These efforts will
complicate notions of conversion practices for researchers and the general
public alike. This award will also further Ms. Iverson's academic and
intellectual development.