* 1156829
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Investigating Behavioral practices at the Mississippian Site of Cahokia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Sarah Otten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2013
* USD 12,999.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Timothy R. Pauketat, Sarah E. Baires will conduct
archaeological excavation of a raised walkway, or processional avenue, and
analysis of artifacts, notes, and maps from three previously excavated ridge-top
burial mounds at the site of Cahokia a pre-Columbian Native American city
located in the American Bottom near the confluence of the Illinois, Mississippi
and Missouri Rivers. Ms. Baires proposes to investigate the relationship between
formal burial practices, new religious beliefs, and the rise of an urban society
in the Cahokia region between the years of AD 1050 - 1200. This research will
test the hypothesis that mortuary practices, as a religious activity, play a
central role in reinforcing the social organization of this complex society.
This hypothesis will be tested through (1) archaeological excavations into a
possible raised walkway connecting one of the largest ridge-top burial mounds at
the site with Cahokia's central public plaza, and (2) the analysis of three
ridge-top mound mortuaries. Ms. Baires will visit three museums, the Illinois
State Museum, the Smithsonian Institution, and the University of Michigan Museum
of Anthropology to study the as yet unanalyzed collections of human remains and
artifacts from three burial mounds located at Cahokia. Sites such as Cahokia
provide insight into the forces which originally gave rise to complex societies
such as our own and help to trace the underlying developmental processes. They
set a wide range of societies which characterize the extant world in a broader
chronological context. Excavations into the raised walkway, which connects
public space to burial grounds, will provide new information on how Native
persons in Illinois gathered, moved, and buried their dead. The analysis of
human remains from three ridge-top burial mounds will provide demographic data
on those buried in the mounds. Death is often tied to concepts of the
afterworld, ancestors, and religious beliefs. These aspects of religion and
death appear to be a human universal, a way in which people make sense of the
world around them and their place in it, and a way in which politicians achieve
positions of authority. By using the archaeological evidence of religious
mortuary practices, where certain people are buried in politically powerful
ways, Ms. Baires will contribute to a larger understanding of how religion and
politics influence each other. This research will engage three subfields of
Anthropology, physical, socio-cultural, and archaeology, focusing not only on
the scientific components of the research but also on the direct relationships
among complex societies, mortuary practice, and religious belief. Excavations
into the raised walkway, or processional avenue, will take place on Cahokia
Mounds property, engaging both community members and archaeologists visiting and
working at the site. The project will involve interested community members
through presentations of the excavation results at the annual public Cahokia
Conference and Illinois Association for Advancement of Archaeology Conference,
the annual Midwestern Archaeological Conference, Southeastern Archaeological
Conference, and the Society for American Archaeology Annual Meeting. Two public
lectures at the University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee and Monmouth College,
Monmouth, Illinois will provide additional ways for community education and
participation. And finally, an informational pamphlet will be authored by Baires
and distributed to interested Native and non-Native communities through the
Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site Interpretive Center.