* 1156485
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Colonial Subjects, Colonial Space: The production of Portuguese colonial society in Velha Goa from 1510 to 1700.
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Brian Wilson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2013
* USD 11,015.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Kathleen Morrison, Brian Wilson will explore the
social and material production of space in Velha Goa during the Portuguese
colonial period. Before the Portuguese conquered the city in 1510, Velha Goa was
already an important port of trade in South Asia, and it quickly became the
administrative and religious capital of the Portuguese Asian Empire. The city
sharply declined in the latter half of the 17th century and the capital was
eventually moved to Panaji in the 1840's. However, the site remains largely
intact and unoccupied today yet almost completely undocumented outside of the
well preserved administrative and religious core of the city. It thus provides
an ideal location to investigate the production of colonial space in both elite
and non-elite contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An underlying goal of the project
is to describe how 'space' is conceived and utilized in a complex society and
the Velha Goa site, both because of its state of preservation and the
accompanying historical documentation provides an excellent context for this.
The conclusions which emerge will provide a framework which can be employed in
social reconstructions of numerous sites, many prehistoric, where less control
is possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the first European power in Asia, the
Portuguese opened the door to European socio-economic expansion into the region
effectively inaugurating the modern colonial era. Therefore, knowledge of this
initial colonial venture is critical to increasing understanding of the broader
processes that have shaped the last 500 years of world history. As local
practice and global networks continue to become more and more enmeshed today, a
greater understanding of the historical development of modern socio-economic and
political practices is highly relevant to our contemporary world. To understand
these processes in Goa and in other localities, however, scholars must not only
grasp global socio-economic and political trends but also understand the
specific and historically contingent, local manifestation of these forces. By
using archaeological resources, this project adds a much needed material
dimension to our knowledge of colonialism, urbanization, and the way these
processes are mediated by local social groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr.
Wilson's research will begin the process of documenting this important colonial
site through archaeological survey, systematic surface collection, artifact
analysis, and historical research. In addition, this research will test the
effectiveness of a new low level aerial photography (LLAP) platform using both
color and near infrared photography for surveying dense urban environments. The
use of affordable LLAP systems has great potential to significantly increase the
speed and reduce the costs of traditional archaeological survey, and this
project will help to demonstrate the overall usefulness with which this method
can be implemented into research designs. In addition, modern industrial,
commercial, and agricultural developments are beginning to negatively impact the
archaeological site, making the documentation of the site an increasingly urgent
matter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also make significant
contributions to archaeological education, training, and knowledge
dissemination. It will be carried out in close affiliation with the
Archaeological Survey of India, and student volunteers from various universities
will participate in the research. Furthermore, the project has a close
association with the Goa Heritage Action Group, and it will help their mission
to educate the public and to preserve the cultural heritage of Velha Goa. The
results of the research will also be disseminated through publication in
scholarly journals, participation in conferences, and Wilson's dissertation will
be available to the public through UMI.