* 1156612
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Mathematics for Undergraduates and Teachers
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Simon Goberstein, Chico State Enterprises
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2016
* USD 325,751.00

The REU/RET in mathematics at California State University, Chico targets
secondary teachers with a strong interest in mathematics or statistics and
undergraduate students who have completed their junior year. For six weeks of
each summer, twelve participants, including three teachers, will work in three
research teams on problems selected from Knot Theory, Algebra, Mathematical
Modeling, Statistics, and Number Theory. Depending on the field, projects may be
appropriate for students from scientific disciplines other than mathematics.

The research experience is intended to give participants an appreciation for the
breadth and depth of mathematics and its applications, while providing
undergraduates an opportunity to improve their communication skills and also
providing in-service teachers an experience which will deepen their
understanding of mathematical content and inspire pedagogical innovation in
their classrooms. By working on open problems in mathematics, participants will
experience the excitement of exploration, discovery, analysis, proof, and
systematization that are part of the mathematician's world. While much of
mathematics is accessible only after years of study, the field is rich enough to
allow for a fuller mathematical experience at the undergraduate level. The site
is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.