* 1156236
* Conference: Fifteenth and Sixteenth Annual Meetings for the Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology. June 23-26, 2011 in Queretaro, Mexico.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2011,05/31/2014
* Colin Saldanha, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2014
* USD 49,900.00

A direct and tangible contribution of any scientific discovery or science-
education lies in the creation of a springboard to success for the future
generation of scientists. A resilient principle of the Society for Behavioral
Neuroendocrinology (SBN) is our commitment to trainees. We see our trainees as
the future of the field and thus; recruiting and welcoming them into,
encouraging their participation in, rewarding their input to, and nurturing
their continued inclusion among the SBN are all inherently critical aspects of
the SBN mission. The SBN Education Committee will use NSF funds to stimulate,
maintain, nurture, and reward the participation of post-doctoral fellows,
graduate and undergraduate students at the 15th and 16th annual SBN meetings. In
keeping with our commitment to recruit, retain, and reward trainees, funds will
be used for: (1) Travel Awards. This allows trainees to present their work in a
supportive environment and gain exposure to the breadth and depth of the field.
(2) Career Development Workshops. Workshops are offered at each meeting to
educate trainees on important career development topics and retain trainees in
the sciences. (3) Mentor-Mentee Lunches. One-on-one discussions with senior
mentors help trainees gain insight into the research enterprise, create new
relationships, and find strong mentors. (4) Trainee Poster Competition. The
competition an educational experience for all and it also provides an
opportunity to encourage and reward success at each level, and, (5) the Young
Investigator?s Symposium. Outstanding senior graduate students or post-docs are
chosen to present talks in a dedicated symposium at the meeting. This format
recognizes the accomplishments of such trainees, facilitates their movement into
more advanced positions, and motivates younger scientists. The trainee events at
the SBN meeting will play a key role in the attraction, retention, and reward of
the brightest and best-trained transdisciplinary scientists.