* 1156171
* Bronze Age Urbanism in Upper Mesopotamia: Ritual, Power and Community
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2013,05/31/2017
* Glenn Schwartz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2017
* USD 150,066.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Glenn Schwartz and an
international team of colleagues and students will conduct two seasons of
excavation and geophysical survey at Kurd Qaburstan, southwest of Erbil, in
Iraqi Kurdistan (Kurdish Regional Government). This work will study the
emergence and functioning of a large urban center of northern Mesopotamia, as a
counterpoint to the well-known trajectories of urbanization in southern
Mesopotamia. The study of Mesopotamian urbanism and its possible variability is
of particular importance because Mesopotamia was the first civilization to
produce cities and urban societies.

One of the largest sites (118 hectares) on the Erbil plain of northern
Mesopotamia, Kurd Qaburstan has a small high mound and an extensive lower town
enclosed by a city wall. According to surface materials, the lower town was
occupied in the early second millennium BC (Old Babylonian period, ca. 2000-1600
BC), while the high mound was inhabited from ca. 3000 BC to 500 AD.

Preliminary analysis suggests that Kurd Qaburstan is ancient Qabra, capital of
the Erbil plain in the second millennium BC. The capture and defeat of Qabra by
the Mesopotamian conqueror Shamshi-Adad ca. 1800 BC was the subject of two
monumental stone steles now housed in the Louvre and in the Baghdad Museum.

Since the lower town at Kurd Qaburstan is primarily datable to the Old
Babylonian era, it provides an excellent opportunity to study a northern
Mesopotamian city from that period in great detail. The depositional
accumulation on the lower town is relatively modest, so excavation can expose
very large extensions of occupation from one period. The project will provide
new information on the layout, neighborhoods, households, and public structures
of a north Mesopotamian metropolis preserved below the present-day surface at
Kurd Qaburstan.

The project will thus provide a rare opportunity to study an entire Mesopotamian
city at one point in its history. Such a study was attempted in southern
Mesopotamia by Elizabeth Stone at Tell Abu Duwari but was cut short by the first
Gulf War. Stone proposed a model of heterarchy to understand the organization of
southern Mesopotamian urban populations. However, there is reason to suspect
that north Mesopotamian urbanism took a distinctly different form from that of
southern Mesopotamia, given the ecological differences between the two regions.
Therefore, the project will test Stone's model to see if it is applicable to a
north Mesopotamian city.

The project will also study urban and socio-political development through
focusing on under-researched variables like ritual, religion and ideology. In
the center of Kurd Qaburstan is a conical mound likely to be a ziggurat, part of
a temple complex. Excavation in such a complex with an anthropological approach,
studying faunal, archaeobotanical, and microstratigraphic debris, will
illuminate the functioning of religious organizations in the development of
early urbanism.

Geophysical survey will be implemented on the lower town to produce a map of
subsurface architecture and acquire a picture of the early second millennium
town plan. Such data will also supply useful information on areas for
excavation. Excavation on the high tell will include a step trench to document
the stratigraphic sequence of the site history and horizontal exposures of the
presumed temple area. On the lower town, excavations will aim for broad
exposures of Old Babylonian period occupation. The retrieved artifacts, animal
bones and plant remains will be studied by relevant specialists to determine
patterns of economic and social organization and lifeways in the city.

The Kurd Qaburstan project will have a number of broader impacts. Most broadly,
the project will expand our understanding of ancient urbanism and of cities in
general, why people began to live in cities, and how city life functioned. The
project will include and train colleagues and students from Iraqi Kurdistan,
which is only recently developing its own archaeological infrastructure after
suffering extensively under the regime of Saddam Hussein. Students and
colleagues from the U.S., U.K., Italy, Belgium, and other countries will also
participate and undergo training in archaeological field techniques.