* 1156905
* REU Site: Tampa Interdisciplinary Environmental Research
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Maya Trotz, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2017
* USD 335,226.00

The goal of this three year renewal REU site program is to provide a well
structured research and professional development experience for sophomore and
junior level undergraduate students in environmental related fields in the
Colleges of Engineering, Arts and Sciences, Public Health, and Education at the
University of South Florida (USF). It builds on the experience with a REU site
started in 2009 by the Principal Investigator and refines the underlying
research theme to the nexus of water, energy, materials and humans, with a
particular emphasis on the Tampa Bay region. The objectives of the REU are to:
1) train student participants in the skills required for scientific research; 2)
encourage student participants to pursue an advanced degree in an
environmentally related area of research; 3) encourage students to consider the
ethical aspects surrounding their research and the contribution of the research
to sustaining healthy communities; 4) establish a sustainable mechanism for
broadening participation of underrepresented groups in academic research; 5)
promote mentoring between graduate and REU students, and 6) create a
collaborative community committed to mentoring and advising undergraduate
students in activities that advance faculty research. Thirty-six students will
be directly supported by the grant, with six included on a supplement for
education research. Three more will partake through USF's College of Engineering
outreach program to Latin America and the Caribbean students. It involves
fourteen research faculty mentors from six different departments and 4 different
colleges. Faculty and graduate students will interact with REU students through
individual research projects and group meetings, research seminars and field
trips, oral and poster presentations, brown-bag student discussions, social and
community activities, technical and professional training workshops, and online
social media like blogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
project are: 1) a larger number of students enrolled in, and retained by STEM
disciplines, 2) an increase in the diversity of undergraduates who are well-
positioned in the pipeline to graduate school in a STEM field, 3) the
development of a research and mentoring community aware of ethical
responsibilities and committed to innovative solutions for sustainable
communities, 4) the sharing of the undergraduate research process and research
through the internet (REU-TIER.net) and local,or national conferences, and 5)
the direct support of 36 sophomore/junior level students and enhancements of the
research programs of 14 faculty participants that could contribute to
improvements in practices throughout the world that depend on the interface of
water, energy, materials and humans.