* 1156836
* REU Site: Snapshots of Chemistry -- Visualization of Processes at the Molecular Level
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Peter Qin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2017
* USD 270,000.00

This award by the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation and
the Department of Defense's (DOD) "Awards to Stimulate and Support Undergraduate
Research Experiences" (ASSURE) Program will support a 10-week summer research
program in chemistry for eleven students. Each REU student will join an active
research group and carry out a project that facilitates visualization and
manipulation of processes at the molecular level, with research topics spanning
all modern chemistry disciplines. In addition to the faculty advisor, each REU
student will work closely with a designated graduate student mentor who will
facilitate their integration into the research group and serve as a role model.
Students' progress will be evaluated using quantitative formative/summative
assessment and long-term data tracking. The proposed program will broadly impact
a diverse range of students by exposing them to cutting edge chemical research
and encouraging them to pursue a career in fields of science and engineering. It
will place strong emphasis on mentoring underrepresented minorities and women,
and will work closely with local Primarily Undergraduate Institutions to recruit
minority participants. Achievements of the REU participants and the program will
be advertised to the broader community via peer-reviewed publications,
scientific meeting presentations, and other forums (e.g. USC Chemistry REU
Facebook page). The NSF-funded REU program will also serve as the engine for
leading a variety of research/educational programs for undergraduates and high-
school students, such as an institutionally-supported international REU program,
thus impacting undergraduate research and education both nationally and
internationally. Overall, the program will contribute to the development of a
diverse, internationally competitive, and globally-engaged science and
engineering workforce.