* 1156534
* REU Site:  Safe and Sustainable Transportation: Rural Matters
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Jerry Stephens, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/28/2015
* USD 295,326.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The three year REU site will seek to develop
integrated solutions to the safety, sustainability, and mobility challenges
confronting the country's rural transportation network. These challenges cannot
be addressed simply using conventional engineering solutions; they require
researchers to cut across traditional boundaries between science, engineering,
and the humanities to both fully understand the challenges and to holistically
work toward their solution. The fabric of the nation's rural communities is
woven together by its transportation network. Like the rest of the country,
rural communities have and continue to evolve economically and socially, and the
transportation system that serves them needs to correspondingly evolve. Among
the many challenges confronting rural areas are: 1) a rapidly increasing
population and expanding exurban development, 2) an aging and deficient
infrastructure and 3) a landscape heavily impacted by human activity. In
response to these multifaceted challenges, students at the Safe and Sustainable
Rural Transportation REU site will research sustainable transportation
infrastructure materials and practices, safety and human factors, and
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This REU site program
will address the nation's need for a diverse group of innovative transportation
researchers and professionals capable of pursuing interdisciplinary and creative
long-term solutions to the increasingly complex challenges confronting the rural
transportation system. Using real transportation problems confronting rural
America as a medium, the program will improve undergraduates' understanding of
the depth and breadth of most contemporary research questions; foster their
ability to identify and draw important connections between the diverse
disciplines needed on a research team; and enhance their basic analytical,
research and communication skills. Further, the REU site will broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering research,
with a focus on women and Native Americans students, by working with various
diversity programs and in direct partnership with tribal colleges in the
recruitment of participants.