* 1156516
* Catalyzing New International Collaborations: US-MENA countries Research and Education in nano-organics for renewable energy harvest and storage
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Munir Nayfeh, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 02/28/2015
* USD 91,243.00

1156516 &lt;br/&gt;Nayfeh&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project by the
Dr. Munir Nayfeh, Department of Physics at the University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) is to catalyze international research collaboration between US
researchers and researchers in Middle East institutions in the area of
development of efficient harvest and storage technologies of renewable, green
energy and the study of their health and environmental impact. Researchers from
the UIUC, University of Chicago and Cleveland State University on the US side
and from Fatih University (Turkey), Masdar Institute of Science and Technology
(UAE), National Research Center (Egypt), and University of Karachi International
Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences (ICCBS) (Pakistan), and Yarmouk
University and University of Jordan Nano Groups (Jordan) will examine the
feasibility of initiating and catalyzing a coherent, complimentary partnership
among the institutions to conduct joint studies in the area of nano particle-
organics composites for development of advanced renewable energy harvest and
storage devices. The project will focus on the synthesis and understanding of
the electronic and optical nature of thin films of nanomaterial composites based
on silicon as well as other materials, such as carbon, and conducting polymer as
well as developing new prototype devices using the thin films. The initiative
can make significant contribution to the solutions of the present energy crisis,
and can yield transformational energy technologies, which will get renewable
energy to a point where it is economically competitive with current technology.
The activities will include planning visits and a workshop to plan multi
instructional research projects to be submitted in proposals to the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The key research perspective in
this proposal is the further development of USiN as an approach to sustainable
energy with three applications identified: solar cell, supercapacitor and fuel
cell. The identified research needs are: synthesis of nanomaterial, environment
and safety, device simulation and testing, education and outreach, intellectual
property and commercialization. The US PI has been successful in promoting
S&amp;E in the Middle East, and there is a strong likelihood for this work to
result in collaborative funded research. Dr. Nayfeh has been doing extensive
research in silicon based nanotechnology and its commercial applications,
including solar energy, and the foreign collaborators are from countries with
strong interest in renewal energy. The NSF PIRE program is identified as one of
the potential future funding sources. The non-US countries involved all have
S&amp;T programs that will also be potential funding sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The need for developing economical
renewable energy is well-documented. The project research in nanomaterial will
transcends energy, and will address important question of health, safety, effect
on the environment, as well as nano ethics. The project is likely to open up new
channels for international collaborations with industry. One of the most
pressing issues in nano research and nano industry is the shortage of qualified
workforce. The project will provide training and valuable international
experience and perspectives for the graduate and undergraduate students working
on the project. It will also build important intellectual bridges between U.S.
scientists and scientists of key U.S. allies in the Middle East. The visits and
workshop will also provide useful exposure of students (including high school)
to international scale efforts.