* 1156626
* REU Site: Student Research in Oceanography and Marine Sciences at BIOS
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* F. Gerald Plumley, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2013
* USD 107,623.00

This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) Site program at the Bermuda Institute for Ocean Sciences (BIOS). The REU
Site provides hands-on research experiences for undergraduates. Students conduct
independent research projects based on a variety of marine and open ocean
science topics ranging from the molecular to macro scale processes. Many of the
research projects fall within the framework of the numerous long-term deep ocean
programs conducted at BIOS including Hydrostation 'S', the Bermuda Atlantic
Time-series Study (BATS), the Microbial Observatory, the Ocean Flux Program
(OFP), and the Ocean Carbon and Climate Change Program. Students also have
opportunities to focus on near-shore processes (e.g., water and air pollution,
coral reef ecology, marine biodiversity), topics within the Oceans and Human
Health Program (e.g., cancer and aging), and topics within the Risk Prediction
Initiative (e.g., ocean:atmosphere-based catastrophe models such as those used
to predict hurricanes and/or intense rainfall events). Students participate in
weekly activities (e.g., REU student seminars, visits to the aquarium and
biological conservation/restoration sites) and frequently join BIOS scientists
aboard the R/V Atlantic Explorer. Since BIOS is a small campus, REU students
have ample opportunity to get to know faculty/staff. BIOS has many active
teaching programs during Fall semester that ensure a diverse student population
that includes US students taking semester-long courses as well as US, Canadian,
and UK visiting university groups. REU students also have opportunities to work
with ocean science students from developing countries as part of the POGO Centre
of Excellence in Observational Oceanography. At program end, REU students
present a seminar of their work to BIOS staff and write manuscripts in the
format of a journal appropriate for publication of each project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support provided by NSF includes funding for student
stipends, student travel to and from the site, student housing and meals and
some administrative costs.