* 1156076
* SHINE: Plasma Heating During Coronal Mass Ejections
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* John Raymond, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 03/31/2017
* USD 463,848.00

This research team will determine the mechanisms responsible for plasma heating
during coronal mass ejections (CMEs), by performing a time-dependent ionization
analysis of CMEs observed by the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA) instrument
on the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) spacecraft. In their data analysis, the
team will quantitatively constrain plasma heating to low solar altitudes where
most of the heating occurs, apply plasma density diagnostics, and then assess a
wide range of models with different plasma heating parameterizations and rates,
in order to determine how much heating is required to match AIA observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will then test the three most promising
candidate heating mechanism theories, which are (1) heating by the large-scale
post-eruption current sheet, (2) small-scale magnetic reconnection events during
flux rope expansion and relaxation, and (3) energetic particles. The proposing
team will use three-dimensional simulations of CMEs to predict the observational
signatures of plasma heating by the current sheet, which will help elucidate
whether or not CME current sheets are energetically important to CME eruptions.
The team will also perform simulations of an expanding cylindrical flux rope to
determine the relationship between magnetic reconnection and relaxation, as well
as to determine the spatial and temporal dependence of plasma heating. In
addition, they will perform simulations of energetic particles contained within
expanding flux ropes in realistic geometries, in order to determine whether
there is enough time for non-thermal particles to heat CME plasma before its
density drops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project will be published
in widely available peer reviewed journals. Since CMEs are significant drivers
of space weather, this research on the early evolution of CMEs can also improve
space weather forecasts. This research team will be applying a legacy numerical
code developed by the laboratory plasma physics community to an important
problem in solar physics. In this way, the team will strengthen
interdisciplinary ties between these two communities while serving the research
interests of both. Components of this project will be performed by undergraduate
summer interns who are separately funded by the NSF through a solar physics
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the Harvard-Smithsonian
Center for Astrophysics. This undergraduate cadre will include members of
traditionally underrepresented groups in science.