* 1156968
* REU Site:  The Athienou Archaeological Project, Cyprus
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Michael Toumazou, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/29/2016
* USD 316,097.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Athienou Archaeological Project
(AAP) has been investigating long-term culture change in central Cyprus since
1990 (supported by NSF from 1995 to 2008, and again from 2012 - 2014). This
multidisciplinary undertaking combines field training in archaeological methods
(excavation and survey) with analyses of the natural and cultural contexts of
ritual and secular use of the ancient and modern landscape. The specific problem
that guides the Project's research agenda is the degree to which rural areas
were assimilated into regional and interregional economic, political, social,
and religious networks of exchange. A focus on regions is essential to such
considerations since it is only by comparison to events in other parts of Cyprus
and elsewhere in the eastern Mediterranean that past and present human activity
in the area of Athienou makes sense. While the Athienou region and in fact,
Cyprus as a whole may be viewed as marginal in the evolution of western
civilization, the Project area can, nonetheless, be seen as a laboratory for the
study of culture change. Ten outstanding undergraduate students are provided
with the opportunity to join AAP and (1) receive instruction in survey and
excavation techniques (e.g., remote sensing, computer-assisted mapping), record
keeping and data management, and artifact analysis, (2) attend lectures taught
by specialists on archaeological methods and theory and the cultural history of
Cyprus and the eastern Mediterranean, (3) visit archaeological sites and museums
on the island, (4) plan and complete an independent research project bearing on
the work of AAP, and (5) live in Athienou and learn about life in modern
Cyprus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of their AAP experience, students find
themselves at the intellectual vortex created by the presence of many
international scholars in the fields of Social Sciences, Humanities and Natural
Sciences, working towards a common goal. The students benefit enormously through
their interaction with different disciplines and learn the value of cooperation
across disciplines. By the end of the 7-week experience with AAP, students gain
a deep understanding of archaeological theory and field research, including most
recent approaches to data collection and analysis. Their undertaking of
independent research, sometimes on artifacts brought to light by themselves,
with the aim of publication, gives them confidence in their abilities to work as
scientists, and accomplish set goals. This mentally and physically demanding
program prepares students for productive careers in archaeology or related
fields, or for that matter, in whatever other career they ultimately
pursue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AAP's
broader impact to society is manifest in many ways. Through site tours, public
lectures and articles in the media, the Project contributes immensely in
educating people on the importance of archaeological remains and helps stem
illicit looting. AAP's impact is further manifested by the recent conversion of
portions of the archaeological site into an archaeological park and the paving
of the road signs and all leading to it. Moreover, 2009 saw the inauguration of
a state-of-the-art Municipal Museum at Athienou which houses scores of artifacts
unearthed by AAP (http://www.athienoumuseum.org.cy/). Like AAP, the Museum has
primarily educational objectives, as attested by visits of thousands of school
children in the short time since its inauguration, and is a source of great
pride among the locals. The cross-cultural interaction between the local
population and AAP staff and students helps forge lasting friendships and
bridges of understanding between Cyprus and the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International Component: The NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering has co-funded this award.