* 1156607
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experience in Hyperspectral Imaging (IDREHSI)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Ramanathan Sugumaran, University of Northern Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2016
* USD 344,848.00

The University of Northern Iowa has been granted an NSF award to establish a
Research Experience for Undergraduates Site (REU): The Interdisciplinary
Research Experience in Hyperspectral Imaging (IDREHSI). The goal of this project
is to introduce young scientists to a highly interdisciplinary research
environment with a unifying theme of fundamental and applied research in
hyperspectral imaging (HI) in eight different STEM disciplines. Recent
technological developments and the increased availability of laboratory,
satellite, and airborne-based HI imagery has led to a growing demand for HI-
related jobs which calls for greater learning, understanding and use of
hyperspectral imaging for various applications. Given the advantages of HI, REU
students will have opportunities to engage in HI-based research in geographic
information science, earth science, environmental science, physics, biology,
computer science, and atmospheric science for different applications such as
mapping and modeling of land use/land cover, minerals, soils and geologic
features, water resources, wetland, forestry, and precision agriculture. The
participants will: (1) be exposed to existing scientific approaches and
experimental methods in HI, (2) develop skills that make students competitive in
academic and professional environments, (3) be involved in faculty-mentored
scientific investigations that prepares them for graduate studies and/or
professional careers, (4) operate in highly interdisciplinary research settings
and work across disciplinary boundaries in problem-based research, (5) improve
their capability for learning independently, and (6) provide opportunities to
discuss ethical issues related to collection and use of data, experimental
design, and professional standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is co-funded
by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.