* 1156603
* REU Site:   A Pilot Project to Engage Underrepresented Minority Students in a Research Experience
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2015
* Nina Barcenas, Heritage University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 267,900.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) award has been made to Heritage
University (HU) to provide 10 weeks of research training for 8 students in the
summers of 2012- 2014. This program also includes an academic-year component
that prepares students for the summer research program and assists them in
preparing abstracts and papers for submission to conferences. After preparing
students for the lab work, students spend 10 weeks in the summer at partner host
labs of their choosing. A diversity of REU host labs will be offered to students
and placement at labs will be determined, in part, by students' interest and
their needs to remain in or near the Yakama Valley. Potential host laboratories
include those that are close enough for students to return home on weekends and
others where students can return home daily. "Distant" REU sites include: (1)
University of Washington, Seattle, WA (bacterial antibiotic resistance;
dendrology, paleoecology); (2) University of Puget Sound, Tacoma, WA (polyploidy
in plant evolution); and (3) NSF Science and Technology Center and Columbia
River Inter-tribal Fish Commission, Beaverton, OR (fisheries biology and
ecology). Local REU sites include: (4) the Yakama Nation Fisheries Resource
Management, Toppenish WA (lamprey biology, restoration); (5) USDA-ARS, Wapato,
WA (insect molecular ecology); (6) Pacific Northwest University, Yakima, WA
(microbiology); (7) Washington State University, Prosser, WA (molecular plant
pathology); and (8) Heritage University, Toppenish WA, (DNA barcoding and well
water quality assessment). The PI, coPI and partner sites prepare students for
their internships and their presentations for national meetings. All REU
students will participate in spring pre-REU and fall post-REU activities. Our
overall strategy is to provide undergraduate students, who are mostly place-
bound, with a fulfilling and challenging research experience supported by a
richly mentored environment. These opportunities will provide a magnet for
recruitment of STEM majors from the Yakima Valley and will help motivate
students to pursue graduate studies and careers in science. Students are tracked
to determine their continued interest in their academic field of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience. Information
about the program will be assessed by using the REU common assessment tool. More
information is available at: www.heritage.edu/science dept/summer
internships/reu, or by contacting Dr. Nina Barcenas (PI) at
Barcenas_n@heritage.edu or Dr. Kazuhiro Sonoda (co-PI) at Sonoda_k@heritage.edu.