* 1156686
* REU Site for Increasing Diversity in Engineering at Duke University
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Martha Absher, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2015
* USD 233,860.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The three-year renewal REU site program for
Increasing Diversity in Engineering at Duke University will provide
interdisciplinary and interdepartmental research opportunities for 8
undergraduate students for nine weeks each year. The program will involve all
departments of the Pratt School of Engineering at Duke: Biomedical Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, and Electrical and Computer Engineering. This REU program has as
its intellectual focus opening the whole field of engineering for the full
inclusion of all individuals, in particular underrepresented populations -
women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities. The Principal
Investigator is in a unique school-wide position directing educational programs
which have placed many hundreds of undergraduates in research opportunities with
almost every professor in the school, and can provide projects across all
disciplines with experienced, strong advisors and trained mentors. Duke
University's Biomedical Engineering Department at the Pratt School of
Engineering consistently ranks in the top 5 in the nation. Due to the strength
of this area, the Pratt REU Program will provide approximately half of its
projects in biomedical engineering and bioengineering areas, ranging from
biomedical cardiovascular engineering to biochemical engineering, biomechanics
of cells and hard and soft tissues, cellular and biosurface engineering, and
electrical activity of the heart and brain. Multiple projects in materials
science including those on biologically inspired materials and material systems,
mechanical, electrical, computer, civil, and environmental engineering will also
be offered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The Principal
Investigator of this REU site program aims to recruit over 75% of its students
from underrepresented groups. This program will include at least 25% disabled
students. The emphasis in this program is recruiting students who would not have
the opportunity to do such challenging research and placing them in a nurturing
environment which addresses their weaknesses in moving into and staying in STEM
areas. This program will change students' live, by developing research
competence and confidence and encouraging them to continue on to graduate school
and pursue careers in STEM areas. This REU site program will have a major impact
on students' career possibilities.