* 1156859
* REU Site: Bridging the Cyber and Water Worlds: Cyber-Aquatic Systems for Undergraduate Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Shengli Zhou, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 02/28/2015
* USD 218,500.00

The last decade has seen a research wave in terrestrial sensor networks, in
which the embedded networked sensing technologies have revolutionized the way
for human beings to understand and interact with the physical world on the land.
This decade will witness a revolution for the water world: transformative cyber-
aquatic technologies will enable us to densely deploy static and mobile systems
in an underwater environment, significantly enhancing the spatial and temporal
dimensions of our monitoring and exploration capabilities. The Underwater Sensor
Network (UWSN) Lab at the University of Connecticut (UConn) recently launched an
initiative on Cyber-Aquatic Systems (CAS). Part of the CAS initiative will be an
REU site offering undergraduate students to participate in the cutting-edge
technologies of cyber-aquatic systems and encouraging them to pursue academic
careers and professionals by sparking interests through exciting research
projects. A major goal of this interdisciplinary REU site project is to
introduce the cutting-edge research and technologies in cyber-aquatic systems to
undergraduate students in the early stages of their careers to spark their
interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU work, as part of a collaborative action
with REU site 1156837, will recruit a diverse group of undergraduate students to
engage in research that will broaden their interest in academic careers and
professions and help develop a globally competitive engineering workforce
equipped with innovative cyber-aquatic technologies. Through integrated
research, education and outreach programs, this REU site will better prepare
these undergraduate participants for future careers in academia or industry.
&lt;br/&gt;