* 1156899
* REU Site: Engineering Tools for Decision Support in Systems Medicine
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Robert Parker, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2017
* USD 357,693.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this new three-year REU
site program at the University of Pittsburgh is to expose 9 undergraduate
students per year to research in the emerging field of systems medicine. Systems
medicine problems are characterized by complex interacting systems requiring
multidisciplinary knowledge to formulate and solve. The intellectual merit of
this REU proposal derives from the emergence of this field and the need for
experts with the knowledge and motivation to address constrained real-world
problems where mathematical models can provide hypothesis-generating and in
validating predictions. Furthermore, systems medicine is underserved by existing
REU sites, in comparison to other areas of biomedical research, and this site
would expand the existing REU portfolio while educating students who could serve
as the next generation of leaders in the field. The necessity of coupling
modeling and systems analysis approaches to experimental data; thereby yielding
a predictive model upon validation is a prerequisite to solving clinically-
relevant systems medicine problems. Through a series of mentored research and
teaching experiences, REU students will take the first step on the path to
becoming the next generation of experts in the field of systems
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The PI will actively
recruit underrepresented undergraduates to participate in interdisciplinary
research and to advance the abilities of all students in the program with
respect to communication, teamwork, and professional skills. Through existing
relationships, and the development of new ones with minority, female, or
primarily undergraduate institutions, the program will provide a pathway to
graduate education for populations that are traditionally underrepresented at
the engineering (and STEM) post-graduate level by fostering the ability to
independently and collaboratively investigate systems medicine research
problems. One path of dissemination is to design simulations for use in K-12
education; through partnering with the CTSI "Mobile Lab" to bring computational
experiments to K-12 students in an effort to stimulate the desire of these
students to pursue STEM subjects at the baccalaureate level.