* 1156571
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in the Ecology and Evolution of Changing Environments: Mechanisms to Responses
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Bruce Snyder, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2016
* USD 296,865.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Kansas State University that will provide research training for 9 students to
participate in a 10-week program during the summers of 2012-2014. The program
has a broad focus on the mechanistic understanding of ecological and
evolutionary responses to short- and long-term responses to changing
environments. The 10-week summer program will provide participants with the
opportunity to conduct independent research projects that address the
mechanistic basis of evolutionary and ecological responses to changing
environments. The summer program has six core components that will contribute to
the professional and ethical development of undergraduate participants: i)
independent research projects that train students in field methods, lab
techniques, and experimental design, ii) a weekly seminar on modern approaches
in ecology and evolutionary biology, iii) a set of ethics training in science
workshops that focus on responsible research and the evaluation of case studies,
iv) workshops in professional development, the graduate school application
process, and specialized research skills, v) field trips to ecologically
important field sites, biological collections, and genomic facilities in Kansas
and Missouri, and vi) oral presentations of research results in a research
symposium at the conclusion of the program. Over 30 faculty from the Division of
Biology and Departments of Entomology, Geography, and Plant Pathology will serve
as potential mentors. REU participants will have full access to individual
mentor's facilities, as well as the facilities in the Ecological Genomics
Institute and the Konza Prairie LTER site. The program's recruitment effort
consists of both traditional "hard copy" formats as well as digital-based
advertising. Students are selected for potential for outstanding research in
biology. Participant career paths are tracked to determine the lasting
influences of the research experience. Information about the program will be
assessed by exit interviews and surveys, including the use of an REU common
assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.ksu.edu/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Bruce A. Snyder at
biologyreu@ksu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Theodore J. Morgan at biologyreu@ksu.edu).