* 1156756
* CURE (Consortium for Undergraduate Research Experience) - Research Experience for Undergraduates
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Paul McCudden, Los Angeles City College
* Continuing Grant
* James Neff
* 07/31/2015
* USD 340,445.00

CURE is a year-round (though summer-centered) REU site that provides Astronomy-
based research opportunities at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory for underserved
community college students from selected colleges in the Los Angeles area.
Students (approximately 8 per year) work full time for 10 weeks during the
summer, and have the option of continuing part-time during the academic year
under the supervision of JPL scientists on various Astronomy-related projects,
both at JPL and at JPL's Table Mountain Observatory. Research topics include
high precision astrometry of occulting asteroids, photometry of near-Earth
asteroids, design and testing of a compact Doppler magnetograph, and research
into space optical communications systems.

CURE students are drawn exclusively from community colleges. In addition to
being remarkably diverse in virtually every way, these students have often
overcome great obstacles and challenges to get where they are. CURE provides
them with a priceless opportunity to experience real science and real research ?
an opportunity usually available only to four-year college and university
students. In addition to providing underserved and minority students (many of
whom are first generation college students) with valuable professional research
experience, CURE's impact extends beyond the students it serves. CURE connects
community college faculty with cutting-edge research, keeping them up-to-date in
the field, strengthens the relationship between community colleges and
professional researchers, and provides valuable inspiration, incentive and
modeling to all STEM students at the participating community colleges.