* 1156168
* Competition, Markups, and the Gains from International Trade
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2017
* Yi Xu, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2017
* USD 294,300.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Competition, Markups, and the Gains from
International Trade"&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chris Edmond,
Virgiliu Midrigan, Daniel Xu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies the pro-competitive effects of policies that eliminate barriers to
international trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most existing research focuses on
gains from international trade that arise from increased specialization or from
increased diversity in consumption. This project focuses on an alternative
mechanism, namely the increase in the amount of competition domestic producers
face when international trade barriers are reduced. Greater competition can
lead, in theory, to a drop in markups (price-cost margins) and in markup
differences across domestic producers, thereby leading to an increase in
production, employment and efficiency and large potential welfare gains. This
project aims to measure the strength of this mechanism by combining theory and
firm-level data from a number of countries that have experienced trade
liberalizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring the response of markups to
trade liberalizations is a difficult task since data on markups is generally
unavailable. This project seeks to make progress on this dimension by combing
recent theoretical models of markup determination with state-of-the-art
estimation techniques from the field of industrial organization to carefully
estimate producer-level costs and markups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
uses several sources of information to measure the response of markups to
changes in trade barriers. One source of information the project exploits is the
relationship between price-cost margins and the amount of competition individual
producers face, as measured by a producer's market share in its own industry. To
the extent to which price-cost margins vary a lot with the amount of
competition, a decrease in trade barriers, by increasing competition, can have a
significant effect on the average level of domestic markups. A second source of
information the project exploits is the response of price-cost margins to
individual episodes of trade liberalizations. By exploiting the differential
impact of various trade agreements (such as NAFTA) on different industries'
trade patterns and price-cost margins, the project can shed light on the effect
individual episodes of trade liberalizations have had on the amount of
competition and the level of markups in different industries in the US and other
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's findings have ramifications beyond
international trade and will shed light on the role of markups for cross-country
income differences and business cycle fluctuations. Cross-country differences in
income reflect, in part, differences in the efficiency with which resources are
allocated across producers. Differences in markups may be an important source of
allocative inefficiency and the project will examine whether this is indeed the
case. Markup fluctuations may also play an important role in explaining the
large recent drop in US employment in the aftermath of the financial crisis and
more generally around episodes of large contractions in economic activity. Such
recessions are typically associated with large declines in labor's income share.
Whether such declines are accounted for by an increase in producer markups, or
inefficiencies in the labor market is an important question that the project
will address by studying producer-level data during episodes of large recessions
and financial crises.