* 1156887
* REU Site: iREU: Promoting Innovation and Entrepreneurship through Academic-Industrial Partnerships
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Richard Dino, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2015
* USD 338,819.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this three year REU site program
at the University of Connecticut (UConn) is to develop a unique Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site thematically based on Innovation and
Entrepreneurship. The program will be titled an "Innovative Research Experience
for Undergraduates", or ( iREU). Each student will have an independent research
project advised by a faculty member. The iREU program, however, will also
incorporate an Industry Mentor that has a commercial interest in the project.
This mentor, in combination with a business oriented seminar series, will expose
engineering students to the commercial side of innovation and help them link
their work to a targeted market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This iREU program will
facilitate academic-industrial partnerships that are often the precursor to
technology development. Fostering such collaborations will strengthen research
efforts at UConn by providing additional opportunities for funding and
innovation. The diversity of cutting-edge research in the Chemical, Materials,
and Biomolecular Engineering (CMBE) Department provides unique opportunities for
students of varying interests, and UConn provides world-class research
facilities and centers to help students in their research. The Principal
Investigator (PI)is a CMBE professor with a proven track record in undergraduate
research based education and the Co-PI is a University of Connecticut School of
Business professor with a strong background in developing entrepreneurship
programs in the School of Engineering. Each REU student will have the
opportunity to present their work in their laboratory group meetings, present
progress reports to both mentors, an end-of-program oral presentation, a final
report and a poster session at the Connecticut Innovation
Connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The iREU program,
like most REUs, will provide an independent research project for an
undergraduate student in a cutting-edge field and give that student an
opportunity to intellectually contribute to a dynamic research environment.
Additionally, however, the program will help link that research to the market
and thus providing the crucial connection between theory and practice. This is
made possible by the unique mentorship structure of the iREU where the student
is co-mentored by an academic faculty and a company partner. This provides the
student with multiple feedback sources on their written and oral presentations,
both of which will be an integral part of the iREU program. It also expands the
student's network to include a company, which can provide internships or
permanent employment, and a faculty, who can provide letters of recommendation
and career mentorship. The iREU will also facilitate the participation of
underrepresented groups with targeted recruitment at a Historic Women's College.
The iREU program has partnered with Smith College (98% female) to directly
recruit from its Picker Engineering Program. Smith College, located less than 90
minutes from UCONN, will be visited by the PI each year for recruitment and a
minimum of two spots in the iREU will be reserved for Smith College Students.