* 1156848
* REU Site: Supporting Undergraduate Research Fellows In Timely STEM Education Research Via the University of Kentucky's STEM Education Research Laboratory
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Molly Fisher, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 06/30/2018
* USD 316,494.00

This award to the University of Kentucky STEM Education Research Laboratory
supports undergraduate students who are studying to be K-12 STEM teachers in
education research projects in STEM fields. There are four ongoing STEM
education research projects on which the REU participants work, including: (1)
motivation and career trajectories of STEM educators; (2) racial and gender
equity and participation in K-12 math and physics; (3) elementary teacher
attitudes and beliefs regarding mathematics; and (4) technology and engineering
design concepts for integrated STEM instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each
year, 8 undergraduates are recruited from the University of Kentucky, Kentucky
State University, Berea College, and other regional institutions. A total of 24
students are supported over the life of the grant. The program is an academic
year REU. Students participate in biweekly meetings on campus as a cohort and
with their research mentors. The program uses online collaboration tools to
facilitate interactions throughout the experience. By focusing on recruiting
preservice STEM teachers, this project has the potential to help these teachers
understand ways to incorporate education research findings in their practice; it
may also provide a model for bridging research with practice through such STEM
education research experiences.