* 1156798
* Kent State Math REU
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mikhail Chebotar, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 08/31/2016
* USD 230,400.00

The purpose of Kent State's Math REU program is to give talented and motivated
undergraduates an actual research experience in the nurturing atmosphere of the
Kent State Mathematics department. In Summers 2013-2015 students will work on
projects arising naturally in the faculty's research. Every summer, there will
be a general theme that will unify all the projects. Some of the possible themes
are linear algebra, theory of convex bodies, and group theory. A general theme
creates a context for all the projects and allows for better communication
between students from different groups. The projects will require only a limited
background, which will allow the students to get right to work extending their
knowledge of the subject while doing actual research. Although the projects that
will be suggested to the students in each particular year will be all related to
one theme, their motivations will come from a variety of fields, including ring
theory, Lie algebra, algebraic geometry, coding theory, number theory, and
operator theory. All projects will deal with unsolved research problems and some
of them will lead to publications in refereed journals.

The emphasis of the program is on independent work under close supervision of a
project advisor. Students will speak about their progress in a weekly REU
seminar. There will also be a weekly colloquium series where faculty members or
departmental visitors will give expository lectures that will introduce the
students to various exciting topics in mathematics. Informal gatherings will be
a regular and important part of the program. One of the aims is that the
students get to know each other on a personal level, and bond into a cohesive
group that stays in touch after the program finishes. Further information
regarding the program can be obtained by visiting the program's website
http://www.math.kent.edu/~soprunova/reu/ or by contacting Dr. Jenya Soprunova at
soprunova@math.kent.edu.