* 1156821
* REU Site: Integrated Bioengineering Research, Education, and Outreach Experiences for Females and Underrepresented Minorities at WPI
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Helen Vassallo, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,674.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This three-year REU site program will engage a
diverse cohort of students in research projects within the intellectual theme of
Bioengineering with a focus on innovation. Each student will conduct research
mentored by a faculty member and graduate student on a project specifically
designed for his/her abilities. The six participating faculty span multiple
departments and have a strong history of involving undergraduates in research,
leading to numerous awards, manuscripts, and conference presentations. To foster
a strong sense of community amongst the students, the program will begin with a
"Boot Camp" and all research will be conducted in a new multidisciplinary
research center. Weekly workshops including creativity, communication,
mentoring, and ethics will help the students gain professional skills and
personal confidence critical for young students success in innovative research.
A unique feature of this REU site program is that the students will be trained
in mentoring for outreach to middle school girls in a week-long Bioengineering
Innovation Program. The programs' evaluation plan focuses on desired outcomes,
has multiple formative and summative elements, and uses valid and reliable
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
integrated training experience will not only expose a diverse cohort of students
to research, but will also help them see how a scientific career can be possible
for them as part of a rich personal life. Further, participants will appreciate
how their involvement in science and engineering can benefit the next generation
of students. The Principal Investigators (PIs) have developed a strong, proven
plan for effectively recruiting from underrepresented groups of students and for
providing authentic research projects that encourage confidence and self esteem.
The innovative thinking fostered by this program will encourage students to
think more broadly and creatively about the potential implications and impact of
their work. For the middle school students, participation will increase their
interest in science and their confidence in their abilities with the aim of
increasing their retention in math and science courses essential for engineering
careers. The programs' research results will be disseminated broadly through
scientific and lay publications, conference presentations, and the Web, by the
PIs, participating faculty, and students alike.