* 1156579
* REU Site: A Chemistry REU on Molecular Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CheMIE)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* William Brittain, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Texas State University- San Marcos will bring 12
students to campus for ten weeks each summer to conduct research in a supportive
research environment. The summer research project seeks to build a
multidisciplinary chemistry research community with a focus on Molecular
Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CheMIE). The twelve student participants will
engage in a 10 week traditional research experience while exploring how basic
research contributes to molecular innovation, entrepreneurship and economic
development in the molecular sciences. The CheMIE REU will build a research
community at Texas State that will provide a research environment for students
who otherwise would not be able to participate in undergraduate research. The
students will join the active research community that exists at Texas State and
participate in research experiences in chemistry, biochemistry, and material
science that will lead to professional presentations and peer-reviewed
publications. At the same time, the students will be participating in an
interdisciplinary group study of innovation and entrepreneurship guided by
faculty from the College of Business and the College of Science program in
Material Science, Engineering and Commercialization. This combination of
research and innovation training will give students the opportunity to
understand both academic and industrial research. The academically diverse
faculty at Texas State and the existing collaborations between the science and
the business faculty make Texas State an ideal location to pursue this novel REU
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CheMIE REU participants will be students
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences and those who would otherwise be
unable to participate in undergraduate research. The primary recruitment focus
will be students at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) and two year
colleges within 50 miles of Texas State. This region includes eight PUIs and six
two year colleges, including two Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and ten Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs). The fourteen partner
schools, whose students have limited access to undergraduate research
opportunities, educate over 128,000 students, 50% of whom are underrepresented
minorities. The overall CheMIE REU experience will increase the participation of
these students in graduate programs in chemistry, biochemistry and material
science.