* 1156513
* I-Corps: PHOTOCATALYSTS for WATER REMEDIATION
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Clive Clayton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal involves the focused effort by this team to translate the results
of current NSF funded research on visible light photocatalysts for water
remediation (nanogrids) into actual products for the remediation market.
Nanogrids -i.e. miniaturized "fishing nets"-like self-supported mats that float
on water- of these nanocatalysts rapidly decompose crude oil and other
contaminants using solar irradiation, and fast and at low cost turn them into
water, carbon dioxide, and biodegradable organics. Therefore, these nanogrids
may clean oil spills effectively, whether these are near the seashore or in the
middle of the ocean; at a refinery, or at a water cleaning facility. The
proposed project addresses the scalability of the synthesis method used for the
nanogrids and aims to produce a prototype of the nanogrids technology for use in
remediating oil pollution. The photocatalytic nanogrids tehnology that this team
are developing involve green photochemistry; uses the whole spectrum of the
solar irradiation (unlike the industrial catalysts that respond to UV-light
only) thus providing significantly improved catalytic efficiency; it responds to
various types of contaminants (thus enabling diverse uses); and offers complete
oxidation of hydrocarbons into ecofriendly species. The potential flexibility of
process conditions (contact time with pollutant, floatability, recovery, reuse),
the fact that it responds to an urgent need for economic water remediation
technologies, and its potential to go from the lab to the marketplace within
months, make the nanogrids a breakthrough nanotechnology worth exploring further
towards commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oil derivatives are among the
most dangerous compounds for the environment. The photocatalytic nanogrids
technology provides a means to contain and clean oil contamination, especially
in water, in a most cost-effective and ecofriendly manner. While current
photocatalysts are activated by only about 2% of the solar irradiance, the
nanogrids respond to radiation from the full solar spectrum. And solar power is
free. Apart from water remediation, immediate uses of the nanogrids technology
are envisioned in filtration, as well as in biomedical and pharmaceutical
industries. Scaling-up the nanomanufacturing process will provide significant
benefits in terms of reducing the cost and increasing the availability of the
nanogrids to be used in actual commercial products. Commercializing this
technology will create new jobs, will provide the opportunity to train the
workforce in using nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing to make real and
versatile market products, and it will benefit the environment and the human
welfare.