* 1156522
* REU Sites: Summer Research Experience in Brain and Cognitive Sciences
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Douglas Wedell, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2015
* USD 298,835.00

The Summer Research Experience in Brain and Cognitive Sciences (SREBCS) REU at
the University of South Carolina provides ten undergraduate students from across
the country a nine week immersion into how research is conducted in the field.
Students participate in 1) weekly group laboratories that provide hands-on
learning of brain and cognitive science methods, 2) semi-weekly seminars that
integrate topics within brain and cognitive sciences, and 3) daily individual
research with internationally recognized scientific scholars in the subfields of
behavioral neuroscience, cognitive science, and cognitive and developmental
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SREBCS fosters minority and non-minority student interest in basic research
within brain and cognitive sciences. A weekly group laboratory engages students
in hands-on experiences with diverse methodologies that include MRI, fMRI, EEG,
ERP, eye-tracking, animal observation, neural tissue assays and basic cognitive
experimentation. Semi-weekly research seminars stimulate student discussion of
research presented by faculty as it relates to the broader field of brain and
cognitive sciences. Daily research in faculty laboratories provides students
with insights into all phases of the research process, including an opportunity
to formulate and conduct research projects with individual guidance from
energetic and supportive research faculty mentors. The combination of group
seminars, group laboratories and individual laboratory experiences provides
students with multiple perspectives on research gleaned from innovative and
hands-on learning experiences. The group laboratory and seminar foster
theoretical and practical understanding of relevant issues and methods in the
field. Research projects derived from the mentors' ongoing research programs
investigate critical topics within the discipline, often using highly
sophisticated methodology and equipment. Thus, students receive the benefits of
individual training within specific laboratories as well as integrative sampling
of topics and methods across the diverse areas of brain and cognitive
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SREBCS
provides an innovative and integrative forum for educating undergraduate
students about the brain and cognitive sciences and encouraging them to pursue a
career in the field. Although the U.S. is perceived as a leader in the brain and
cognitive sciences, our universities must be able to motivate and train the best
students for future careers in these vital areas of research. The SREBCS helps
fill this role by providing experiences that excite and motivate students to
apply to basic research graduate training programs in the brain and cognitive
sciences and hence build the research and educational infrastructure in these
vital areas. Students experience diverse methods and theoretical orientations,
becoming more open to multidisciplinary approaches to understanding the field.
The program provides enhanced and exciting research experiences to students who
may have limited opportunities for research at their own institutions. The
SREBCS makes a special effort to increase minority opportunities in these areas,
adding to the diversity of the field. The program also impacts the training of
graduate students associated with the institute, with the aim of broadening
their academic experiences as researchers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the NSF EPSCoR
Office.