* 1156880
* REU Site: Plant Genomics and Biotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Amit Dhingra, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2016
* USD 275,582.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
Washington State University that will provide research training for 8 students,
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. The program focuses on genomics
and biotechnology -- the application of gene-guided knowledge in addressing
issues in plant and animal biology. Student projects will be based on
integrating the principles of genomics and biotechnology with other disciplines
such as plant biotechnology, genetics and breeding, plant physiology, calcium
signaling, computational biology, food science, plant pathology, and
bioinformatics. Faculty members from Departments of Horticulture, Molecular
Plant Sciences, Computer Science, Plant Pathology, Crops and Soils Science and
Food Science will serve as mentors. There is a wide range of engaging and
exciting projects for students. Students are expected to do full-time lab
research as well as participate in seminars and various workshops, such as
scientific writing, ethics in science and the responsible conduct in research,
professional career development and critical thinking. Students are also
provided educational visits of the local agricultural industries ranging from
wheat to fruit production and processing. REU students have access to a large
array of individual mentor's facilities as well as several interdepartmental
labs and centers with core facilities such as genomics with the latest
sequencing technologies, microarray printing and analysis, electron microscopy
etc. The research experience will conclude with a seminar presentation and a
campus-wide undergraduate poster presentation event. The program's multi-pronged
recruitment efforts comprise of traditional 'hard copy" formats and digital
media advertising. Students are selected based on academic record, prior
research experience and potential for outstanding research in genetics,
genomics, molecular biology and biotechnology. Students are tracked by
establishing an online community of undergraduate researchers to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the
lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common assessment
tool. More information is available by visiting
http://genomics.wsu.edu/pages/team/undergraduate/index.html, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Amit Dhingra, adhingra@wsu.edu).