* 1156311
* CAREER:    Opportunistic Routing in Multihop and Multirate Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Wenjing Lou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Min Song
* 08/31/2014
* USD 271,970.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Opportunistic routing (OR) is a powerful new
concept that exploits broadcast nature of wireless medium and spatial diversity
of network topology to cope with time-varying wireless links in multihop
wireless networks. Its potential to improve the network performance, such as
network capacity, has not been well understood and there is also a lack of
efficient and distributed routing protocols that fully exploit its advantage to
achieve performance optimality at the end-to-end path level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the theory and protocol design of
OR in multihop wireless networks. The results will also be extended to
incorporate other emerging wireless technologies, such as multi-rate, multi-
channel, etc. There are two main thrusts in this project. The first thrust
focuses on a theoretic study on the network capacity and performance bounds
achievable by OR. A novel theoretical framework will be established to
characterize the wireless interference, multirate capability, time-varying
channel fading, and their impact on the performance of OR. A method to compute
the throughput bounds between a source and destination pair in a given OR
network will be devised. The second thrust is to develop distributed and
efficient communication protocols. While existing OR schemes mainly focus on the
link layer coordination mechanisms, the emphasis of routing protocol design in
this project is on the exploit of the spatial diversity in a larger scale at
path level and target to end-to-end performance optimality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance the theoretical frontier in
characterizing fundamental limits of OR in multihop wireless networks and will
provide a better understanding of theoretical guidelines to the efficient OR
protocol design in such networks.&lt;br/&gt;