* 1156315
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: A Neuroeconomic Analysis of Personality and Learning Strategic Games
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Daniel Hawes, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2014
* USD 13,501.00

This award funds a doctoral dissertation that combines methods from social
psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and behavioral economics. The coPI seeks to
measure the neurobiology of personality traits, the adaptive properties of these
traits in the context of strategic games, and the relation of these traits to
experience-based learning and abstract reasoning. In particular, the research
investigates how the relative salience of potential gains and losses interact
with specific personality traits to determine a decision-maker's success in
using the relatively complicated mental process of backwards
induction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project extends current research on the
neural correlates of personality and choice-behavior to the domain of strategic
decision making and abstract reasoning. The project also provides a foundation
for a formal description of personality traits as characteristic adaptive
properties in the context of a strategic decision. The coPI plans to formulate
and test an empirical model of learning in strategic games that includes
personality traits as an independent variable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impacts include training a graduate student in a wide variety of research
methods that are important for interdisciplinary research in behavioral science.
The research may also prove useful in helping us understand how to improve the
ways information is presented to individuals who carry out collective decision
tasks.