* 1156040
* Conference: 2012 Bioanalytical Sensors GRC, June 17 - 22, 2012, Newport, RI
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2012
* Steven Soper, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Revzin
* 09/30/2012
* USD 20,000.00

2012 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Bioanalytical
Sensors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant application seeks partial support for
the GRC on Bioanalytical Sensors, to be held at Salve Regina University, 17 - 22
June 2012, and its associated Gordon Research Seminar, which will be held at the
same location on 16 - 17 June. The objective of this conference is to serve as a
conduit for stimulating, but collegial discussions of unpublished data in the
areas of biochemistry, biology, chemistry, engineering, medicine, and physics as
they apply to the development and applications of bioanalytical sensors. This
will be achieved through active participation of attendees in two poster
sessions, informal discussions, and 9 oral sessions with 31 speakers and 9
discussion leaders. The data discussed will encompass diverse fields and will
address the following themes: 1) molecular recognition using alternatives to
standard antibodies, 2) recent advances in optical, electrochemical, and
mechanical detection, 3) real-world applications and in vivo sensing, 4) use of
nanotechnology to advance understanding of molecular interactions, (5)
biocompatible engineered surfaces, and 6) supporting/enabling technologies.
Specific topics will include (but are not limited to) single molecule-based
sensing, intracellular sensing, biomaterials with enhanced optical or electronic
properties, nanoparticles and nanostructures, biocompatibility and the
biological/non-biological interface, miniaturization and automation, and
multiplexed detection in complex matrices. In addition, the Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS) will convene immediately preceding the GRC. Organized and
conducted by graduate students and postdocs, the GRS will provide an opportunity
for junior scientists to present their own work in an oral format in front of
their peers. Participation in this more intimate program (limited to ~35
participants) will enhance the scientific training of these junior investigators
and provide to them contacts and potential collaborators. A large proportion of
the total proposed budget will go to support GRC and GRS conference fees for
graduate and postdoctoral participants as well as emerging researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT. Because the field of Bioanalytical
Sensors is by its very nature highly interdisciplinary, it is important to
provide scientists with information on the latest research in diverse areas
directly related to and ancillary to biosensing. The conference program designed
for the 2012 GRC addresses many diverse topical areas associated with
bioanalytical sensing with presentations by both up-and-coming researchers as
well as world renowned scientists with established track records of successful
innovation and multidisciplinary endeavors. The discussion leaders - a hallmark
of GRCs - are recognized experts in their fields and will be responsible for
initiating and maintaining a vigorous, all-inclusive discussion for each talk.
It is anticipated that new ideas will be generated, leading to improved
instrumentation and materials for future bioanalytical sensor platforms as well
as fostering new collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT. The
broad, long-term objective of the 2012 GRC on Bioanalytical Sensors is to
increase the knowledge base by informing participants of the latest research in
sensor systems and materials development, systems integration and automation,
and other relevant basic and supporting technologies. This meeting will bring
together a diverse group of participants with the expectation of forming cross-
disciplinary collaborations. These interactions will be critical to bridge the
gap between the biological and physical aspects of existing and future
bioanalytical sensors. Additionally, the 2012 GRC and its associated GRS
represents a significant opportunity to promote diversity in the field of
bioanalytical sensing. The invited participants include young scientists and
members of groups underrepresented in the fields of
chemistry/biology/engineering. The GRS in particular is an exciting opportunity
to involve graduate and postdoctoral trainees more fully in the "GRC
experience", with formal oral presentations selected by a panel composed of the
GRS chairs and vice chairs. Other GRS participants will present posters at both
the GRS and GRC. The organizers will seek participation by trainees who are
members of underrepresented groups, including women, African-Americans, and
Hispanics by soliciting potential attendees from relevant organizations.