* 1156712
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Mobile Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Qijun Gu, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2017
* USD 339,912.00

This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding establishes a new CISE Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at Texas State University - San Marcos
focused on mobile cyber-physical systems (Mobile CPSs). The students will
develop secure, efficient, and energy-aware mechanisms for various applications
using the robots and sensors in the Mobile CPS Lab at the university. Students
will be exposed to control and optimization theory as well as new technologies
developed for Mobile CPSs. A nationwide recruitment process is used to select
cohorts of undergraduate students to participate in a ten-week summer research
program at the host institution. Students will be recruited from a wide range of
universities, ensuring the participation of women, veterans, and minorities. The
project includes mentoring by the experienced computer science faculty members,
technical seminars and workshops, student presentations, and field trips and
other professional development opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in strong research basis and the
expertise of the faculty. The projects are in research areas that are current
and address national priorities such as cyber security and sustainability. The
students participate in a full range of research activities from preparing
research literature reviews to production and dissemination of research results.
The project has the potential to add to the emerging research base of cyber-
physical systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the project
include providing a quality research experience to undergraduate students,
particularly students from underrepresented groups. The project team is
committed to including under-represented minority students in their research.
Thus this project has the potential to produce new computer science graduate
students and faculty members and to advance discovery and understanding while
promoting learning.