* 1156368
* Variation in symptoms at midlife: Ethnic and rural/urban comparisons
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Laura Huicochea-Gomez, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 334,336.00

Dr. Lynnette Leidy Sievert (University of Massachusetts, Amherst), Dr. Laura
Huicochea (El Colegio de la Frontera Sur, Campeche, Mexico), and Dr. Daniel E.
Brown (University of Hawaii, Hilo) will undertake research on cross-cultural
variability of menopausal symptoms as reported and as measured bio-metrically
for women at midlife. The goal is to better understand how women perceive and
report symptoms in the context of social and material conditions, belief
systems, and cultural institutions. The study will compare symptoms at midlife
across rural Mayan women, rural Mestizo women (of mixed European and Amerindian
ancestry) living in the state of Campeche, and Mayan and Mestizo women living in
the city of Campeche, Mexico. One of the most cited studies of menopause among
the Maya, carried out in the 1980s, reported a zero prevalence of hot flashes.
The aims of this study are to compare (1) symptom reports across Mayan and
Mestizo groups living in rural and urban communities; (2) the frequency of
biometrically measured hot flashes across the same groups; and (3) the level of
concordance between symptom report and biometric measurement. For example, rural
Mayan women may not report hot flashes on questionnaires, but may show (via
ambulatory monitoring) sweating consistent with hot flashes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is distinctive in its integration of in-depth
interviews with semi-structured questionnaires, biomarkers of stress, and
biometric methods to better understand the experience and perception of symptom
experience. If the results of this study show that the lived experience and
report of hot flashes is shaped by cultural context, then differences in lived
experience explain variation in cross-cultural hot flash reports. In addition,
we will better understand how women can improve their health, and their
perception of health, in precarious conditions. The results of the proposed
research will inform local community and health care providers about the
experiences of Mayan and Mestizo women at midlife. Funding this research, which
is provided by both the NSF Cultural Anthropology Program and the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering, also supports formalizes an international
collaboration.