* 1156373
* Socio-political Complexity, Interaction, and Community Ritual at Formative Etlatongo, Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jeffrey Blomster, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2017
* USD 267,605.00

The origin of complex societies--the change from egalitarian to early ranked (or
chiefdom level) societies-- is a fundamental transformation explored by social
scientists. Due to its diachronic nature, archaeology is particularly well
suited to explore the dramatic changes in power and status relationships
attendant with complex societies. In ancient Mexico, socio-politically complex
societies first appear between 1500 and 850 BC. Substantial debate has centered
on the role of political integration, differences in domestic economies and
access to exotic materials, interregional interaction, and public ceremony in
this major social transition. In order to contribute to this debate, Dr.
Blomster will conduct archaeological research at the Nochixtlán Valley site of
Etlatongo, in the Mixteca Alta of Oaxaca, Mexico. His research will explore the
emergence and dynamics of early ranked society through variation in
archaeological correlates including: household assemblages, architecture, craft
production, community ritual, access to exotic goods, and interregional
interaction. The Mixteca has been characterized as exhibiting less precocious
developments in socio-political complexity and interregional interaction than
their contemporaries in the nearby Valley of Oaxaca, which provides substantial
comparative data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through three years of excavation and
laboratory analyses at Etlatongo, the researcher will generate multiple lines of
data to explore the emergence and dynamics of early ranked society in the
Nochixtlán Valley. The researcher's hypothesis is that Etlatongo developed
rapidly into a large center circa 1150 BC due to the confluence of the
development of public ritual and greater access to exotic symbols and materials
through interregional interaction. He will explore this central hypothesis
through two main anthropological questions. The first question is: did
Etlatongo, circa 1150 BC, become a ranked society, comparable to the similarly-
sized contemporaneous chiefly center of San José Mogote in the Valley of Oaxaca?
This issue will be assessed by exploring comparative differences in household
architecture, crafting activities, material culture, and participation in
feasting. The second question is: if present, what were the key factors in the
emergence of socio-political complexity at Etlatongo? This issue will be
examined through analysis of public space, ritual, and interregional interaction
(including with the Olmec of Mexico's Gulf Coast), to determine if they are
associated with nascent leaders both spatially and through their restricted
access to ritual paraphernalia and/or exotic materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
documenting Etlatongo's early political history, this research will have a
broader impact by increasing awareness of Mixtecs' unique contributions to local
and national cultural heritage. Based on the interests of local stakeholders,
Dr. Blomster will collaborate in development projects, including a proposed
community museum at Etlatongo. Research results will be disseminated to the
public through a bilingual English/Spanish project website. The project will
also train students from both Mexico and the United States, promoting
international collaboration, and will generate dissertation and thesis projects.