* 1156896
* REU Site:  Atmospheric Science in the Gulf Coast Region at Texas A&M University
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Don Conlee, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2016
* USD 297,589.00

This award funds a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in the
Department of Atmospheric Sciences at Texas A&M University. The program allows
undergraduate students to conduct research projects in atmospheric science over
an 8-week period during the summer, with an expected enrollment of 10 students
each summer. REU student research involves linkages between physical
meteorology, atmospheric chemistry, and weather and climate, as well as making
and analyzing observations and designing, conducting, and interpreting modeling
studies. Research topics are largely driven by air quality, climate change, and
precipitation processes in the Gulf Coastal region. Students spend the majority
of their time conducting focused research under the direction of mentors from
the Atmospheric Sciences Department. Sudents also gain exposure to a variety of
research settings and multiple sub-disciplines within atmospheric sciences,
giving them a clear understanding of the wide variety of atmospheric science
research and study opportunities available to them.

The REU program has broader impacts through its educational focus, as it exposes
students to atmospheric science research and helps to develop the future
workforce in atmospheric science disciplines. This REU program is particularly
advantageous due to its location in and focus on the Gulf Coast Region, in which
there are few atmospheric science departments and, when this award was made, no
other REU programs in atmospheric sciences. With its regional focus, this REU
site involves students in research problems that are directly relevant to their
own and neighboring communities, leading to immediate and long-term benefits to
those communities. In addition, the REU program strives to recruit students from
underrepresented groups, both through existing partnerships between Texas A&M
faculty and minority-serving institutions in the region, and through recruiting
visits to minority-serving institutions.