* 1156419
* REU Site: Integrative Molecular Plant Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Amy Grunden, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2015
* USD 268,499.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to
North Carolina State University (NCSU) that will provide research training for 8
students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. Students will be
engaged in cutting edge research in integrative molecular plant systems (IMPS)
with foci on sustainable foods, fuels, and model systems. NCSU has a strong core
of plant biologists who are working in multiple areas of integrative plant
biology, as well as faculty collaborators from multiple departments and
disciplines that serve as research mentors in the program. The goal of the
program is to inspire and empower undergraduate researchers to pursue productive
scientific careers. Students in the program will participate in a 3-day
"Biotechnology Bootcamp" during the first week of the program, where they will
learn critical molecular biology laboratory skills, and then will pursue
independent research projects for the remainder of the summer under the guidance
of a faculty mentor. Students will have multiple public-speaking opportunities
to present their research, including a poster presentation at the campus-wide
undergraduate research symposium at the end of the program. Students will also
participate in career-development activities, including research seminars and
various workshops, such as the responsible conduct in research, professional
communication skills, career opportunities in industry and academia, and the
graduate school application process. The student recruitment strategy has an
online component through the program website and the NSF website, as well as
direct email to colleagues and programs at other institutions and site visits to
local HBCUs. Students are selected based on academic record, research interest,
letters of recommendation, and potential for outstanding research in molecular
plant biology. Students from underrepresented groups are especially encouraged
to apply. Students are tracked to determine their continued interest in their
academic field of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the
research experience. Information about the program will be assessed by various
means, including use of an REU common assessment tool. More information is
available by visiting http://biotech.ncsu.edu/reu or by contacting the PI, Dr.
Sue Carson (sue_carson@ncsu.edu or 919-513-0330).