* 1156126
* Symposium FF: Mechanical Nanofabrication, Nanopatterning, and Nanoassembly; Boston, Massachusetts; November 28 to December 3, 2011
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Marco Rolandi, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Mechanical Nanofabrication, Nanopatterning, and
Nanoassembly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal CMMI-1156126 seeks travel awards
for graduate students, post-docs, as well as under-represented and junior
faculty to attend and present at the four-day symposium on Mechanical
Nanofabrication, Nanopatterning and Nanoassembly, to be held during the 2011
Materials Research Society Fall Meeting. This symposium will bring together
researchers in the area of basic mechanics, nanomechanics, and mechanics of
materials with the engineers and industrialists developing and using mechanical
means of nanoscale scalable manufacturing. It will provide a forum to define and
present problems and solution pathways through expanded scientific understanding
of the underlying processes and multi-scale interfacial phenomena that govern
mechanically based fabrication spanning nanoscopic to macroscopic
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of mechanics of nanofabrication is
making rapid advances with the potential to greatly impact future scalable
manufacturing strategies. It is critical to assemble a diverse community that
embraces this work at the interface. This community will promote continued
scientific advancement and to encourage the development of new inter-
disciplinary researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;?Encourage an inclusive community of researchers with
interdisciplinary perspectives working on the mechanics of nanoscale
manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;?Publicize recent advances in the mechanics of
nanomanufacturing applied to industrial problems as well as novel fundamental
theoretical insights&lt;br/&gt;?Initiate exchange of ideas and promote new
multi-disciplinary collaborations among mechanical engineers, material
scientists, chemists and industrialists&lt;br/&gt;?Enable junior scientists
(including graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and junior faculty) to
present their research findings and to interact with the community of
established and prominent researchers in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funds provided by NSF will be used to award 20 symposium participants with
travel support of $500 each. The goal of this support is to broaden the
participation of a diverse group of junior researchers including women and
underrepresented minorities who otherwise may be financially restricted from
attending the symposium to present their research.