* 1156932
* Research Experience for Undergraduates: Green Chemistry in Colorful Colorado
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Allen Schoffstall, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) at the National Science
Foundation supports the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
University of Colorado- Colorado Springs (UCCS). The REU Program will bring
seven students to campus for ten weeks each summer to conduct Green Chemistry
research. One important goal of this REU Site is to train future scientists from
institutions with no research opportunities, including community colleges and
four-year colleges having limited research opportunities. In this region,
several of these campuses have a large percentage of underrepresented students.
The theme of this project, Green Chemistry, is a field that has been developing
exponentially in academic and industrial venues. This project especially
features elements of atom economy, small-scale reactions and analyses, and
reactions in aqueous media. Some of the scientific goals of this project
include: developing novel ligands that can catalytically remediate heavy metals
from soils and wastewater, detecting the presence of household chemicals,
hormones, and endocrine-disrupting compounds in the environment, and developing
a photocatalyst for splitting water into H2 and O2. One of the collaborative
inorganic/organic/biochemistry projects uses the rapidly expanding synthetic
field of azide-alkyne "click chemistry". Participating faculty members have a
strong commitment to undergraduate research and aim to prepare students for the
transition to graduate school and research careers. Students in this program
will benefit from having experienced UCCS student and faculty researchers
working alongside them in a brand-new, handicap-accessible facility especially
designed for undergraduate student researchers. One goal is to create a life-
long support community for REU students composed of the other REU students and
faculty mentors, to help these students achieve their educational and career
goals. Results of the experiments are to be made available to the scientific
community-at-large on the UCCS REU web site and through publications and
presentations at American Chemical Society meetings and Green Chemistry
conferences.