* 1156585
* REU Site: Integrated Research at the Frontiers of the Biological, Physical, and  Engineering Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Lynne Regan, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 238,004.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to Yale
University that will provide research training for 8 students for 10 weeks each
summer, during the period 2012-2014. The program focuses on grand challenges in
the life sciences using interdisciplinary physical and quantitative approaches.
The program includes more than twelve faculty mentors from Yale's Raymond and
Beverly Sackler Institute for Biological, Physical, and Engineering Sciences.
The Institute spans six departments: Biomedical Engineering, Chemical &amp;
Environmental Engineering, Mechanical Engineering &amp; Materials Science,
Molecular Biophysics &amp; Biochemistry, Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental
Biology, and Physics. In consultation with the program leadership team, students
choose a mentor and research project from three areas: (A) mechanics of cellular
processes, (B) protein function and misfolding, and (C) technology and method
development for integrated research. Students also participate in workshops and
seminars on laboratory methods, scientific presentations, ethics, STEM careers,
and graduate school admissions process. Students present their work at a
research symposium coordinated with the NSF-funded CEMRI CRISP REU program at
Yale. Students also can take advantage of program-wide social activities that
provide a forum for networking. Students are selected based on their academic
performance, research interests, and their future career plans. Students with
limited opportunities for research and those from underrepresented groups are
encouraged to apply. The program is particularly suited for students interested
in conducting research in interdisciplinary areas. The evaluation and assessment
of the program will consist of pre- and post-summer surveys, student interviews,
and the REU common assessment tool. Students will be tracked to determine their
career paths, using a web-based database. More information is available by
visiting http://www.sackler.yale.edu/summer.htm, or by contacting the PI (Prof.
Corey S. O'Hern at corey.ohern@yale.edu) or the co-PI (Prof. Lynne Regan at
lynne.regan@yale.edu).