* 1156574
* REU Site: Enhancing Undergraduate Experience in Next Generation Networking Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Jie Wu, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 05/31/2016
* USD 319,932.00

This site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding establishes a new Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the Temple University focused on
networking technologies. Students will participate in research projects that
involve mobile computing, wireless communication, and cloud computing. Each
summer a cohort of undergraduate students will work with Temple faculty in small
groups to design, implement, and evaluate a research project. The students will
participate in professional development activities that make them more aware of
graduate school and professional aspects of a computing career. The students
will have access to the WiMAX testbed that covers much of the metropolitan
downtown area of Philadelphia. Students will also have access to an internal
supercomputer and a cloud cluster. Thus the students will be able to use the
outstanding facilities available at the university and work with the faculty at
the Center of Networked Computing to conduct challenging and timely research
using technologies that underpin next generation
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies with
the strong research team and the focus on next generation networking
technologies, an area of interest to students and a national priority. The
students will work closely with faculty members on a research project that will
be of interest to a wider research community and that has the potential for
practical impact on everyday life. The research has the potential to contribute
to the research core of the computing disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the project include providing a quality research experience
to undergraduate students, particularly students from underrepresented groups
and from institutions with limited research environments. Thus this project has
the potential to produce new computer science graduate students and faculty
members and to advance discovery and understanding while promoting learning.