* 1156350
* REU Site:  Cornell's Summer REU Program in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Robert Strichartz, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 06/30/2015
* USD 378,000.00

Each summer, 12 undergraduate students will participate in an 8 week research
program in the Cornell University Mathematics Department directed by 3 faculty
members (the Principle Investigator, R. Strichartz, and 2 other chosen from
among current and former department members) and assisted by graduate students
and postdocs. The students will work on research projects that are within their
grasp, and which present real opportunities for new discoveries that will be of
value to the mathematical community. It is expected that some, but not all, of
the research will lead to published papers. Two types of projects will be
emphasized: 1) computer related research with students writing programs, or
using existing software; 2) problems in other areas that do not require a great
deal of background knowledge. In addition, the students will gain experience in
communicating mathematics by presenting talks to each other and to the public.
Additional information can be found at the project's website:
http://www.math.cornell.edu/Undergraduate/REU/REU.htm

This project gives students the opportunity to contribute to research projects
of interest to the mathematical community. It is expected that the research will
continue to have a significant impact in the area of analysis on fractals. The
faculty mentors are leaders in their fields. Student participants will get a
true feeling for what mathematical research is like at a major research
university, as they will be part of collaborative research groups including
senior faculty, postdocs, and graduate students. This will help recruit talented
students to enter graduate school in the mathematical sciences.