* 1156289
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Crosslinguistic Perception of Pitch in Language and Music
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Irene Vogel, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2013
* USD 8,730.00

This dissertation investigates how one's native language and degree of
musicianship shape auditory perception by examining the perception of pitch in
language and music. The central hypotheses are based on the Reverse Hierarchy
Theory of learning, in which sensory experiences tune brain areas to provide
better information for solving complex perceptual tasks. This tuning can lead to
crossover between domains which are united by common brain areas. The specific
proposal is that languages with lexical tone (the inclusion of pitch as an
important component of words) share properties of musical melodies. Thus, tone
language speakers are expected to show better melody perception, and musicians
to show better tone perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three experiments
investigate these issues. The first compares native speakers of Mandarin
Chinese, Yoruba (tone languages), and English (nontone language) on a
standardized music perception test, measuring discrimination of several
properties of melody. It is expected that tone language speakers will outperform
English speakers only on those melodic properties shared with lexical tone, and
that Mandarin speakers will outperform Yoruba speakers only on those properties
which are unique to Mandarin. Second, English-speaking learners of Mandarin
participate in the same test. It is expected that after linguistic training,
they will show improvement in melody perception similar to native speakers,
compared to students learning nontone languages. Third, students taking musical
training are tested on their perception of Mandarin tones. It is expected that
such musical training will lead to improved perception of lexical tones even
without linguistic training. That is, music training should enhance melodic
properties shared with lexical tone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These results will
provide insight into the cognitive relationship between language and music and
the influence of sensory experience during development and adulthood. Thus, they
will bear directly on issues of cognitive modularity and language and music
training. This award will also enhance the training of a promising linguistic
scholar.