* 1156155
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics:  How Does Ability Information Impact Educational Investments?
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Pascaline Dupas, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 03/31/2013
* USD 25,800.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: &lt;br/&gt;How Does Ability
Information Impact Educational Investments?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: PI
Pascaline Dupas, co-PI Rebecca Dizon-Ross&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years,
governments across the developing world have invested heavily in improving
educational access. However, despite these measures, educational inequalities
still persist across generations.&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a
relatively unexamined hypothesis for educational inequalities: that poorer
parents have more inaccurate information about their children's ability, which
prevents them from making optimal investments in their children's schooling. The
research will explore this hypothesis through a randomized controlled trial in
Malawi. First, it will measure parents' beliefs about their children's aptitude
and school performance. It will then provide randomly selected parents with
information about their children's true performance, and measure the effect on
educational investments.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will thus be able to
address the following research questions: Does ability information impact
investments? Can poor information explain part of the socioeconomic gap in
educational attainment?&lt;br/&gt;In addition, by examining whether parental
investments increase or decrease (relative to investments in the control group)
depending on whether parents find out if their children's performance was lower
or higher than expected, the research will address the question: how do
schooling investments depend upon a child's actual measured
ability?&lt;br/&gt;Since most models of optimal human capital investment show
that efficient schooling investments depend upon a child's ability, this
research will contribute to the literature by examining a potentially important
source of inefficient investments in education -- that investments depend on
perceived, not true, ability.&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, the study is expected to
contribute to the literature examining whether ability and schooling are
complements or substitutes, and whether parents invest more if their child has
lower or higher ability. Empirically estimating these relationships is difficult
because of reverse causality -- because investments may increase measured
ability, one cannot distinguish whether high ability is a cause or effect of
high investment -- and omitted variable bias. The proposed research improves
upon the identification of previous work by using information shocks to create
exogenous variation in (perceived) ability.