* 1156569
* REU Site: Undergraduate Summer Research in Molecular and Cellular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Gail Waring, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2015
* USD 241,620.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to
Marquette University that will provide research training for 8 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. This award is supported by both the NSF
Directorate for Biosciences and the Department of Defense ASSURE program (thru a
Memorandum of Understanding with NSF). The REU program is intended to encourage
students to pursue science- and research-related careers. The focus of this
program is the understanding of biological processes in organisms ranging from
microbes to mammals at the level of individual cells, proteins, and genes.
Students will choose from among several faculty in the Department of Biological
Sciences and will design and carry out a research project under the direct
supervision of their faculty mentor, thereby developing a realistic view of the
demands and excitement of scientific discovery. Besides full-time research,
students will learn to read the scientific literature and develop written and
verbal communication skills through weekly journal clubs, laboratory group
meetings, and research discussions. Students will also participate in workshops
on responsible conduct of research, career opportunities, and the graduate
school application process. Students will present their findings at both a
poster session and research symposium during the final weeks of the program.
Social activities are interwoven throughout the program to promote camaraderie
among faculty, Marquette students, and the REU participants. Housing, a stipend,
and meal and travel allowances are provided. Students will be encouraged to
present their work at national meetings during the following year. Students are
selected based on their interest in research, academic record, and phone
interviews with potential faculty mentors. Members of underrepresented minority
groups and students from colleges with limited research opportunities are
especially encouraged to apply. After the program, participants are tracked to
determine their continued interest in their academic field of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience. The program
will be assessed using various means, including an REU common assessment tool
available online to students. More information about the REU Site program is
available by visiting
http://www.marquette.edu/biology/summerresearchprogram.shtml, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Edward Blumenthal at edward.blumenthal@marquette.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Gail Waring at gail.waring@marquette.edu).