* 1156942
* REU Site: Interactive Biomaterials
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Patrick Mather, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2016
* USD 298,092.00

This three year REU Site program at Syracuse University will engage
undergraduate students in research focused in the area of interactive
biomaterials. The objectives of this REU Site program are to: (1) train students
in leading edge research techniques through independent biomaterials research
projects in a multidisciplinary, collaborative, and open laboratory environment;
(2) to provide multifaceted mentoring opportunities and network building
experiences that ultimately increase the likelihood that participants will
pursue graduate education in their chosen discipline; and (3) to train students
to be effective communicators of their research to their peers and the
scientific community. These goals will be accomplished through participation in
independent, interactive biomaterials research projects in faculty laboratories,
one-on-one mentoring from faculty advisors and graduate student coaches, an
innovative career mentoring program, interactive laboratory tours with REU
student-led demonstrations, student research presentations, team building
activities, and social events. This program aims to engage undergraduate
students in meaningful and stimulating research, educational and social
experiences as a means of increasing their enthusiasm and preparation for future
graduate level study and careers in biomaterials science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects available to students in the REU
program will advance fundamental scientific knowledge in the areas of shape
memory polymers, stimulus-responsive polymers, drug delivery, control of
bacterial biofilms, cell-biomaterial interactions, electrochemistry of metallic
biomaterials, tissue engineering, and molecular modeling of interactive
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site program will broaden the
participation of students from institutions with limited research opportunities,
women, and underrepresented minorities in meaningful undergraduate research,
strengthened by the Hampton Roads HBCU Cluster Partnership. A signature element
of the proposed REU site is a career mentoring initiative, focused on both
industrial and academic career paths at the PhD level, which emphasizes the
importance and benefits of graduate education in STEM disciplines. The best
practices of this REU site will be broadly disseminated via the web and
educational publications, with an aim to produce models for replication at
future REU sites.