* 1156611
* REU Site: Sensor Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2016
* John Vetelino, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2016
* USD 418,707.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This three year renewal REU site program will
provide 10 undergraduate students per year with in-depth research experiences in
sensor science and engineering at the University of Maine. Students will conduct
research advancing their knowledge of engineering, chemistry, physics, and/or
biology. The students selected will be distributed so that at least 15 of 30
participants (50%) will come from institutions with limited research
opportunities for undergraduates and at least 12 students will come from the
student applicant pool of women, minorities and students with disabilities. At
least 30 additional undergraduates (funded through research grants) will
participate in site activities, for a total of at least 60 site participants.
All participants will be on site for ten weeks each summer, working with 15 of
University of Maine's top researchers, and benefiting from specialized sensor
science and engineering research facilities such as the Laboratory for Surface
Science and Technology and Maine Center for Next Generation Wireless
Communications. REU participants will interact with faculty research mentors,
graduate students, post-docs, technicians, visiting scientists, and middle and
high school teachers. Such interaction will help the students develop strong
communication skills and work across disciplines as required in a growing number
of professional environments. In addition to their research experience, REU
participants will complete INT 398 Undergraduate Research Participation and ECE
465 Introduction to Sensors, make a presentation within a context similar to a
national or international conference, and share results from their research at a
middle or high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensor design and use provides an
ideal context for demonstrating the interdisciplinary nature of
scientific/engineering content and methodology. The ability to solve problems
using an improved understanding of mathematics, chemistry, biology, physics, and
engineering is central to the proposed REU site. In addition to gaining hands-on
experience as part of a research team, the REU participants in the proposed site
will become familiar with the integration of knowledge for creative problem
solving and effective communication across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
the end of their research experience, REU participants will present their
research in conference format and submit a written report or co-author paper(s)
for publication in peer-reviewed journals and/or symposia. REU students will
also participate in two complementary courses, INT 398 Undergraduate Research
Participation and ECE 465 Introduction to Sensors. Each student will receive
three credits for each course (total of six credits for the summer). Both
courses have already been developed and successfully implemented as a result of
prior NSF funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
undergraduate participants will utilize new knowledge to solve real-life
research problems that impact society. This REU site will specifically recruit
women and minorities and provide research experiences for students at non-PhD
granting institutions. Two of the 15 senior personnel are women with very strong
research track records who are especially well qualified to mentor female
students. More than 90% of U of Maine undergraduates are from Maine; many are
the first from their family to attend college and come from geographically
isolated areas where opportunities for research experiences are limited. This
REU site will enhance the infrastructure for research and education by bringing
together faculty and students from diverse disciplines under the intellectual
umbrella of sensor science and engineering. The proposed activities will also
ensure that multi-user facilities are sites of research and mentoring for
significant numbers of science and engineering students. Research results will
be disseminated through campus presentations and more broadly through
professional journals and symposia enhancing scientific and technological
understanding. Based on their interaction with former RET and GK-12 participants
during their on-campus research experiences, REU participants will share their
research experiences with middle and high school students and teachers. Finally,
society will benefit as undergraduates, as a result of their research
experiences, choose to continue in graduate school to excel in technologically
and scientifically challenging careers that advance such areas as homeland
security, food safety, transportation, communications, and medicine.