* 1156479
* REU Sites: A long-term perspective on marine biodiversity and conservation: Interdisciplinary fieldschool in the Lau Group, Fiji
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Loretta Cormier, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 10/31/2013
* USD 238,350.00

The summer program at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (a Minority
Serving Institution and the lead institution for NSF's Alabama AMP or Alliance
for Minority Participation Program) engages a diverse group of students in
interdisciplinary problem based research that has laid the foundation for a
model of long-term dynamics in human exploitation of marine biological
communities, emphasizing interactions between humans and the environment. This
program has enhanced understanding of global culture, biological diversity, and
effective strategies in science education. Student activities and projects
include: archaeological surveys, mapping, and excavations; collecting and
analyzing ethnographic data on resource exploitation, foodways, and domestic
social and economic organization; conducting lab analysis of archaeological
materials; working with database systems and computer software; and interpreting
data in written, digital, and oral presentations for the academic and general
public.

Intellectual Merit.

The innovative project produces a model describing millennia of human-
environmental interactions. An evolutionary perspective is afforded by the PI-
team's expertise in ethnography, archaeology, and historical ecology, providing
for the evaluation of changes in marine diversity and resource use through time.
A fundamental part of the proposed research is the collaboration of students and
faculty from North America, Fiji-based collaborators, and Fijian villagers.
These interactions serve to stimulate interest in the understanding and
preservation of cultural and natural resources. This project provides a model of
innovative strategies for teaching field-based sciences, for disseminating
research to educators, and for evaluating the educational effectiveness of this
approach. They have developed and continue to develop visual digital media and
contribute to technologically savvy curriculum for use in K-16 classrooms
throughout the state of Alabama. It is anticipated that an exceptional model for
conducting fieldschools will result from the project. This research is expected
to have a positive impact on theory and method in anthropology, historical
ecology, and science education.

Broader Impacts.

The broader impacts of this project include the teaching and training of
students and indigenous collaborators in anthropological field methods. The
research findings are disseminated via a partnership between this REU site and
Alabama Public Television (APT) through APTPLUS, which is APT's 21st century
destination for online learning. State-of-the-art technology combined with a
wealth of content-rich resources makes learning a dynamic, interactive
experience for all ages. Free for educators, adult learners, parents and youth,
APTPLUS provides exciting multimedia education. This video-on-demand service
offers pre-K through adult learning curriculum content, professional
development, national and local video libraries, and links to state and national
educational web sites and support materials. In an effort to reach as many
audiences as possible, the REU team also continues to disseminate information
through traditional procedures such as scholarly presentations and publications.
Data gathered by REU students are used in displays and presentations to the
general public in collaboration with UAB, the McWane Science Center, University
of the South Pacific, the Fiji Museum, Birmingham City Schools, and APT.
Moreover, this experiential learning opportunity equips students with a broad
array of skill sets and numerous opportunities to engage with faculty and form
supportive relationships that extend well beyond the 9-week REU. By integrating
practical research skills, a broad understanding of scientific theories and
methods, specific hands-on involvement in a foreign cultural setting, and
training in ethics, students emerge from this REU experience with abilities that
prepare and serve them in graduate programs in a variety of potential areas.

This REU Site is co-funded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE) Global Venture Fund.