* 1156361
* The Response of the Greenland Ice Sheet to Holocene Climate Change: Testing Ice Sheet Models and Forcing Mechanisms of Ice-Margin Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Beata Csatho, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Holly Hapke
* 06/30/2015
* USD 288,374.00

Ice sheet response to climate change is a growing concern in light of recent
rapid climate warming over Greenland. A consensus among scientists is that
oceanographic conditions (e.g., temperature and currents) play a critical role
in controlling rates of ice sheet retreat. This project will generate
reconstructions of western Greenland Ice Sheet change across a wide geographic
corridor that encompasses both marine- and land-terminating sectors of the
Greenland Ice Sheet. Measurements from these locations will help demonstrate the
different mechanisms thought to control ice margin response to climate change.
The project will combine geological reconstructions of past ice margin change
and remote sensing and photogrammetry methods to generate records of ice margin
change throughout the Holocene, up to and including the 20th century. The
geological reconstructions take advantage of untapped archives of former ice
margin positions contained within proglacial lakes. In addition, cosmogenic 10Be
dating will generate records of early Holocene ice margin recession that took
place for both marine- and land-based glacier termini. Records of 20th century
ice margin change will take advantage of recently produced spatial datasets such
as aerial-photograph-based topographic maps, satellite images, laser and radar
data that provide high-resolution images of the ice sheet bed and its surface

Despite the potential of the Greenland Ice Sheet to contribute dramatically to
sea level rise in response to ongoing and projected climate change, resulting in
significant socio-economic impacts in the US and around the globe, the future
behavior of the ice sheet remains largely uncertain. This uncertainty stems from
our incomplete knowledge of the pattern and timescales of the ice sheet's
response to climate change. This, in turn, stems from a relatively brief view
that we have of ice sheet change, which is limited to several decades. This
project will improve our understanding of what controls ice margin change based
on how different types of ice sheet sectors have responded to climate changes
over the last 10,000 years. By combining these results with marine records and
other ice margin and climate reconstructions, the findings of this project will
be useful in forecasting future ice sheet and sea level change.