* 1156134
* Early Career: Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education in Tectonics and Paleoclimate
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Katharine Huntington, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2014
* USD 365,362.00

This award supports the acquisition of a gas-source, isotope-ratio mass
spectrometer to measure clumped isotopologues of CO2 (&amp;#916;47) at the
University of Washington. The ability to make these measurements with high
precision enables a wide range of applications?from constraining atmospheric CO2
budgets to documenting the thermal histories of meteorites?and the most
developed application to date is a paleothermometer based on 13C-18O clumping in
carbonates. Carbonate clumped isotope thermometry offers the promise of
reconstructing terrestrial paleoclimate, paleoelevation, and the thermal history
of the upper crust. Specific studies will include use of the mass spectrometer
to (1) study carbonate formation processes in soils and develop
paleoenvironmental proxies in paleosols, (2) constrain the climatic and
topographic evolution of the Andes, Tibetan plateau, and western North America,
and (3) investigate isotopic resetting in buried carbonates and fluid migration,
mineral growth, and interactions of brittle deformation and diagenesis in
sedimentary basins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mass spectrometer will
substantially enhance research infrastructure enabling a large number of
investigators and students to advance core research supported by NSF-EAR.
Research made possible by this facility will be integrated with education,
outreach, and broadening participation efforts through university-level
curriculum development and experiential learning opportunities for minority high
school students and teachers. These activities will strengthen K-12 science
education and partnerships between the university and high schools, helping to
raise awareness of geoanalytical capabilities in the U.S. The PI is an early
career investigator.