* 1156357
* Collaborative Research: Source apportionment of iron in the marine atmosphere - application of stable iron isotopic measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2011,09/30/2013
* Brian Majestic, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 09/30/2013
* USD 12,485.00

In many regions of the world's ocean, primary productivity is not limited by the
major nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorous and silica) but by the micronutrient iron
(Fe). One major source of Fe is the atmospheric transport and deposition of
aerosols to the open ocean. The aerosols come from natural sources, such as
soils and dust and biomass burning, and from anthropogenic emissions related to
industrial processes and energy generation. Our understanding of the sources is
limited by our ability to identify the origin of the Fe. Mechanisms of tracing
the sources of aerosols include the use of the elemental ratios as specific
sources have specific elemental signals. Fe isotopic variation has recently been
demonstrated to be a potentially important tracer of Fe sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, a collaboration between investigators at
Arizona State University and Northern Arizona University, will explore the use
of Fe isotopes as a tracer of natural and anthropogenic sources of aerosols to
assess their importance as a source of Fe to the open ocean. Fe is known to
limit primary production in many high nutrient, low chlorophyll areas, so it is
important to understand the origin of the Fe that is delivered to the oceans and
its availability to marine microorganisms. Additionally, aerosols from different
sources have variable size and solubility in seawater and therefore this also
impacts Fe bioavailability. Examination of the isotopes of Fe in aerosols could
help address these questions as the investigators' prior research has
demonstrated distinct variations in the isotopic composition of aerosol Fe that
arise from natural and anthropogenic sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will measure the Fe isotopic compositions of aerosol particles collected on
Bermuda over a period of one year. Bermuda was chosen as seasonal differences
lead to different aerosol types being deposited - summer winds flow from the
east and carry Saharan soil dust and other aerosols, while winter winds
originate from over North America. The project will compare the Bermuda results
with that of key anthropogenic and natural aerosol materials that could be a
source of Fe to the Atlantic Ocean. In addition, elemental analyses of these
aerosols will provide an independent confirmation of the Fe isotopes results.
Analysis of size-segregated samples will provide additional information and will
be coupled with solubility experiments designed to assess the soluble Fe
fraction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The scientific impact of this
work relates to obtaining a better understanding of the factors that impact the
sources and availability of Fe, an important limiting micronutrient, to the
ocean, and to marine microorganisms. As a part of the proposed project, the
investigators will develop interactive educational activities to teach the major
concepts of ocean nutrient availability and limitation to non-science students,
which will be part of a new course "Habitable Worlds". Additionally, the
proposed project will support graduate student training, and benefit under-
represented groups.