* 1156452
* REU Site:   Research in Environmental Studies and Evolutionary Developmental Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2017
* Cynthia Cohen, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 11/30/2017
* USD 700,156.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to San
Francisco State University (SFSU) that will provide research training for 10
students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2016. The program's focus is
in the area of ecology, evolution, and developmental biology. REU fellows will
work with an exceptionally diverse team of REU mentors with active extramurally
funded research labs, many of which are located at SFSU's marine station, the
Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies (RTC). The program will feature
a one-week intensive lab/lecture/field methods course, a 9-week independent
research project conducted on the main campus or at RTC, a 9-week professional
development seminar, a bioethics workshop, a variety of networking activities,
and a campus-wide research conference where students present their research
projects to the broader community. The program's recruitment effort consists of
"hard copy" and digitally based advertising, as well as through networking
activities by REU alumni and faculty. The goals of this program are to provide
research training for students at an early stage of their academic careers and
to encourage them to not only complete their undergraduate degrees in the
sciences but also to consider graduate-level training and careers in the
sciences. Therefore, students are selected based on their academic record,
letters of recommendation, specific interest in the area of ecology, evolution,
and development, and future career goals. Students are tracked to determine
completion of their degree program and the impact of the research experience on
their career path. Pre and post surveys as well as an REU common assessment tool
will be used to evaluate the program. More information is available by visiting
http://biology.sfsu.edu/faculty-pages/reu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Carmen
Domingo at cdomingo@sfsu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Sarah Cohen at
sarahcoh@sfsu.edu).