* 1156170
* Environmental Engel Curves
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Arik Levinson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2016
* USD 149,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1156170 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
National Bureau of Economic Research Inc &lt;br/&gt;NSF Program: ECONOMICS
&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigators: Arik Levinson &lt;br/&gt;Title:
Environmental Engel Curves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the relationship between households' incomes and the amount of
pollution embodied in the goods and services they consume. It provides the
first-ever estimate of an Environmental Engel curve (EEC) - a graphical
depiction of the relationship between household income and consumption-related
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 30 years, while real U.S.
household income approximately doubled, many measures of the pollution
attributable to household consumption have remained relatively flat or declined.
Some of this reduction in pollution per dollar of household consumption has been
the result of consumers switching to a relatively cleaner mix of goods and
services. Part of this switch has been a consequence of economy-wide social
changes, such as regulation-induced price changes and growing environmental
consciousness. But part of the switch has been due to an underlying and possibly
coincidental preference by richer people for relatively cleaner goods and
services. This project calculates annual EECs for the United States and thus
provides a basis for decomposing the improvements in pollution attributable to
U.S. households into those two parts: changing nationwide prices and
preferences, and household income growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, evidence
about the income-pollution relationship is based on comparisons across countries
at a particular point in time, or across time within a particular country. These
aggregate data are insufficient to estimate EECs or to differentiate between
consumption patterns driven by society-wide changes and consumption patterns due
solely to income growth. In order to estimate the income-pollution relationship,
all other factors must be held equal - including the prices and characteristics
of available goods, which are likely to vary significantly across countries or
over time. Consequently, this project estimates year-specific EECs within the
United States for each year from 1984 to the present. This involves combining
data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), the Bureau of Economic Analysis
benchmark input-output tables, the U.S. Economic Census and Census of
Agriculture, and a new dataset of industry-specific pollution intensities called
the Trade and Environmental Assessment Model
(TEAM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debates about the relationship between economic
growth and environmental degradation have a long history. Some proponents of
stringent environmental regulations have claimed that economic growth must be
slowed in order to preserve the environment. Opponents of regulations
occasionally note that wealthier countries have less pollution, and infer that
economic growth improves the environment. While both conclusions may mistake
correlation for causation, one mechanism that could ameliorate the effect of
economic growth in pollution due to economic expansion would involve richer
households consuming a less pollution intensive set of goods. By estimating
household-level EECs, this project represents the first empirical link between
the broad literature on growth and the environment and the fundamental
microeconomic literature on consumer preferences and income growth.