* 1156120
* SHINE: Study the Evolution of Coronal Mass Ejections from the Sun to the Earth
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jie Zhang, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2015
* USD 338,656.00

The principal investigator (PI) will study the evolution of coronal mass
ejections (CMEs) in interplanetary space between the Sun and the Earth, in order
to refine predictions of their arrival times at Earth and of their potential
geoeffectiveness. To achieve this goal, the PI will use a variety of
measurements to fully track and characterize the kinematic and morphological
evolution of CMEs, including remote sensing data and 'in situ' solar wind
observations from spacecraft. Using a first-principles-based approach, the PI
will also create appropriate theoretical flux rope models consistent with
observational constraints, in order to fully understand the physical processes
that govern a CME's evolution. Finally, the PI will develop an effective CME
arrival time prediction model, based on comprehensive observations and improved
characterization of a large number of CME events and a robust theoretical model.

The PI recognizes that CMEs are a known driver of severe space weather events in
the near-Earth space environment. Since CME disturbances in geospace can affect
the safety of astronauts, as well as interfere with satellite operations for
communication and navigation, this effort will have positive broader impacts for
society by improving our predicative capabilities for CME evolution, arrival,
and geoeffective impact at Earth. This project will also facilitate the
integration of research and education, since most of the requested funding will
be used to support a graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher. The PI has
already developed two graduate courses in solar and heliospheric physics, and he
educates students at George Mason University in the space weather sciences. The
research results of this project will be further integrated into the PI's
established curriculum, for the continued benefit of his students and for
training the next generation of scientists in space weather research.