* 1156601
* Neural mechanisms providing flexible links between perception and action
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Jochen Ditterich, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 04/30/2015
* USD 630,904.00

Successful decision-making in a complex and ever-changing world involves
multiple steps; First, identifying decision-relevant information: Second,
identifying possibly sensible actions; and Third, deciding on an action that is
most reasonable under the current circumstances. To achieve this, our brain
needs to select decision-relevant sensory signals, and link the relevant sensory
evidence to the action planning process. With funding from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Jochen Ditterich and his research team, are carrying out
research on how our brains are able to make decisions on the basis of sensory
information. His research is investigating the neural mechanisms that provide
the necessary flexibility to deal with a changing environment. In his research,
participants carry out a perceptual decision task that requires them to separate
decision-relevant from irrelevant information and to switch stimulus-response
associations. The investigators are analyzing human decision behavior and are
using computational modeling to reveal the properties of the mechanisms that
allow our brain to make flexible decisions. In addition, recordings of neural
activity from animals performing the same decision task are providing insight
into the neural mechanisms that can separate decision-relevant from irrelevant
information, and that can switch stimulus-response associations based on the
current task demands.

It is a hallmark of our cognitive abilities that our brain can easily adjust to
very different situations in which we might find ourselves. From a mechanistic
point of view, decision-making in complex and changing situations means that our
brain must be able to change quickly how information flows between its different
parts. While theories have been proposed how the brain might be able to achieve
this, the actual neural mechanisms are surprisingly poorly understood. This
study is expected to provide a major advance in our understanding of the
necessary brain mechanisms, as well as their limits. Such knowledge will be a
prerequisite for developing strategies to improve decision-making in complex
situations and for understanding failures of these neural mechanisms in mental
disorders, for example, in the case of schizophrenia.