* 1156663
* REU Site in Mathematics at Louisiana State University
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Neal Stoltzfus, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 04/30/2016
* USD 373,206.00

The REU Site in Mathematics at the Louisiana State University will engage a
group of twelve nationally selected, highly motivated undergraduates in current
mathematical research around the theme: Invariants in Galois Theory, Geometry
and Knot theory. To this end we will create an environment with social and
scientific activities that nurtures intellectual creativity, encourages mutual
support and promotes the discussion, communication and dissemination of
mathematical ideas. Participants are introduced to mainstream math problems
within the fields of number theory, algebraic geometry and topology which are
supported by well-developed symbolical computation software. This provides an
early capability to ask significant questions and make computational
explorations while theoretical knowledge is being further developed. Additional
guidance is provided during mentoring sessions to permit each participant to
choose their own project direction at the end of the first week (within the
arenas laid out by the introductory presentations during the first week). The
REU students are housed on the LSU campus; additional program activities are
planned that will foster the interaction of all participants and promote group
cohesion. Each student gives several graduated presentations and submits a
written paper in a form suitable for publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galois
theory, algebraic geometry and knot theory lie at the intersection of many
threads of current mathematical research connecting geometric problems of the
twenty-first century. Algebraic and computation tools are employed to
differentiate among the possible geometric structures. We are introducing a new
generation of mathematicians to this exciting mix of ideas and providing
participants with communication skills suitable to making presentations at
conferences as well as advice on making applications to graduate school and on
potential career opportunities. By broadening and strengthening the
mathematically trained workforce, this REU will do its share to alleviate the
current and projected national shortage within the scientific and technological
workforce.