* 1156667
* REU Site:  A Multidisciplinary Research Experience in Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* James Hilt, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2015
* USD 398,487.00

The three year REU Site award at the University of Kentucky is focused in the
area of Engineered Bioactive Interfaces and Devices. The overall objective of
this project is to provide a novel multidisciplinary research and education
experience for rising junior and senior undergraduates in this research area.
The University of Kentucky also has a National Science Foundation IGERT program
in this area, and therefore, the REU students will not only have the opportunity
to interact with REU faculty but will also interact with IGERT graduate trainees
through research, special seminars, and other technical and social activities.
Specific objectives of the program include the following: 1) providing the
students with true interdisciplinary mentoring and research training through
their participation in a research project related to Engineered Bioactive
Interfaces and Devices, 2) stimulating the students interests in Ph.D. careers
in science and engineering through seminars, field trips, and interactions with
both graduate students and faculty, and 3) developing the students independence
and confidence through participation in research, journal clubs, in house
presentations and scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered Bioactive
Interfaces and Devices focuses on the novel design of architectures that
interact with biological systems and promote a desired response. These advanced
architectures have numerous applications ranging from tissue engineering, to
sensing systems, to drug delivery and successful development of these systems
will depend on expertise not only in developing novel synthetic architectures
through nanotechnology, self-assembly and hybrid systems but also on the
interactions of these interfaces with biological systems such as cells and
proteins. This REU program will introduce students early on to this exciting
multidisciplinary area and will encourage them to pursue this or similar areas
for graduate studies. As part of the REU program, the undergraduate students
will have the opportunity to learn about three cross-disciplinary research
themes that form the foundation of the research in this area. They include: 1)
Novel Bioactive Architectures, 2) Cell/Protein Interactions at Interfaces, and
3) Integration into Devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be recruited
from various undergraduate disciplines including engineering, biology, chemistry
and physics. Surrounding the University of Kentucky are numerous regional
colleges and universities that have no graduate programs in these areas.
Recruitment at these institutions will encourage students that may not otherwise
pursue an advanced degree. In addition, we will recruit at a number of national
institutions that do not have graduate programs. Special efforts will be made to
attract women and minorities to this program by recruiting at minority
institutions such as University of Puerto Rico and Tuskegee University and
publicizing the program at national meetings of minority and women organizations
such as the Society of Women Engineers and the National Society of Black
Engineers. Students accepted into the program will work closely with faculty and
IGERT graduate students who are currently engaged in collaborative, cross-
disciplinary research. The faculty participants have existing research
collaborations that include joint student supervision, grant funding and
publications. The proposed REU program builds on these successful collaborations
and integrates them with other educational components, such as seminars,
workshops, and other technical and social activities. The students will be
exposed to the excitement of interdisciplinary research and by the end of the
program will have an excellent knowledge of what is involved in graduate
research.