* 1156644
* REU Site: Microbial community interactions and functions
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2017
* USD 332,906.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to The
University of Tennessee that will provide research training for 10 students per
year, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2013- 2015. This program is supported
by the NSF's Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
program, and the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure. The program focuses on microbiology and the interplay between
the microbial community structure and microbial community function. Housed in
the Department of Microbiology, the site has more than 20 faculty whom will
serve as mentors and make their homes in Microbiology along with Earth &
Planetary Sciences, Biosystems Engineering & Soil Sciences, Civil &
Environmental Engineering and Ecology & Evolutionary Biology. There is a wide
range of interesting and exciting projects for the students that span
microbiology in environments spanning oceans and lakes, caves and polar regions,
industrial and agricultural sites. Students are expected to perform full-time
lab research as well as participate in seminars and workshops where they will
receive training in responsible conduct in research, professional communication
skills, career opportunities in industry and academia, and the graduate school
application process. REU students have access to a rich array of individual
mentor's facilities on the University of Tennessee campus and at the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. The program's multi-phase recruitment effort consists of
both traditional "hard copy" formats as well as digital-based advertising.
Students will be selected based on academic record, research performance, and
potential for outstanding research. Following their summer research, students
will be surveyed to determine their continued interest in their academic field
of study, their career paths, and the lasting influences of the research
experience. Information about the program will be assessed by various means,
including use of an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by
visiting www.bio.utk.edu/microbiologyreu , or by contacting the PI (Dr. Wilhelm
at wilhelm@utk.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Zinser at ezinser@utk.edu).