* 1156862
* Line Shape Parameters in Support of Remote Sensing of Earth's and Planetary Atmospheres
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Robert Gamache, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2017
* USD 434,197.00

This project involves development of a theoretical model to calculate pressure-
broadened half-widths and pressure-induced line shifts and their temperature
dependences for gases in the terrestrial and planetary atmospheres that meets
the needs of the remote sensing community. The half-width remains the major
source of error in the spectral parameters used for reducing remote sensing data
and in line-by-line models used to calculate radiative forcing from greenhouse
gases. Because data are needed for many thousands of ro-vibrational transitions
of many different gases a computationally efficient theoretical model, based on
physics, is desired that can correctly determine the line shape parameters. The
semi-classical Complex Robert-Bonamy formalism is the basis of the theoretical
approach. For results to be good for all transitions, not only strong lines, the
intermolecular potentials must be expanded to very high order and the molecular
dynamics must use Hamilton's equations. For transitions in the near infrared and
visible spectral regions better wavefunctions and energies are needed, since the
classic effective Hamiltonian determination breaks down. The use of ab initio
energies and wavefunctions in the determination of the reduced matrix elements
is being explored as a means to remedy the problem. The vibrational state,
rotational state, and temperature dependence of the collision-induced parameters
are being investigated. Because of the improvement in space borne spectrometers,
line shape models need to be improved. While the Voigt model forms the basis for
line shape, corrections for Dicke narrowing and speed dependence, and their
correlation, must be and are being considered in this
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting data will provide greatly improved line
shape parameters and their temperature dependence, aiding researchers doing
concentration and temperature profile retrievals and radiative transfer studies
of the heat balance of Earth and other planets by reducing the uncertainty of
the half-widths and other line shape parameters used in their models. This work
will improve confidence in spectroscopic remote sensing results and allow a
better determination of the radiative forcing of greenhouse gases. The
improvement in understanding the energy balance of the Earth will help make more
informed policy decisions. The data will be distributed via the HITRAN, HITEMP,
GEISA, and IUPAC (for water vapor) databases and the principal investigator's
web site. A postdoctoral scholar and several undergraduate students will work on
this project, learning skills that they would not get in a classroom setting. An
ongoing collaboration with a local high school allows undergraduate students to
routinely visit the school to talk about their work with the aim of creating
interest in science among the high schoolers.