* 1156366
* REU Site: Perception, Planning, Mobility, and Interaction for Next Generation Robotics
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Max Mintz, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2015
* USD 340,000.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) focused on next generation
robotics. The site is hosted by the General Robotics, Automation, Sensing, and
Perception (GRASP) Laboratory inside Penn's School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences. Each summer a cohort of undergraduate students will work with GRASP
faculty on cutting-edge research aligned with core projects ongoing in the lab.
The students will participate in professional development activities that make
them more aware of graduate school and professional aspects of a computing
career. The primary purpose of the site is to extend the GRASP research
experience to more students who come from groups traditionally under-represented
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. These students will have
access to the outstanding faculty and facilities available at the university to
conduct challenging research using technologies that underpin next generation
robotics.

The intellectual merit of this project lies with the strong research team and
the focus on next generation robotics technologies. The students will be exposed
to the fundamentals of robotics science, spanning a wide spectrum from
perception and control theory to planning algorithms and mechanical design, but
unified by experiments on concretely defined real-world challenges. The research
has the potential to contribute to the research core of the computing
disciplines. The broader impacts of the project include providing a quality
research experience to undergraduate students, particularly students from
underrepresented groups and from institutions with limited research
environments. Thus this project has the potential to produce new computer
science graduate students and faculty members and to advance discovery and
understanding while promoting learning.