* 1156228
* Topics in the Study of Fluctuations:  Business Cycles and Household Formation and Corner Solutions in New Keynesian Models
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/29/2016
* USD 258,207.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over time, as people get richer, household size
declines: young people move out of their family house earlier, young couples do
not live with their parents, older people do not move back with their children,
people spend a bigger fraction of their time as singles. A related little known
feature is that similar behavior occurs during business cycles: in recessions
people tend to live in larger households, while the opposite happens in
expansions. This is mostly due to young people in distress moving in with their
parents, although there are other margins at work: divorces get delayed, people
move in with their siblings or friends. Studies of the business cycles have
ignored this margin, and the plan of the first part of the project is to close
this gap. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Movements in household size over the cycle are
important for various reasons. Taking into account that people can move in with
others gives a more accurate picture of how willing they are to change the hours
that they work over expansions and recessions, and it also gives a very
different picture of how good people are at bearing the consequences of economic
adversity. So it has potential implications&lt;br/&gt;both for the performance
of the economy in the aggregate, and for the study of how the effects of
business cycles trickle down in the lives of people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project involves posing artificial economies populated by stable people, those
that are older and married, and by not-so-stable people, the young, the
unmarried. In these artificial economies, the not-so-stable people have the
option of moving in with stable people in certain circumstances that are more
prevalent during recessions. The project will then compare the performance of
these artificial economies where household size is moving with standard models
of the business cycle that ignore this margin and it will measure the
adjustments that the latter would need in order to have the main properties of
economies with movements in household size. To carry out this type of exercise,
there is a need to carefully measure the willingness and ability of people to
move in with others. The artificial economies that will be built will have to
share with the data the behavior of household composition over the business
cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further down the road, the insights provided by the
project will be used to construct artificial economies populated by individual
agents that form and destroy households (they move out of their parents, get
married and divorce, have children who in turn move out) in ways that are
similar to those in the U.S., but that are affected by current economic
conditions. This feature will be useful as it complements standard artificial
economies in the literature where people and households are taken to be either
one and the same, or unchanged over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
another part more technical that has to do with the solution methods of some
models. The existing methods to solve these models are based on assumptions that
certain global considerations are not relevant and use what are called local
techniques. Unfortunately, whether these global conditions are satisfied or not
are not checked. This part of the project builds global methods that take into
account those global considerations. An example of this issue is the following:
firms sometimes cannot change the wages of their employees, and they face
oscillating demand. What standard methods assume is that these demand
oscillations are small and they are accommodated by changing the number of
workers hired. It is possible, however that when demand increases are large,
there are just not enough workers willing to be hired at those fixed wages (this
is the global condition that is assumed not to be violated). Current methods
proceed as if there are always available workers, and there are sound reasons to
do so when demand increases are small enough. However, sometimes the demand
increases are large. The project plans to use methods that accommodate the
possibility that workers cannot be found.