* 1156360
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Archaeological and Museum Conservation Science at the Smithsonian Museum Conservation Institute
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Edward Vicenzi, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 02/29/2016
* USD 235,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Smithsonian Museum Conservation
Institute (MCI) has established an REU program that provides exciting and
challenging research experiences for undergraduate students in the
interdisciplinary fields of archeology and museum conservation science to help
them prepare for future careers in science. The program serves to enhance
traditional classroom education that lacks a 'hands-on' component with mentored
laboratory research in one of seven MCI project areas. Students engage in
aspects of ongoing research projects or propose their own unique project. In so
doing they acquire basic laboratory skills and an in depth understanding of the
scientific method under the immediate supervision of a staff mentor. Students
receive training in professional presentation and career and graduate school
selection, and are included, as appropriate, in co-authored peer-reviewed
publications and professional presentations at scientific meetings. Students are
selected from a pool of highly motivated undergraduate applicants with an
emphasis on under-represented minorities. MCI is a a well established and
diverse institute with the infrastructure, staff, and resources capable of
supporting this program. All MCI mentors have experience providing
undergraduates with research opportunities and an infrastructure to recruit and
process student interns is already in place through the Smithsonian Center for
Education and Museum Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental goal of this program is the education and
training of undergraduate students who utilize their unique interdisciplinary
experience at MCI to achieve graduate degrees and establish themselves as
professional scientists. Students are placed with a staff mentor according to
their mutual interests and participate in all aspects of a project including
planning, execution of analyses, data analysis, and formulating conclusions.
Students contribute their results to a peer-reviewed publication and are
assisted in pursuing graduate appointments. Insofar as all student interns are
enrolled in external universities, this program establishes partnerships with
institutions across the country and provides their students with hands-on
laboratory experience in an established research group. Applications are
solicited through the NSF REU Sites website and the larger Smithsonian
Internship Program. Several established minority programs within the Smithsonian
Institution provide additional venues to recruit underrepresented groups of
young scientists.