* 1156501
* Collaborative Research:  REU Site:  Integrative approach to landscape evolution in a monogenetic volcanic field. San Francisco volcanic field, northern Arizona
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Joseph Licciardi, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lina Patino
* 09/30/2015
* USD 44,500.00

The San Francisco volcanic field in northern Arizona is a natural laboratory for
investigating the eruptive processes of cinder-cone volcanoes, the effects of
eruption and erosion of these common but small systems on landscape forms, and
the patterns and timing of volcanism. A multi-disciplinary team from Northern
Arizona University, University of Arizona (Biosphere 2), and University of New
Hampshire will offer an 8-week summer REU experience to 10 undergraduate
students each summer, funded by the NSF Directorate for Geosciences. Two-three
students from the first-year cohort will be invited to return in the second year
to mentor new students, thus ensuring a long-lasting investment in research and
experience in teaching other young scientists. The goals of the project are to
provide all students with (1) a fundamental understanding of the relations
between landscapes and basaltic volcanism, (2) an opportunity to construct a
research project, with guidance from a mentor who will work alongside the
student, (3) an understanding of how a research project is executed, from the
initial research proposal to the final presentation and publication of results,
(4) first-hand experience in interdisciplinary collaborations and research, and
(5) a network of colleagues and mentors who will support the student's
development as a scholar. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first two weeks of the
program, students will learn theories of basaltic volcanism, Quaternary dating
methods, and landscape studies. The first week will culminate in a two-day trip
to Biosphere 2, an enclosed Earth system near Tucson, AZ. At the end of the
second week, the student, with the assistance of his/her mentor, will write a
research prospectus that will guide the goals and field or lab activities of the
following five weeks. After a further 1-2 week study of a specific volcano,
students in Quaternary dating projects will depart for the host lab to carry out
their analyses. These students will continue to network with those who remain in
Flagstaff throughout the summer, and, in the final week of the program, students
and mentors will gather in Flagstaff to create posters that will model GSA/AGU
posters. On the final day, students will join with participants in other REU
programs at NAU for a research symposium. The posters will then be presented at
GSA or AGU meetings that fall.