* 1156780
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Astronomy and Astrophysics at Cornell University
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Martha Haynes, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Benacquista
* 04/30/2018
* USD 553,509.00

This award supports the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site in
Astronomy and Astrophysics at Cornell University. The program aims to provide
undergraduate students from across the country with the opportunity to engage
actively in research covering a broad swath of the science frontier from the
Solar System to the extreme environments surrounding black holes to the distant
reaches and earliest moments of the universe. Students will work with individual
faculty on a focused research project. In addition, they will also participate
in a series of lectures and workshops designed particularly to expose them to a
range of research topics, techniques and forefront facilities as well as the
processes by which major facilities and missions are designed, constructed and
operated. While primary mentoring responsibility will lie with the faculty,
interactions within research groups will provide contact with more junior
professionals such as graduate students and postdoctoral students as well as
engineers and technical staff. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will have access
to local resources and facilities and will learn how to access and use public
databases and software tools. Organized activities on our residential rural
campus, sometimes in coordination with other undergraduate research programs
within our university, will offer the opportunity to expose the students to
broader science areas and to stimulate understanding of the nature, methodology
and ethics of scientific research on a scale larger than our own program. The
program will encourage mentors to take students on observing trips, to assist
with development of publications and other presentations, and to send them to
professional meetings. Students will also participate in several activities
designed to address issues related to graduate school and science as a career.
Students will be selected on merit, but the program will aim to recruit diverse
student cohorts including students from underrepresented groups and from
colleges and universities with limited research infrastructure.