* 1156739
* REU Site: IRIS Undergraduate Summer Research in Seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* John Taber, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 05/31/2017
* USD 629,985.00

The Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS), a consortium of
over 110 research universities and institutions dedicated to monitoring the
Earth and exploring its interior through the collection and distribution of
seismological data, will provide up to 12 undergraduate students per year with
research experiences as part of its 9-11 week internship program. Through this
program, students will take part in an intensive week-long preparatory course,
and work with leaders in seismological research, in both lab-base and field-
based settings, to produce research products worthy of presentation at large
professional conferences. Given that the Consortium is a collection of
institutions, the program employs a distributed REU model that has been
demonstrated to bond students into a cohort, despite conducting their research
at geographically distributed sites. Some elements of this model include: an
emphasis on the acquisition and analysis of seismic data to help address broader
Earth science questions, an orientation week to build the cohort through shared
experiences, a cyber-infrastructure to nourish group cohesion while enabling
peer-learning and collaboration, the opportunity to reconnect face-to-face and
become integrated into the intern alumni network while presenting research at a
large professional conference, and an Alumni Mentor to provide experienced,
consistent support throughout the entire summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not only
does this program develop seismological knowledge through intern research, this
unique REU model has the opportunity to contribute to the growing body of
knowledge regarding the application of cyber-infrastructure for distance
learning, community building, and the implementation of the skills associated
with metacognition. The success, documentation and dissemination of this model,
will also enable other organizations to apply geographically distributed
resources to the development of their human capital. Additionally, this proposal
presents an opportunity to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups
in the study of seismology. IRIS continues to work closely with minority serving
institutions and professional organizations to raise awareness of the study of
seismology as a potential career path.