* 1156401
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: An Inductive Framework to Support Software Maintenance
* CSE,CCF
* 08/07/2011,07/31/2014
* Huzefa Kagdi, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2014
* USD 228,697.00

Software maintenance and evolution is a vital and resource consuming phase of
the software lifecycle. Introducing software changes is a particularly complex
phenomenon in case of long-lived, large-scale, and globally distributed systems.
Years of research efforts have recognized three core tasks to support developers
during software maintenance: feature location (a starting point of a change in
source code), impact analysis (other software entities that are also change
prone), and expert developer recommendations (appropriate developers to
implement changes). The research will develop a novel one-stop solution for
these tasks by integrating and mining the latent information cluttered in
structured and unstructured software artifacts produced and constantly changed
during evolution of software systems, which are largely untapped in current
solutions.

This research program has three main goals: 1) Define a new integrated framework
SE2 for a comprehensive analysis of software evolution, based on conceptual and
evolutionary information, under a single umbrella, 2) Define new methodologies
for software maintenance tasks based on SE2, and 3) Perform empirical studies to
evaluate SE2 and supported methodologies. Central to our solution are the state
of the art data mining, information retrieval, and program analysis methods. The
research will formulate both theoretical foundations and deliver novel practical
solutions to uniformly represent, analyze, and use them within the SE2
framework. Among the broader impacts the project includes production of software
tools under open source licenses and collaboration with industry to transfer
technology.