* 1156378
* Longevity-related Statistics and Their Perturbation Analysis: A Markov Chain, Matrix Calculus Approach
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

Human longevity has always been a central focus of demographic research. It
reflects the intensity, age pattern, and causes of mortality throughout the life
cycle, from infant mortality to old-age mortality and everything in between. The
objective of this research project is to develop and apply new mathematical
tools for the sensitivity analysis of longevity. Sensitivity analysis quantifies
the effects of changes, and these new tools will enable researchers to quantify
the effects of changes in mortality on various statistics measuring longevity.
Those statistics include life expectancy, indices of variation in longevity, and
the contributions of particular causes of death to those
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensitivity analysis is important in the study
of longevity because human mortality has changed dramatically over the last two
centuries, due to unprecedented advances in medicine, public health, and
technology. In addition to these temporal changes, at any one time, patterns of
longevity also differ among regions, countries, and socio-economic groups.
Together, these changes in longevity have important implications for society,
determining, as they do, the age structure of populations and the needs for
medical care and social services. The new analytical methods developed in this
research will be widely useful in studies of changing longevity and its
consequences.