* 1156762
* REU Site: Advanced Materials for Environmental Sustainability
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Elizabeth Dickey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/29/2016
* USD 312,041.00

Intellectual Merit This three year REU site program at North Carolina State
University (NCSU) will introduce and train ten undergraduate students per year
in a mentored, hypothesis-driven materials research environment. The site
activities are designed to connect focused research projects to broad
engineering challenges associated with environmental sustainability and to
diverse career opportunities in research and development. The participating
faculty mentors include both experienced, tenured faculty as well as very new
assistant professors, with strong representation from several underrepresented
groups. Formalized mentor training will be conducted, with intermittent
assessment of mentoring efficacy throughout the 10-week REU program. Through a
variety of integrated activities, the REU site aims to: 1)engage students in
multidisciplinary research that will take advantage of state-of-the-art research
facilities across campus; 2) gain an understanding of "life as a researcher"
through focused technique training,laboratory work, group meetings and weekly
seminars and discussions; 3) introduce students to research career opportunities
associated with sustainability through interactions with researchers in academia
and industry; 4) develop communication skills through mentored preparation for
poster and oral presentations; and 5) promote long-term interactions with a
number of minority-serving institutions by inviting faculty from these
institutions to the final REU symposium.

The REU participants will collaborate with their faculty and graduate-student
mentors to advance scientific research projects centered on a number of diverse
and impactful science and engineering areas: solar-driven clean energy and
environmental technologies; ultraviolet disinfection for water purification;
energy storage and delivery; material reliability for continuous and dependable
energy systems; devices for room-temperature magnetic field sensing, energy
harvesting, and low-power, high-speed memory.

Broader Impacts Each year the REU site will introduce a diverse group of
undergraduate students to research, many of whom do not have the opportunity to
participate in undergraduate research at their home institution. The REU site
activities are designed to connect students to the sociological and
environmental impacts of their research and to help motivate them to pursue
advanced degrees and careers in science and engineering. Focused recruiting
efforts aim to increase the representation of women and minorities and to
establish long-term interactions between NCSU and minority-serving institutions
beyond the scope of the REU site.