* 1156260
* WORKSHOP: Workshop on Cultural Property, Creativity, and Indigeneity Under the New Bolivian Constitution (Four day workshop in Bolivia)
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Michelle Bigenho, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Gould
* 03/31/2015
* USD 36,403.00

Bolivia adopted a new constitution in 2009; the new constitution provides an
opportunity to analyze &lt;br/&gt;how people understand a constitution, and how
a national constitution intersects with international &lt;br/&gt;legal
frameworks. The workshop is guided by the questions of whether or not and how
Bolivians, &lt;br/&gt;as they go through constitutional change will propose
alternatives to globally prevalent intellectual &lt;br/&gt;and cultural property
frameworks. These global regimes too often discussed only at international and
&lt;br/&gt;national levels--have fallen short as regards recognition of
collective creativity, access in unequal &lt;br/&gt;social terrains, and
resolution of state-indigenous contradictions about
heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working from the ground up, the workshop will
initiate a dialogue&lt;br/&gt;about indigenous rights and cultural property that
does not dismiss economic motivations,&lt;br/&gt;considers a multiplicity of
proprietary systems, addresses already identified social values
of&lt;br/&gt;creativity and acknowledgement, and locates cultural property
claims in relation to other local&lt;br/&gt;indigenous struggles. As the poorest
and most indigenous country of South America, Bolivia poses &lt;br/&gt;pressing
local and globally germane challenges for intellectual property, which in
Bolivia is viewed by some as an&lt;br/&gt;external legal mechanism designed to
deny majority access to knowledge, and by others as a&lt;br/&gt;route out of the
nation&amp;#700;s economic woes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
facilitate discussion among Bolivians through (a) an intensive four-day
participatory&lt;br/&gt;workshop on cultural and intellectual property involving
twenty participants who do creative&lt;br/&gt;performance work, represent
indigenous organizations, or work in local media, and (b) a
mediabased&lt;br/&gt;dissemination program. Principal investigators from the
U.S. and the U.K. and two&lt;br/&gt;Bolivian research assistants will draw on
collaborative ethnographic methods to coordinate the&lt;br/&gt;workshop and
media-based dialogues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop proceedings will be
summarized for international circulation through a Spanish-
English&lt;br/&gt;bilingual website. Before and after the workshop, television
and radio discussions (sometimes in&lt;br/&gt;indigenous languages) will further
disseminate these conversations among Bolivia&amp;#700;s poorer
urban&lt;br/&gt;and rural populations where Internet access is limited. Through
the workshop&amp;#700;s activities, local&lt;br/&gt;voices rarely heard in the
international context will be brought into broader global debates,
and&lt;br/&gt;Bolivians will be provided with greater access to diverse
perspectives on cultural property.&lt;br/&gt;Through the website and subsequent
reports, connections will be sought with other international&lt;br/&gt;and
national entities engaged in these issues.