* 1156744
* REU Site:   Sensing and Signaling in Biological Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Brad Binder, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2015
* USD 323,845.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Tennessee Knoxville (UTK) that will provide research training for
10 students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. This "Sensing and
Signaling" program, supported by both the NSF Directorate for Biological
Sciences and the Department of Defense ASSURE program, focuses on a variety of
experimental approaches, including computational biology, structural biology,
neurobiology, cell biology and genetics, to study the ways organisms sense
environmental cues and adapt to their surroundings. Faculty from the Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cell Biology will serve as mentors. Students
will engage in full-time lab research and will participate in a variety of
seminars and workshops, including ethics and the responsible conduct of
research, networking, professional communication skills, career opportunities in
industry and academia, and the graduate school application process. Students are
also provided tours of the nearby Oak Ridge National Lab, including the high-
performance computing and neutron facilities. REU students have access to state-
of-the-art resources housed in individual faculty mentor labs as well as core
facilities for advanced imaging, DNA sequencing, bioanalytical methods, etc.
Recruitment for the program involves circulating flyers by mail, establishing a
web site, and digital advertising through a variety of distribution methods, and
campus visits. Students are selected based on academic record, faculty
recommendations, and potential for outstanding research using modern approaches
in solving biological problems. REU participants are tracked to determine their
continued interest in science, their academic and career paths, and the impacts
of the summer research experience. Information about the program will be
assessed in collaboration with local assessment experts at UTK, participation in
the web-based SURE III nationwide survey sponsored by Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, and the NSF REU common assessment tool. More information is available
by visiting http://web.bio.utk.edu/bcmb/summer/reu.html, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Cynthia Peterson at cbpeters@utk.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Brad Binder at
bbinder@utk.edu).