* 1156001
* Case Studies of Causal Discovery with Model Search
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* David Danks, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2014
* USD 45,000.00

This award provides support for a workshop on Case Studies of Causal Discovery
with Model Search, to be held at Carnegie Mellon University in October 2012.
Computer scientists, statisticians, and philosophers have created a precise
mathematical framework for representing causal systems called "Graphical Causal
Models." This framework has supported the rigorous description of causal model
spaces and the notion of empirical indistinguishability/equivalence within such
spaces, which has in turn enabled computer scientists to develop asymptotically
reliable model search algorithms for efficiently searching these spaces.
However, the conditions under which these methods are practically useful in
applied science are unknown. The investigators will hold a 3-day workshop on
methodological issues germane to practical causal discovery that brings together
scholars from genetics, biology, economics, fMRI-based cognitive neuroscience,
climate research, public health, sociology, and education research, all of whom
have successfully applied computerized search for causal models. The goals of
the workshop are to: (1) to identify strategies for applying causal model search
to diverse domain-specific scientific questions; (2) to identify and discuss
methodological challenges that arise when applying causal model search to real-
world scientific problems; and (3) to take concrete steps toward creating an
interdisciplinary community of researchers interested in applied causal model
search. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance our scientific
understanding of conditions under which one can efficiently and reliably gain
causal knowledge from both experimental and non-experimental data, especially in
contexts in which background theory is weak. It will provide a set of real-world
cases, problems, and domains that will spur practical advances in causal
discovery, which affects people's everyday lives through public policy, medical,
social, and behavioral sciences. Specific products of the workshop include plans
for a book-length volume of case-studies, possibly a blueprint for an online,
sustainable, extendable repository of data sets and supporting analyses, and a
plan for ongoing workshops.