* 1156735
* REU Site:   Globalization and Community Health:  Combining Social Science and Engineering
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Nancy Romero-Daza, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 03/31/2016
* USD 418,611.00

The REU Site "Globalization and Community Health: Combining Social Science and
Engineering" provides undergraduate students with intensive interdisciplinary
methodological and ethics training, mentorship, and practical experience in the
conduct of community-based health research that brings together social sciences
and civil and environmental engineering (CEE). The program is conducted in
Monteverde, Costa Rica, a region that is undergoing rapid changes associated
with globalization in general, and tourism specifically, and where the PI-team
has worked for the past ten years in close association with the Monteverde
Institute and a variety of local stakeholders. Each year the program involves 10
undergraduate students from CEE, medical anthropology, public health, and other
health-related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: The program is
unique in bringing together medical anthropology and CEE, two disciplines that
have, for the most part, been isolated from each other, but that can be combined
effectively to address issues of community health in a culturally appropriate
and sustainable way. The program also fosters critical thinking skills and
community engagement among participants, and contributes to the scientific
understanding of the impact of globalization and tourism on the health of rural
communities. The program combines six weeks of interdisciplinary methods
training with four weeks of research on health-related issues that have already
been identified by local communities and that can be approached from an
interdisciplinary perspective. Two such projects are 1. the involvement of the
local community in the identification of potential sources of drinking water
contamination and the treatment of polluted water through BioSand filters (BSF)
that remove turbidity, natural organic matter and pathogens from drinking water
in households that obtain their water from sources other than the national
aqueduct (e.g., rivers and springs) and 2. the establishment of key hole gardens
and other forms of sustainable food production at the household and community
levels, to respond to the rising problem of food insecurity and associated
health impacts such as increases in overweight and obesity in adults and
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project contributes to
NSF's efforts to increase research capacity among undergraduate students. It
provides students with valuable interdisciplinary hands-on experience useful for
future graduate studies addressing global issues from multiple perspectives. In
order to contextualize their training and research, students first become
familiarized with the historical and present political, socio-economic, and
environmental conditions of the host communities, with the main health related
issues that affect the population, and with the local health care system.
Students carry out their research in small teams under the guidance of faculty
members and graduate mentors from the University of South Florida departments of
Anthropology and CEE. In addition, each team works closely with community
advisors (i.e., local residents with expertise in the issues to be addressed) to
ensure that the research is culturally appropriate and responsive to local needs
and desires. The students present the results of their research to community
members and to the collaborating institutions. The program also includes a
community health fair during which students collect a variety of data related to
physical health, environmental conditions, demographics, etc., conduct water
testing, take basic nutritional anthropometry measures (e.g., stature, weight,
skinfolds), perform simple tests such as blood pressure, glucose, and
cholesterol, and provide health education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site is co-
funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;This site is also co-funded by the NSF Office of
International Science and Engineering via its Global Venture Fund.