* 1156737
* REU Site: Materials Physics at the University of Florida
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Kevin Ingersent, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2016
* USD 319,908.00

Abstract for DMR 1156737

TECHNICAL SUMMARY The REU Site Materials Physics at the University of Florida
will bring 12 undergraduates per year to the University of Florida for a 10-week
summer research experience. Each REU participant will be integrated into an
active research group under the guidance of a faculty mentor and in most cases
also more junior members of the group. The research projects cover a wide range
of topics in condensed matter physics and materials science: multiferroism,
carbon nanotubes, organic solar cells, piezoelectricity, quantum dots, low-
dimensional magnetism, superconductivity, quantum phase transitions, low
temperature physics, and large scale simulations. To provide a complete research
experience the program includes seminars on current and emerging research areas,
a seminar on applying to graduate school, a forum led by graduate students on
life as a graduate student, a written communication workshop, an oral
communication workshop, a library workshop, visits to local scientific and
technical facilities, a group outreach activity for local K-5 students, and
social events. Through exposure to all aspects of research, the project will
equip undergraduate students to make informed career decisions, make them more
likely to continue in science and engineering, and better prepare them for
advanced research if they attend graduate school. Members of underrepresented
groups will be actively recruited to enhance diversity in the science and
engineering workforce. This project is supported by the Office of Special
Programs, Division of Materials Research, NSF. The site is co-funded by the
Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.



NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY The REU Site Materials Physics at the University of
Florida will bring 12 undergraduates per year to the University of Florida for a
10-week summer research experience. Through exposure to research, the students
will be more likely to continue in science and engineering and also be better
prepared for advanced research in graduate school. The research topics include
many deemed essential for technological advancement in the future: advanced
electronic and magnetic materials and materials for energy conversion. In
addition to completing a research project students will be exposed to research
in seminars and field trips, have career development workshops including written
and oral communication and applying to graduate school, and participate in a
group outreach activity with local K-5 students to excite our future scientists
and engineers about teaching. Women, minorities, and students from schools with
limited research opportunities will be actively recruited to enhance the
diversity of the science and engineering workforce. This project is supported by
the Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research, NSF. The site is
co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.