* 1156154
* Collaborative Research: Improving Randomized Controlled Trials: Practical and Theoretical Challenges
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Erik Snowberg, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2015
* USD 256,080.00

The PIs use a mechanism design approach to analyze the informational properties
of experimental trials, with the goal of improving upon the standard randomized
controlled trial (RCT) method. Their concept of a selective trial uses a
dominant strategy mechanism to generalize RCTs by allowing experimental
participants to express their preference over treatment through costly signals
that increase the probability of being chose for the treatment group. A
selective trial makes the implicit selection possibility in an ordinary RCT an
explicit part of the experimental design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has
four parts. First the PIs demonstrate how straightforward extensions of standard
experimental protocols can produce important information. Second, they
demonstrate that these extensions work as predicted in controlled experimental
settings. Third, they use the same basic concepts to consider methods for
conducting dynamic experiments. Fourth, they consider how to adjust the
experimental design for situations where there are informational or productive
externalities between experimental subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Randomized
controlled trials are becoming increasingly important in the social sciences.
Improved experimental design that carefully takes into account the incentives
and beliefs of experimental subjects will improve the usefulness of field
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: These methods are also useful
for medical research. The method is particularly suited to considering medical
non-compliance, and may provide a more accurate way to predict the effects of
medications. The PIs will be making the power formulae, protocols, and software
for data analysis available to a wide community.