* 1156057
* Collaborative Research: The Economic Origins and Ramifications of the Great Migration
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* William Collins, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 02/29/2016
* USD 142,890.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Collaborative Research: The Economic
Origins and Ramifications of the Great Migration"&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Marianne H.
Wanamaker and William J. Collins&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
the origins and ramifications of the internal migration of southern-born U.S.
workers between 1900 and 1940. Social scientists widely view the "Great
Migration" of southerners, especially the high rate of migration by African
Americans, as one of the most important events in American economic and social
history. A key aspect of the project is the development of new datasets that
link individuals across census years in the early 20th century, greatly
improving the ability to observe and analyze internal migration for both white
and black workers.&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on four main areas of
inquiry that have been limited by shortcomings of existing datasets: 1)
identification of early-life factors, both household and location-specific, that
raised or lowered the likelihood of migration and affected occupational choice;
2) measurement of the economic gains that accrued to inter-regional migrants,
including differences by race and skill; 3) identifying the role of migration in
fostering intergenerational mobility and racial convergence in labor market
outcomes; and 4) estimating how social networks, geographic distance,
environmental shocks, wage differences, and other factors influenced migrants'
selection of destinations.&lt;br/&gt;The results and datasets of the project
will allow deeper documentation and analysis of American labor markets in the
early 20th century than was previously possible. This, in turn, will facilitate
comparisons with other times and places, where different institutional and
technological contexts prevail (e.g., internal migration in China or the E.U.).
It will also demonstrate at a micro-level how migration fueled the structural
transformation of the American economy, as agriculture declined in importance,
cities grew rapidly, and the South began its economic convergence on the rest on
the U.S. Finally, analyses produced in the project will shed light on the
economics of discrimination, human capital, intergenerational change, and
migration in this important period.