* 1156692
* REU Site:  Training in Redox Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2014
* Julie Stone, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2014
* USD 278,500.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln that will provide research training for 10
students, for 10 weeks during the summers of 2012-2014. This award is supported
by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program, Division
of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the
Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
The program focuses on redox biology which involves oxidation-reduction linked
biological reactions, redox signaling and regulation, and cellular defense
mechanisms that minimize oxidative damage/stress. The summer program will enable
students to explore fundamental redox processes related to biotechnology and the
environment. The goal of the training program is to involve undergraduate
students in broad-based research and significantly impact their career
decisions. REU participants will conduct individual research projects under the
guidance of a faculty mentor in the Redox Biology Center. The mentors offer a
breadth of multidisciplinary approaches and share a common goal of understanding
critical redox-active processes. Students will receive experimental training in
a variety of areas including molecular biology, microbiology, biochemistry,
biophysical chemistry, and protein crystallography, and will utilize state-of-
the-art equipment and facilities. In addition, students will attend journal club
meetings, career development seminars, lunch discussion groups, and social
activities to enhance their cohort experience. The program will conclude with
students presenting their research findings at a poster session. Participant
selection will be based on academic achievements, research interests, and career
goals. Students at smaller institutions with limited research opportunities and
those from underrepresented groups are encouraged to apply. REU participants
receive a stipend, full room and board, and travel assistance. Information about
the program will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common
assessment tool and an alumni database to track the accomplishments and career
paths of former participants. More information is available by visiting
http://redoxbiologycenter.unl.edu/summer, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Donald
Becker at dbecker3@unl.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Julie Stone at jstone2@unl.edu).