* 1156606
* REU Site: SURF-IT:  Exploring Integrative System Design at UCSC
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Matthew Guthaus, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 03/31/2016
* USD 375,006.00

This award provides funding to renew the existing successful CISE Research
Experiences for Undergraduates Site at the University of California - Santa Cruz
(UCSC). The Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship in Information Technology
(SURF-IT) at UCSC provides an intensive and personalized summer research program
focused on integrative systems design. SURF-IT is a 9-week summer program that
includes research directly supervised by a UCSC faculty member. Students also
have weekly meetings on graduate school preparation, ethics, and research
presentation, as well as field trips to local neighboring Silicon Valley
research laboratories, and a number of social activities. The summer program
concludes with a research poster presentation by the SURF-IT students. The goal
is to promote diversity in computer science and engineering by assisting
motivated students in obtaining graduate degrees, who then become positive role
models for future generations of college students throughout the nation. To
better achieve this goal, the site maintains continuing contact with SURF-IT
alumni to assist them in applying to and succeeding in graduate school, as well
as in their eventual careers.

Intellectual merit: The students join a variety of funded research projects in
integrative system design within UCSC's department of computer engineering. The
special intellectual merit of each project varies, however all students will
learn to apply their traditional academic training to open-ended research
problems at the forefront of information technology. The site has a group of
mentors with outstanding experience and expertise to direct the intellectual
component of each project.

Broader Impacts: The broader impacts revolve around the focus on inclusion of
individuals from groups underrepresented in information technology, such as
women and racial/ethnic minorities. These individuals are moving toward
leadership positions in academia and industry, thus providing positive role
models for a next generation. The combination of this program and other REU
sites ensures broadened participation in computer science and computer
engineering, as well as an increased domestic pool of highly trained information
technologists.