* 1156674
* REU Site:  Geothermal and Energy Geotechnics
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Dante Fratta, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 06/30/2015
* USD 312,360.00

Energy Geotechnics is an emerging discipline in which geotechnical and
geological engineers, geologists, and other scientists/engineers employ the
principles of engineering physics and soil mechanics for the advancement and
design of renewable energy systems, such as wind energy foundations and
collector systems, geothermal heat pumps (deep exchange wells and shallow
systems in unsaturated soil), and recovery of biogas in bioreactor landfills.
This REU Site will engage undergraduate researchers in this nascent area of
developing and important research. The University of Wisconsin-Madison (UW-
Madison) is at the leading edge of energy geotechnics as evidenced by our
development of internationally attended, continuing education short courses in
the areas of wind and geothermal energy, new courses in wind energy within the
College of Engineering and, most importantly, multi-faceted research initiatives
to measure the thermal gradient in deep wells in Wisconsin, wind turbine
geotechnical design, biogas extraction and recovery in bioreactor landfills, and
the physics of coupled moisture and thermal flow in unsaturated energy
applications.

The undergraduate research projects will focus on the study of important
problems related to the development of efficient energy systems as related to
geotechnics. These problems include the study of the thermal-hydraulic processes
in unsaturated soils, thermal resistivity of soil as correlated to physical
properties (e.g., soil water characteristic curves and particle properties) for
its application on energy transmission of wind energy systems, evaluation of the
geothermal potential in Wisconsin, and the effects of liquid addition and
leachate recirculation on waste compaction and biogas generation. All these
problems relate the use of geotechnics with the more efficient development of
energy systems.

Undergraduate participants will be involved in outreach and discovery activities
engaging other learners. The proposed outreach and teaching activities will
leverage learning across multiple societal levels and education environments to
engage society on the need for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
in creating an informed public. Activities are developed to engage undergraduate
researchers within the following programs: Camp Badger Targeted 7th and 8th
Grade Outreach, Increasing Sustainable Energy Awareness through Grade 1 to 8
Outreach, and participation in Continuing Education Courses in Energy
Geotechnics

"This site is co-funded by the Department of Energy in partnership with the NSF
REU program"