* 1156026
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Envelope Models and Methods
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2013
* Zhihua Su, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2013
* USD 4,000.00

Multivariate linear regression (MLR) is a paradigm for studying the relationship
between two groups of variables, the predictors and the responses. It is broadly
applied in many disciplines for explaining the dependence between the responses
and the predictors or for conducting prediction of future outcomes. With the
development of technology for data collection and measurement, many contemporary
problems involve high-dimensional datasets. This implies the possibility that a
considerable amount of the response information may be redundant or irrelevant.
This redundant or irrelevant part of the data will bring variation into the
estimation in MLR, making it inefficient. To address this problem, a new class
of models called envelopes was introduced by Cook et al. (2010). It uses
dimension-reduction techniques to identify and extract the relevant information
in the data, so that the estimation is based on only the relevant part. Up to
this point, however, the envelope class is still in its infancy. It has
restrictions on the data structure, and its advantages cannot always be
realized. This doctoral dissertation research project will study and bring the
envelope class to maturity, making it more flexible and achieving further
efficiency gains by enriching the class with new models and methods. New models
that address scale invariance, heteroscedasticity, and small sample size issues
will be developed. New models that lead to further efficiency gains beyond the
current models also will be developed. These extensions of the envelope class
will make minimal assumptions on data structure and extend the applicability and
power of the enveloping idea, making it more
appealing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will result in more efficient data
analysis methods for sociology, economics, genetics, and many other disciplines
in science and engineering. These methods are expected to achieve the same
accuracy in analysis with a smaller sample size, making experiments and the data
collection process shorter, easier, and less expensive. The project also will
link existing statistical tools, such as dimension reduction techniques and
methods for estimating large covariance matrix, to the field of MLR in a novel
way that opens new frontiers of their application. User-friendly software will
be developed that implements the new methodology. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, support is provided to enable a promising student to
establish a strong, independent research career.