* 1156954
* REU Site:   Microbiology in the Post Genome Era
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Biswarup Mukhopadhyay, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2016
* USD 288,285.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to
Virginia Tech that will provide research training for 10 students for 10 weeks,
during each of the summers of 2012- 2014. The REU program trains students in
research on a wide range of microbiological phenomena, covering both fundamental
and applied topics and employing both genome-based technologies and focused
approaches. The program includes i) a student-led independent research project;
ii) discussion sessions and seminars given by faculty members and an external
speaker; iii) visits to specialized laboratories and research centers such as
genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics facilities, the Virginia Bioinformatics
Institute, and the Center for Molecular Medicine and Infectious Diseases; iv)
workshops on responsible conduct in research, professional communication skills,
career opportunities in industry and academia, and how to gain admission to
graduate school and pursue graduate studies productively; v) visits to companies
that utilize or study microbiological processes; vi) informal lunch meetings
with mentors and graduate students; vii) weekly participant meetings aimed at
sharing learning experiences; and viii) presentation of research results by each
student in a seminar format at a mid-summer symposium and in a poster format at
a campus-wide symposium at the end of the program. Students are expected to do
full-time research as well as participate in all site activities. The site
recruits through traditional "hard copy" formats as well as digital-based
advertising. Students are selected based on the potential for outstanding
research as judged from academic transcripts, recommendation letters, and
personal statements. Preference will be given to students who lack the
opportunity to conduct research at their home institution. The program will
emphasize participation of students from underrepresented groups. Students are
tracked to determine their continued interest in microbiology, their career
paths, and the lasting influences of the research experience. The performance of
the program will be assessed by various means, including an REU common
assessment tool. Additional information is available from the Program Director,
Dr. Biswarup Mukhopadhyay (e-mail: biswarup@vt.edu, phone: 540 231 8015) or
online at http://microbiologyreu-ret.vbi.vt.edu.