* 1156855
* REU Site: Mountains and Minds: A Program in Chemical Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Ruben Ceballos, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2015
* USD 306,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) at the National Science Foundation supports a Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site led by Professor Mary J. Cloninger at
Montana State University (MSU) and Professor Ruben M. Ceballos at the University
of Montana. Undergraduate research will occur primarily in the following areas
of chemical biology: activity based protein profiling, radical reactions in
biology, antimicrobial materials, cardiac mitochondrial functions, protein-small
molecule interactions, protein structure-function relationships, enzymology,
metabolomics, bioinspired nanoreactors, neurotransmitter receptor, biofuel
production, and membrane biology. These areas are all the focus of current
research in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Montana State
University, in the Native American Research Lab at the University of Montana,
and at Chiang Mai University in Thailand. Most participants will conduct ten
weeks of research in Montana and will attend weekly workshops and group meetings
to learn about state of the art instrumentation and methods for chemical
biology. These students, especially the Native American students, will have the
option of working the entire summer at MSU or in the Native American Research
Lab at the University of Montana, or distributing their time between both
locations. In addition, two Native American students who already have research
experience will spend four weeks in Montana and six weeks in Thailand. All
students will participate in a daylong symposium, will write a final paper, and
will present a poster about their research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site is
committed to working with Native American students, students from regional
tribal colleges, and students from small Montana and regional colleges with
limited resources. The partnership of Montana State University, the Native
American Research Lab at the University of Montana, and Chiang Mai University in
Thailand will allow research in chemical biology to be more accessible to all
students, including Native American students.