* 1156011
* REU Site: Solar Physics Program at Montana State University
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2018
* David McKenzie, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 09/30/2018
* USD 758,548.00

The Principal Investigators (PIs) will continue their highly successful
"Research Experiences for Undergraduates" (REU) program in solar physics at
Montana State University (MSU). The main activity of this program is the
mentoring and supervision of undergraduate students who will perform individual
research projects in solar physics for ten weeks during the summer. Most of
these student projects will involve the analysis of data from spacecraft and
from ground-based solar observatories. The PIs' target group will be
undergraduates majoring in Physics, Astronomy, Mathematics, and Computer
Sciences. The Montana State summer program will introduce these undergraduates
to solar physics research through independent science projects performed with a
faculty mentor, and frequently with a graduate student co-mentor. During the
summer, REU students will take an introductory course in solar physics which
includes lectures by visiting scholars, and the students' final research reports
will be posted online. These student projects also frequently result in joint
professional publications and confernece presentations with the MSU faculty
mentor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSU mentors have been highly successful in
recruiting women into this REU experience, and program activities have also
included Native American students and teachers. This REU program's "Ethics in
Science" training component has developed into a successful element presented by
a specialist in that field. Prior REU student feedback concerning the utility of
this ethics component indicates that this training has left an indelible imprint
that will serve these students well, regardless of their future career choices.
Previous REU participants at MSU have also reported that their exposure to
professional research in a university environment encouraged them to continue
their graduate education and to pursue research as a profession. With its strong
space science component, the program offers benefits to society by providing
citizens and future researchers with an understanding of space weather impacts
on Earth's space environment. Since solar physics is taught at relatively few
colleges and universities in the US, the Montana State REU Program provides an
important service to this discipline.