* 1156856
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Victoria Corbin, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 301,203.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Kansas that will provide research training for 10 students, for 10
weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. This award is supported by both the NSF
Directorate for Biosciences and the Department of Defense ASSURE program (thru a
Memorandum of Understanding with NSF). The program will provide students with
exciting research projects and experiences that build self-confidence and
encourage critical and independent thinking. An important underlying theme of
the program is unity through diversity. This theme is captured in the science,
which ranges from studies on the behavior of individual molecules to that of
whole organisms, and in the ethnic and cultural makeup of the students. Several
faculty mentors from the Department of Molecular Biosciences, with strong
records of undergraduate mentoring and collegiality, will participate in the
program. In addition to conducting research, the students will attend enrichment
seminars and workshops including faculty and peer presentations on how to become
a research scientist; workshops on applying to graduate school; and workshops on
the development of effective communication skills. The program will include
several opportunities for the students to present their work and will conclude
with a campus-wide mini symposium and a written final report. The program is
especially interested in training students who do not have the opportunity to
conduct research at their home institutions and/or are from underrepresented and
minority groups. Several mechanisms of summative and formative evaluation will
be employed including the assessment tool common to REU programs. Program alumni
will receive updates about each other through Facebook and have continued access
to the REU program director and faculty mentors. These follow-up activities are
devised to provide career-long advising to the students and to facilitate
effective long-term tracking. More information is available by visiting
http://molecularbiosciences.ku.edu/reumb/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Robert
Cohen at rcohen@ku.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Victoria Corbin at corbin@ku.edu).