* 1156511
* 2012 Aqueous Corrosion Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar; July 8 - 13, 2012 at Colby-Sawyer College, New Hampshire, Research Seminar (GRS) July 7-8, 2012
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 03/31/2013
* USD 8,000.00

Corrosion of metals in aqueous environments is an area of great economic,
environmental and technological importance. Prevention of corrosion is a key
component of sustainability programs, since it helps avoid costly replacements,
limits consumption of valuable resources, and controls the spread of
environmental contaminants. It is becoming increasingly possible to understand
materials corrosion issues at the atomic/molecular level, and to use theoretical
approaches in the design of corrosion resistant materials and protection
systems. The next few years promise to be particularly scientifically exciting
and this meeting is the ideal forum within which to generate and nurture that
enthusiasm. This Gordon Research Conference and the preceding Gordon Research
Seminar will foster interdisciplinary scientific interactions by convening a
group of distinguished researchers and young scientists to discuss a diverse
range of materials science and corrosion issues. Oral presentations will cover
the range from perennial issues to those that probe the interfaces between
corrosion science and related scientific disciplines. Discussion of recent
advances covering the atomistic and macroscale levels will be promoted, and a
strong emphasis will be placed on the linkages between experimental,
computational modeling and theoretical approaches. The GRC-GRS combination
provides an essential forum to bring together experts and young scientists in an
atmosphere designed to facilitate extensive discussion and the dissemination of
new knowledge and understanding. Funding will be used to defray the expenses of
invited GRS speakers and to support the attendance of underrepresented
minorities and other worthy participants, including graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, who would otherwise not be able to attend.