* 1156907
* iREU Site: The US/France REU Exchange Site in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Daniel Talham, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry (CHE) supports the renewal of an
International Research Experiences for Undergraduates (iREU) site between the
University of Florida and France for the summers of 2012-2014. This renewal
involves Morehouse College, a primarily undergraduate institution (PUI). The
U.S. program will be under the overall direction of Professors Adrian E.
Roitberg, Valeria D. Kleiman, and Daniel Talham of UF and Professor James P.
Brown, of Morehouse College. The focus of the program provides an extended
international summer research project in materials chemistry. It starts each
year with a spring pre-departure meeting in the US in order to prepare
participants for their extended stay abroad. The length of the program allows
for meaningful contributions to research projects that will lead to peer review
publications with undergraduate co-authorship. US faculty will also be in France
each summer to provide on-site mentoring. This is made possible through invited
professor positions contributed by French partners. Students are distributed in
groups of at least 2 per research site spread over 3 different sites (Paris,
Toulouse and Strasbourg) and assigned to research groups according to their
previous experience and application statements. The students will have the
opportunity to disseminate their research results to a broad audience at the
undergraduate poster session at the American Chemical Society National Spring
meeting following the summer research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed i-REU Site will provide a high-level research experience, allow the
participants a deep cultural immersion with an opportunity to learn another
culture, and prepare for the increasing impact of European unification on US
science. The very successful partnership with Morehouse College in the US is
continuing, which has provided access to a large pool of talented
underrepresented minority undergraduates. The impact of this program is measured
by the increased number of underrepresented STEM groups participating in the
program who are from diverse communities. The majority of the students going to
France will not be from the University of Florida. Participants will have
previous research experiences with backgrounds in chemistry, biochemistty or
physics. As a true exchange program and through a collection of French and UF
funding, a similar number of French students will be brought to the US to
perform research at UF's chemistry department, increasing the
internationalization of the undergraduate and PhD programs.