* 1156645
* REU Site: Bioprocess engineering for sustainability
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Justin Barone, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2016
* USD 368,461.00

This three year REU Site program at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University (VPI) will engage undergraduate students in cutting-edge research in
the area of bioprocess engineering (BPE). The objectives of the REU site are to:
(1)introduce students to the field of bioprocess engineering (BPE) and its
relevance in the future industrial economy; (2)teach students about the
technological, social, and economical challenges facing the traditional fossil
fuel based industry and the burgeoning biobased industry through classroom
learning and discussion; (3) provide those students with a unique and timely
experience performing research in bioprocess engineering; and (4)develop
independence and decision-making skills in students through the research process
and scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BPE REU Site program is
significant in that it is: 1) timely given the current energy and fossil fuel
situation and 2) technological relevant because bioprocessing involves topics
like fermentation, metabolic and genetic engineering, biomaterials,
macromolecular structure, and self-assembly, which are all robust and growing
research fields in engineering. Participating undergraduate students will gain
experience in a growing field with significant hiring potential in traditional
technology companies and engineering departments and burgeoning biotech
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research could show how biological processes
can be adapted to produce useful products like fuels, chemicals, plastics, and
pharmaceuticals. This would circumvent the fossil fuel intensive routes used
currently by the petrochemical industry that have proven detrimental to the
environment. Students will develop scientific skills, be exposed to new and
exciting avenues of research, and have the opportunity to make informed
decisions and gain presentation and writing experience. Recruiting women and
minority students into the REU Site will stimulate broader interest in new
fields and create a pipeline for graduate student
recruitment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"The site is co-funded by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program."