* 1156478
* EAGER: Scaled Down Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Sanjay Sarma, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2012
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award provides funding
for the development of a new paradigm in distributed manufacturing which, if
successful, will integrate small and medium-sized American manufacturing
facilities into virtual factories which can serve large customers. The concept
of a virtual factory is intended on the one hand to leverage the creativity and
efficiency of American small manufacturing businesses, and on the other hand,
create "a sum that is larger than the parts" virtual enterprise so that American
businesses can compete better with the bulk-manufacturing facilities overseas to
which the US is losing manufacturing jobs.

Many of the tools to enable distributed manufacturing are already in place. For
the manufacture of mechanical parts, CAD files are regularly transmitted over
the Internet. CAM takes CNC milling machines a step towards printing. 3D
printing, meanwhile, takes mechanical manufacturing a lot further towards the
printing of form (though not functionality). In the hands of an experienced 21st
century manufacturing expert, though these three technologies already enable
pieces of distributed manufacturing. Key elements of a truly integrated virtual
factory are missing, however. The inspection of parts manufactured in
distributed environments remains unscalable. The shipping of parts shipped from
distributed locations remains expensive. The proposed research attempts to fill
these needs by looking at: low-cost, networked, high-definition CT scanning to
enable quality assurance in a truly distributed virtual factory; and low-cost,
small-batch shipping by leveraging RFID and flexible warehousing and shipping.
In summary, the goal of the research is to fight the tyranny of bulk
manufacturing, by leveraging the strengths of small manufacturing shops in the
US.