* 1157446
* U.S.-India Catalyzing New International Collaboration with Anna University for Computational Enzyme Design Research: Sirt1 and Sirt3
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Raj Chakrabarti, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 01/31/2013
* USD 33,828.00

1157446 &lt;br/&gt;Chakrabarti &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will catalyze a
new international research collaboration in chemical engineering between Purdue
University, Indiana and Anna University, Chennai, India. Dr. Raj Chakrabarti,
School of Chemical Engineering will collaborate with Dr. Krishnan Baskar,
Crystal Growth Center and the Department of Chemical Engineering, Alagappa
College of Technology at Anna University. The project, Computational Enzyme
Design Research: Sirt1 and Sirt3, will study the evolutionary dynamics of
Sirtuin enzymes vis-à-vis the binding of small molecules with the ultimate goal
of treating age-related diseases such as cancer, diabetes, Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve both computer aided
sequence and binding-site analysis of enzymes and experimental verification of
the predicted activities of computer generated sequences and structures. The
computational program will entail extensive project-specific enzyme design code
development within the framework of the Chakrabarti general enzyme design
protocols. Enhancement of design algorithms and experimental work will be
conducted at Purdue; while the enzyme specific code development will be at Anna,
which brings world-class computational code development capabilities and
university-wide computational proficiency. Prof. Baskar's expertise in
crystallography provides technical knowledge that is critical to the success of
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding will enable the PI to strengthen
collaborative linkages between Anna and Purdue universities. The initial visit
by the PI and two advanced graduate students will allow them to define the scope
of the project, discuss details with faculty and students, and delineate
activities at individual levels. For at least one of the US-graduate students,
the visit will provide a unique international research experience. The project
brings together complementary strengths from both teams and institutions, and
fosters innovation cost-effectively by mobilizing international research teams
through its focus on a grand challenge problem with global implications. The
findings from this exploratory study will provide the groundwork for a
subsequent proposal likely to be submitted to the NSF/CBET, Bioengineering and
Engineering Healthcare Program.