* 1157824
* Escrt-Dependent Trafficking Mechanisms in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Marisa Otegui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 04/30/2017
* USD 871,549.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;This projects aims to understand how plant
endosomal proteins control the trafficking and degradation of plasma membrane
proteins, including receptors, channels, and certain cell wall biosynthetic
enzymes. The ESCRTs (Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport) are
multimeric protein complexes that specifically recognize and sort those plasma
membrane proteins that need to be transported to the vacuole for degradation.
The completion of these studies will clarify the functional aspects of the plant
endosome system. There is strong evidence suggesting that the organization and
function of the plant endosomal system is different from their counterparts in
yeast or animals. In fact, plants have endosomal components with no orthologs in
other organisms. This project will also analyze the roles of endosomal
trafficking in various aspects of plant life, such as development, cell type
specification, cell wall remodeling, signal transduction, and hormone transport.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The project will have impact on
education and outreach. The PI is currently teaching two undergraduate and two
graduate courses in the University of Wisconsin. One graduate student from an
under-represented group in science is already working on this project. The
application of state-of-the-art imaging techniques will be also important for
education, since the PI is committed to develop workshops on cell biology and
cell imaging for undergraduate and graduate students across campus as part of
the educational activities of the Plant Imaging Center in the Department of
Botany-University of Wisconsin, which was initially supported by NSF funds. In
addition, the PI's group provides confocal and electron tomography images
obtained in this study for display at the microscope and imaging discovery niche
in the Town Center of the new Wisconsin Institute of Discovery on campus.