* 1157528
* Workshop: Carbon Nano Materials and Applications Workshop, Rapid City, South Dakota, October 30, 2011 - November 1, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Haiping Hong, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2012
* USD 10,000.00

PI: Haiping Hong &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET -
1157528&lt;br/&gt;Institution: South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Title: Carbon Nano-materials and Application
Workshop&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanomaterials, e.g., carbon nanotubes,
nanoparticles, and graphene, continue to attract significant interest because of
their unique blend of thermal, electrical, and mechanical properties. This
workshop on Carbon Nanomaterials and their applications will be held in South
Dakota with the goal of developing a "roadmap" for future carbon nanomaterials
research. Leaders in this field will be invited to attend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will focus on new directions and frontiers
in carbon nanotubes, their alignment and applications. In the last decade, while
significant research in these areas have been done, it is felt that a focused
interchange of ideas would lead to the next roadmap of technical challenges and
practical outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will try to foster the
development of the next generation of carbon nanomaterials in a range of
applications from electronic cooling, seals, heat exchangers, and energy
harvesting. A workshop report that summarizes the discussions and
recommendations of the group will be submitted for publication in a widely read
international journal.