* 1157372
* Knowledge Mining and Bioinformatics techniques to Advance Personalized Diagnostics and Therapeutics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2012
* Ann Liebschutz, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 08/31/2012
* USD 49,138.00

This award, co-funded by the Catalyzing New International Collaboration and
Smart Health programs, supports a workshop organized by Naphtali Rishe of
Florida International University and &lt;br/&gt;Ann Liebschutz of the
U.S.-Israel Science and Technology Foundation. The workshop on Knowledge Mining
and Bioinformatics Techniques to Advance Personalized Diagnostics and
Therapeutics is to be held in conjunction with the Up Close and Personalized -
Personalized Medicine Congress in Florence, Italy, February 2012.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will foster collaboration in the design and
development of bioinformatics tools to analyze and process large quantities of
clinical and genomic data. This topic is at the intersection of clinical data-
mining, algorithms design and bioinformatics. As it is well known that one drug
does not deliver the same results to all patients, this workshop seeks to spur
international collaborations to enable identification of individual genetic
differences affecting drug effectiveness, making possible personalized treatment
plans that can both improve the quality of healthcare while reducing its
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the workshop will seed collaborations
between U.S., Israeli, Turkish and Palestinian scientists. Through the auspices
of the Turkish Embassy and Israeli-Palestinian Science Organization, the
workshop is intended to bring together a multidisciplinary group of scientists
from the fields of computer science, pharmacology, neuroscience, public health,
medical informatics and bioinformatics. These future endeavors will build on
diverse areas of expertise and technologies in development to improve health
care delivery internationally.