* 1157699
* US-France Collaboration:  Exploratory Research on Artificial Immunity in High Speed Trains
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Dragan Djurdjanovic, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2013
* USD 13,216.00

The research objective of this project is to explore the feasibility of
utilizing the emerging computational intelligence discipline of artificial
immune systems (AIS) in the realm of diagnostics in high-speed trains. The
proposed research will catalyze a strong research collaboration between Prof. D.
Djurdjanovic?s team at the Univ. of Texas at Austin (UT) and Prof. N. Zehrouni?s
team at the FEMTO-ST Institute of the Univ. of Franche-comté in Besançon, France
(FEMTO-ST stands for Franche-comté Electronique Mécanique Thermique et Optique ?
Sciences et Technologies).&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will leverage prior
achievements of the UT team in the area AIS inspired diagnostics and on-going
research by the French team in the area of predictive maintenance of TGV trains
(TGV is a well-known French acronym for ?Trains à Grande Vitesse? ? ?High Speed
Trains?). The team will explore the mechanisms of generation and distribution of
?immunity carriers? across various subsystems of a TGV train, as well as the
interaction mechanisms between the immunity carriers and the monitored system
that would lead to precedent-free isolation of subsystem(s) that behave
abnormally. The term precedent-free here pertains to the ability to deal with
anomalies that were not foreseen during the design stage and for which fault
models or training data do not exist. Such capability will be analogous to the
biological systems ability to detect and isolate antigens (viruses, bacteria)
that have never been encountered before. In the final weeks of the project, the
team will devise a follow up proposal that will aim at deepening our
understanding and perfecting the AIS paradigm in high-speed rail (HSR)
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. In 2001, the US economy spent more than $1
trillion to maintain critical assets with more than 33% of these costs being
wasted on ineffective maintenance (unnecessary repairs, repairs of wrong
components, lack of spare parts etc.). The AIS paradigm pursued in this project
addresses this tremendous societal need by exploring a new paradigm that
promises to increase the resilience and improve operation of engineering systems
in the future. The ability to deal with unprecedented faults will lead to
reduced waste of resources due to more effective maintenance interventions, as
well as the improved usage and productivity due to higher availability of
equipment. &lt;br/&gt;In addition, our focus in high-speed trains has a
significant broad impact all by itself. HSR systems have been shown in various
parts of the world to yield increased energy efficiency, decreased emissions and
automobile traffic, while increasing safety and reliability. Several studies on
proposed HSR systems in the US show that, on the emissions side alone, HSR
systems have the capability of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 2.7 million
metric tons and producing only 24% of the emissions of auto and air traffic (see
Broader Impacts section of the proposal for details). It is the PI?s hypothesis
that it is only a matter of time before HSR systems become much more prominent,
and perhaps even prevalent in the US. The proposed research will be an important
contribution to the scientific basis necessary for safe and cost-effective
operation of these systems. &lt;br/&gt;Numerous potentials exist for extension
and impact of the proposed research beyond HSR systems. These opportunities
include computer and communication network security, product design improvement
based on information from product?s AIS, diagnostics in various systems of the
human body and, perhaps in the far future, augmentation of the human immune
system with artificially engineered immunity carriers (T-cells, B-cells,
leukocytes).