* 1157585
* 2012  Chemistry and Physics of Graphitic Carbon Materials Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Herbert Fertig, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports participation of primarily
graduate students and postdocs in the Gordon Research Conference on the
Chemistry and Physics of Graphitic Carbon Materials to be held June 17-22, 2012
at Davidson College in North Carolina. The conference will bring together a
diverse group of researchers studying a group of closely related carbon-based
materials: graphene, carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, and various materials based
on graphite. On the atomic scale these are amazing materials: graphene has
carbon atoms at the vertices of a hexagonal mesh that resembles chickenwire that
is only a single atom thick. Carbon nanotubes can be thought of as tiny rolls of
this chicken wire. The unusual properties of graphene and other graphitic
materials make these systems important both for practical reasons -- potential
applications in microelectronics and renewable energy and for the fundamental
scientific challenges they present. The conference will highlight the need for
further research on graphitic carbon materials, gathering scientists in physics,
chemistry, and engineering to tackle the challenges in this field. The
conference will focus on scalable synthesis, characterization, novel physical
and electronic properties, structure-properties relationship studies, and new
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary conference will have
an informal workshop environment to encourage interactions and collaborations
among scientists and engineers who would normally have little contact with one
another. This will allow participants working on application-oriented aspects of
these materials to become aware of and exploit the exotic fundamental properties
that these materials support. Conversely, scientists interested in the
electronic and material properties of graphitic materials will learn about
challenges faced in their practical exploitation, and will be motivated to
develop increasingly realistic models of them. Moreover, the conference will
strongly emphasize participation from members of underrepresented groups at all
levels, including within the leadership of the conference, the invited speakers,
discussion leaders, and senior and junior participants. Finally, particular
effort will be made to integrate the young students and postdoctoral fellows
into the science and engineering community interested in graphitic materials.