* 1157754
* IUCRC Renewal Proposal: NSF I/UCRC for Friction Stir Processing
* ENG,EEC
* 08/18/2011,12/31/2017
* Rajiv Mishra, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 264,111.00

This proposal requests a five year renewal (phase II) of NSF funding for the
Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri S&T) Center for Friction
Stir Processing (CFSP) site. Missouri S&T was added as a university site in
2005.

CFSP is currently comprised of the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
(SDSM&T) as the lead institution, with Brigham Young University (BYU), the
University of South Carolina (USC), Wichita State University (WSU), and Missouri
S&T as research partners. These institutions were brought together to establish
the Friction Stir Processing (FSP) I/UCRC to focus on the needs of the
aerospace, aeronautic, energy, military and commercial industries in developing
emerging solid-state metals joining and processing technology.

The CFSP has performed basic and applied research programs that address the
implementation needs of its industrial and government sponsors. Missouri S&T
focuses on the fundamental processing microstructure-properties relationships.
Also, this site is the primary site for development of friction stir processing
technology for non-joining applications. In addition to the success indicated by
academic publications, notable commercial successes have resulted from the
Missouri S&T site.

The broader impacts on the community are strongly built into the proposal
through university, local, regional, national and international participation in
the center activities. The renewing Missouri S&T CFSP site PI has worked as an
organizer of FSW/P symposium during TMS meetings, edited the first book on FSW/P
published by ASM, organized a Viewpoint Set in Scripta Materialia on the
fundamentals of friction stir process as a Guest Editor and co-authored the
first review paper on FSW/P. FSW/P symposium during TMS meeting is organized
every two years and CFSP students participate in large numbers. All these
activities help the broader goal of CFSP in generation and dissemination of
fundamental and applied knowledge regarding the friction stir process. The
renewing Missouri S&T CFSP Site has two post-docs in the research projects.
During May 2010 IAB meeting, it was formalized that each site will develop and
implement its own post-doc mentoring program. Missouri S&T site's mentoring
program includes steps to develop post-doc's skills to transition into academia
or research institutions.