* 1157160
* WORKSHOP: A Planning Workshop for Training in Anthropological Discourse Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Susan Philips, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2013
* USD 17,449.00

Dr. Barbra Meek (University of Michigan) and Dr. Susan Philips (University of
Arizona) will convene a planning workshop to develop a training program in
anthropological methods of discourse analysis for documenting and analyzing
social interactions. Discourse analysis is particularly valued in studies of the
way ideas emerge, circulate and are transformed in the interactional process and
in studies of the nature and organization of interpretive diversity. Cultural
anthropologists are increasingly turning to discourse analysis as a form of data
analysis that will give them insight into the nature of culture. Similarly,
linguists are increasingly turning to discourse analysis as a method that will
help them analyze socially embedded linguistic practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-day workshop, to be held in the Spring of 2012,
will bring together linguists and anthropologists skilled in discourse analysis
to discuss the best pedagogical practices for teaching how to do discourse
analysis and the logistics necessary for carrying out the training program,
which will be held initially in conjunction with the Summer 2013 Linguistics
Institute at the University of Michigan, which is organized by the Linguistic
Society of America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training in anthropological discourse
analysis will ultimately provide cultural and linguistic anthropologists,
sociolinguists, and others with useful methodological tools that will strengthen
the overall scientific merit of the research they conduct. The project will
stimulate linguistic anthropologists to speak and write about method more and to
share their analytic approach with those disciplines with which linguistic
anthropology engages in methodological discussions. The workshop will also
provide an important opportunity for interdisciplinarity and collaboration
between scholars in Anthropology and Linguistics.