* 1157041
* REU Site: Summer Engineering Research Experiences in Diabetes for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Vincent Turitto, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 03/31/2016
* USD 371,644.00

Intellectual Merit The primary goals of this renewal REU site program in the
Biomedical Engineering (BME) Department at the Illinois Institute of Technology
(IIT) are: 1) For students to experience engineering research by completing
challenging diabetes-related projects with faculty at IIT; 2) To develop and
apply mentoring concepts and skills in graduate and undergraduate researchers;
3) To expose students to the broader health implications of their research with
lecture, outreach, and tours of clinical facilities; 4) To provide engineering
research experiences to students without previous experience; and 5) To
integrate ethics discussion and training into all aspects of the student
experience. Although laboratory experience is an essential component of this
research program, seminars, mentoring workshops, an ethics colloquium and tours
of clinical facilities are provided to integrate ethics, mentoring activities
and the broader health implications of the research into the educational
experience.

At the end of the summer REU site program students will have a diverse set of
research skills and knowledge by completion of the following specific
objectives: 1) Students complete a diabetes related research project working
with an engineering mentor from IIT; 2) Increase student knowledge of the health
implications related to diabetes and the importance of engineering research; 3)
Increase participation by targeted student populations, specifically students
early in their academic careers without previous research experience; 4) Develop
and apply mentoring skills in graduate and REU students through training and
interactions with students at multiple education levels; and 5) Communicate
research ideas and findings through both informal discussion and formal
presentations. Recruitment efforts will be targeted to students early in their
academic careers with limited opportunity for engineering research, with a
specific focus on women and students from underrepresented minority groups.

The REU site activities are centered on undergraduate research projects focused
on fundamental studies of relevance to diabetes. Diabetes is a complex
pathologic condition with diverse biological and medical issues that drive the
need for engineering approaches. Research in the center reflect this diversity,
with projects offered in a broad range of topics including computational models
of glucose metabolism, design of a bioartificial pancreas, development of novel
biomaterials for the treatment of diabetic complications and fundamental studies
of islet electrophysiology. This is a unique program in which REU experiences
are presented in the context of a problem of significant implications in
society. The mentor team is prepared for this task due to their previous
activities in undergraduate research and the diabetes center under the Pritzker
Institute at IIT.

Broader Impacts The number of researchers in the U.S. must increase
significantly to preserve the global leadership in research and technology. The
education of highly skilled researchers requires strong educational programs at
all levels. Research experiences can greatly influence the future and motivation
of young engineers and scientists. By performing research projects related to a
disease that affects more than 18 million people in the U.S., there is the
potential to advance understanding while influencing engineers in their career.
The program specifically targets students early in their academic careers
without previous research experience. This focus combined with support from the
City Colleges of Chicago will provide the opportunity to impact students at
critical career transition points. In addition to research experience students
will be provided with a broader understanding of the disease and its impact on
society. The program will impact students at multiple academic stages. Mentoring
activities will be provided and fostered for graduate students to facilitate
interactions with the REU student, and REU students will develop an enrichment
activity for a high school STEM program. The high school students will come from
diverse backgrounds and will be exposed to cutting edge engineering research and
opportunities for impact in the field of diabetes.