* 1157714
* Conference on "Symmetries of Differential Equations: Frames, Invariants and Applications"
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Willard Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Annalisa Calini
* 04/30/2013
* USD 44,700.00

This grant provides travel support for graduate students, postdocs, and invited
lecturers to participate in the Conference on "Symmetries of Differential
Equations: Frames, Invariants and Applications" to be held at the School of
Mathematics, University of Minnesota, May 17-19, 2012. The general conference
theme is inspired by the lifetime research achievements of Professor Peter
Olver, but focus will be on current advances, promising directions, and novel
applications. The main topics addressed are symmetries of differential equations
and variational problems, with special emphasis on moving frames, Cartan theory
of differential forms and invariant theory. Also Hamiltonian systems and
integrable systems including solitons will be treated, as well as applications
of symmetry based methods to image processing, fluid mechanics and elasticity.
The organizing committee is: Niky Kamran (Mathematics, McGill University),
Gloria Mari Beffa (Mathematics, University of Wisconsin), Guillermo R. Sapiro
(Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota), and Willard
Miller, Jr, (Mathematics, University of Minnesota). Detailed information is
available on the website http://math.umn.edu/conferences/olver/ and results of
the meeting, including abstracts, slides and a panel discussion, will also be
posted there. In conjunction with the conference the on line journal SIGMA will
publish a special issue entitled ``Symmetries of Differential Equations: Frames,
Invariants and Applications'' with the conference organizers as guest editors,
http://www.emis.de/journals/SIGMA/SDE2012.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general
theme of the conference is the exploitation of symmetries of mathematical and
physical systems to deduce properties of these systems. More specifically, most
physical theories are expressed in terms of differential equations and the
mathematical symmetries of these equations can be exploited to reach important
conclusions about the systems that obey the equations. The meeting comes at a
propitious time - an explosion of new results and new methods in symmetry
analysis, with applications ranging over geometry, differential equations,
computer vision, numerical analysis, mechanics, and physics, make this an ideal
time to assemble the leading experts, and promising younger researchers to
assess the rapid advances in the area, reach a consensus on what are the most
important problems, and evaluate the most promising directions for further
advance. We expect the conference to be a major event in the history of this
research area.