* 1157997
* RUI:   Elucidating Regulatory Mechanisms for Bridging the Contractile Ring with the Cellular Membrane in Fission Yeast Cytokinesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Dawn Hart, Grand Valley State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2017
* USD 498,000.00

Intellectual Merit. Cell division is a fundamental biological event that
underlies the growth and development of all organisms. The broad questions
addressed through this research are universal to cell division in all biological
systems. How does an individual cell know where to physically separate into two
new cells? When is an appropriate time for a cell to divide? Proteins that are
essential for physically dividing the cell undergo dynamic rearrangements within
the cell to concentrate at the future site of cell division and coalesce into a
ring structure called the contractile ring. Physical separation of the mother
cell into two identical cells occurs when the contractile ring constricts during
cytokinesis. Temporally and spatially organizing such a large assortment of
proteins at the cellular division site requires precise regulatory mechanisms.
Because fission yeast (Schizosaccharomyces pombe) cells utilize evolutionarily
conserved machinery during this process, they are an ideal model system to
reveal general cell division properties. In fission yeast, a conserved
scaffolding protein called Mid1 is a foundational part of the contractile ring,
functioning as the initial organizer to anchor the structure to the cell
membrane and to recruit essential cytokinetic proteins to the cell division
site. In this project, a research team, consisting primarily of undergraduate
students, will investigate the Mid1 scaffolding function at a molecular level.
Preliminary results generated by student researchers suggest that Mid1 directly
associates with multiple cytokinetic ring proteins and utilizes an enzyme-
dependent mechanism to interact with the cell membrane. The research will
characterize Mid1 interactions with other cytokinetic proteins and the cell
membrane to elucidate a molecular model for bridging the cell division machinery
to the cell membrane. Given that Mid1 is functionally similar to anillin, a
scaffolding protein required for cytokinesis in animal cells, a detailed study
of the Mid1 scaffolding function is at the core of understanding cytokinesis in
other biological systems.

Broader Impact. Among the greater than 20,000 undergraduate students at Grand
Valley State University (GVSU), 41% of incoming freshman are the first in their
family to attend college, 15.5% of recent graduates were over the age of 25
years (non-traditional) and the majority of current students are financially
contributing to their own education. Like many of the students at GVSU, the
principal investigator is a first-generation college graduate herself. A
specific objective of this research project is to provide an intellectually
meaningful research experience to undergraduate students, primarily first
generation students and/or non-traditional students. Student researchers will
contribute to the scientific goals related to cell division while receiving a
comprehensive training experience. The practical skills gained will include
creative problem solving, proper laboratory technique, clear oral and written
communication, hypothesis development, and experimental design. Results will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed journals, and undergraduate researchers will
present their findings at regional and national scientific meetings. Cell and
molecular biology majors at GVSU are among the top in the country with
consistently high scores on standardized tests in this area. Graduates are
making significant scientific contributions in doctoral programs or industrial
research positions. The educational goals of this research project will
positively impact students who are committed to long-term scientific careers and
will further intensify the research atmosphere at GVSU.