* 1157220
* A high precision method to estimate effective connectivity networks at the group and individual levels
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Peter Molenaar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 06/30/2016
* USD 509,873.00

The frontiers of cognitive brain imaging are shifting from examinations of
isolated individual brain regions to examinations of interactions between
multiple regions in distributed brain networks. Empirical evidence consistently
shows that identification of the structure and dynamics of brain networks is the
key to understanding cognitive information processing as functions of
development, aging, and clinical conditions, among other factors. With funding
from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Peter C. Molenaar and his colleagues,
Drs. Frank Hillary, Ping Li, and Michael Rovine of the Pennsylvania State
University University Park are developing new methods, known as "effective
connectivity mapping," to identify how different brain regions causally
influence each other's activity. Currently available methods have several known
shortcomings, and the proposed project is addressing these shortcomings by
developing new methods to explicitly model both contemporaneous and time-lagged
relationships among the activities of brain regions. The new method will be
highly important for functional brain imaging research. It is designed to
efficiently accommodate individual differences in connectivity maps and to carry
out automatic data-driven search for the optimal network solutions. The
researchers are giving special emphasis to integrating the methodology with
dimension-reduction techniques in order to identify brain regions of interest
and to application of new estimation techniques allowing for arbitrarily time-
varying strengths of effective connections among brain regions. The new
methodology is based on bilinear vector-autoregressive models, with or without
external input, as well as extension of this model into stochastic state-space
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Application of brain imaging is widespread and
increasingly focused on understanding the ways in which activities of brain
regions are integrated into interconnected networks. Individual humans differ
substantially in brain structure and function, and connections among their brain
regions can vary across time due to multiple factors. Therefore, robust
statistical methods are required to reliably identify the networks of brain
regions of interest. This project is aimed at accomplishing this goal by means
of the application of innovative statistical methodology that is extensively
validated with simulated and empirical data and implemented in software tools
that can be applied in both theory-driven and data-driven ways. The
investigators are validating the methodology with large-scale simulation studies
and with applications to existing data sets. The new analysis tools will be
implemented in commonly used computational platforms. For the benefit of the
greater scientific community, the methods will also be made publicly available
through the development of user-friendly interfaces, courseware, and
consultation.