* 1157916
* I-Corps:  Radiotracer Synthesis Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Stephen DiMagno, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed I-Corps project involves bringing advantageous new methodologies
for synthesis of [18F]-labeled molecular imaging agents into the clinic. The
proposed activity builds upon fundamental discoveries in synthetic chemistry
that were made possible by prior NSF funding. In the current project the team
assesses the suitability of newly developed and demonstrated technology as the
basis for forming a startup enterprise. Activities to be performed during the 6
month funding period will include market assessment, evaluation of the
intellectual property surrounding these inventions, and extensive direct
contacts with potential customers, licensees, and competitors. These activities
will be guided and informed by the curriculum of the I-Corps program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Positron Emission Tomography (PET) is a powerful,
noninvasive diagnostic molecular imaging technique. For most PET applications,
[18F]fluorinated radiotracers are preferred. The short half-life of this isotope
of fluorine (~110 min) requires relatively complex compounds to be prepared and
distributed under significant time constraints, while still providing the
excellent image quality, compliance with FDA good manufacturing practices, and
acceptable radiodosimetry typical of short half-life radionuclides. One such
compound, [18F]- 2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG), now accounts for the almost all
of the [18F]-PET imaging market, estimated to be approximately $500MM/yr in the
United States and provides significant support for the clinical management of
cancer patients. Unique technology developed in the laboratory will permit rapid
and efficient production of additional very high specific activity fluorinated
PET compounds for which clinical use has been constrained by the limitations of
current radiochemical synthesis methods. The new technology to be advanced in
this project provides commercially compatible synthetic pathways and new
chemical intermediates for the synthesis of [18F]-labeled imaging agents that
can be used to evaluate the pathophysiology of specific cellular receptors in
the brain and in the heart, to localize and stage tumors, and to assist in
cancer management by monitoring patients' responses to therapy.