* 1157708
* WORKSHOP: ABRF2012 Satellite Educational Workshops to be held March 16-17th, 2012 in Orlando, FL
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Katia Sol-Church, Alfred I du Pont Hospital for Children
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Fernandes
* 12/31/2012
* USD 44,000.00

Project Abstract: The purpose of this award is to support four new Satellite
Educational Workshops that will be held concurrently before the start of the
Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities annual meeting (Orlando FL,
March 2012). The four workshops are (1) Pathway Analysis in Transcriptomics,
Proteomics and Metabolomics; (2) Business Skills for Core Facility Directors and
Managers; 3) Epigenomics: Design, Implementation and Analysis of RNA-seq and
Methyl-seq Experiments; and (4) Manual Interpretation of Electron Transfer
Dissociation Mass Spectra of Peptides. The award will enable the establishment
of a Travel Award program dedicated to the professional development of core
facility personnel and of young scientists interested in life science
technologies. This NSF award will help establish online educational materials
for workshop participants and provide the foundation for the development of
future shared educational resources for the community at large. The intellectual
merit of these workshops is in educating the constant flow of new, enthusiastic
researchers in the use of both established and cutting-edge technologies
critical to the progression of science in all fields. The broader impact of this
award is to provide a particularly powerful mechanism for facilitating the
participation of individuals from underrepresented groups, including women and
members of minority groups, who would not otherwise be able to afford to attend
the educational satellite workshops.