* 1157673
* U.S.-Honduras Workshop: Advancing a Long Term Coastal-Ecosystem Education, Research and Management Initiative in Honduras and Neighboring Countries, La Ceiba, Honduras, Fall 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Edward Laws, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/2013
* USD 43,655.00

Victor Rivera-Monroy and colleagues at Louisiana State University will hold a
workshop in La Ceiba, Honduras in conjunction with Andrea R. Sosa and colleagues
at the National Autonomous University of Honduras. The object of the workshop is
to discuss a research program to establish and utilize a network of long-term
ecological monitoring sites, primarily in Honduras and neighboring countries.
The objective is to assess the sustainability of water use in large watersheds
in Central America compared to that in other sites in the United States,
particularly in the Mississippi Delta and Florida Everglades, which already have
established long-term ecological research programs. Ecologists, hydrologists and
environmental economists from the US and Central American countries, including
Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and El Salvador, will participate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the socioeconomic importance of marine resources
to economies in Central America, the scientific and technical information needed
to develop sustainable management plans for coastal zones is often lacking or
inadequate. This workshop aims to link U.S. researchers with Honduran and other
Central American colleagues in a collaborative dialogue to identify timely
research topics. One of the workshop activities is to select tentative Long Term
Ecological Research (LTER) sites on both Caribbean and Pacific coasts. These
sites will be used to develop research initiatives and promote international
research collaborations in Central America and the Caribbean region. A priority
of the workshop is the inclusion of US and Central American students and early-
career scientists in the workshop and subsequent international research
collaborations.