* 1157878
* RUI: Characterization of a Conserved ATPase Required for Conjugation of Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Melanie Berkmen, Suffolk University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2016
* USD 281,540.00

Intellectual Merit. Conjugation involves the transfer of DNA directly from a
donor cell to a recipient cell. Since conjugative elements can deliver their own
genetic material as well as other resident DNA, conjugation has played a
profound role in bacterial evolution, allowing organisms to acquire new genes
and adapt to new environmental niches. During conjugation, DNA is transferred
from cell to cell through a specialized DNA translocation channel that is
encoded by the conjugative element. This project will characterize the conserved
ATPase ConE, a critical energetics component of the DNA translocation channel of
the conjugative element ICEBs1 of Bacillus subtilis. This project is designed to
reveal which conjugation proteins interact with and recruit ConE to the cell
membrane. Furthermore, the sequences of ConE required for conjugation, ATP
hydrolysis, and localization to the membrane will be explored. These studies
should lead to the discovery of other critical components of the ICEBs1
conjugation machinery and a better understanding of the fundamental principles
that govern horizontal gene transfer in bacteria.

Broader Impacts. Major impacts of this project are to enhance undergraduate
student training while broadening our understanding of horizontal gene transfer.
The research will be designed, conducted, and analyzed by undergraduate students
with guidance from the PI. The PI will continue to integrate inquiry-based
research into her undergraduate biochemistry laboratory course and high school
outreach activities. Furthermore, this project will permit the purchase of a
research-grade fluorescence microscope which will allow students to follow a
wider range of research interests and learn sophisticated microscopy techniques.
The percentage of students entering top-tier graduate programs and careers in
the biosciences is expected to increase, as many more students will have the
opportunity to gain useful research skills, present their work, and experience
the excitement of scientific discovery.