* 1157036
* REU Site: Engineering Applications of Extreme Ultra-Violet (EUV) Laser Light
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Jorge Rocca, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2015
* USD 286,950.00

This three-year REU site program builds on the strength of the existing
infrastructure of the Engineering Research Center (ERC) for EUV Science and
Technology to offer world-class opportunities for students to gain research
experience that will prepare them for entry into graduate studies and the
workforce in this critical field. The Center is a partnership between Colorado
State University (CSU), University of Colorado, Boulder (CU Boulder), University
of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley), and 18 corporate partners. In support of
REU interns, this project combines the complementary expertise already
established between CSU and CU Boulder - leaders in compact EUV light sources
and applications - with the strong track record in EUV optics and applications
present at UC Berkeley/Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). The common
and complementary expertise of the Center faculty, research staff, and students
is built around the unified goal of research and discovery in EUV science and
technology.

This unique focus on EUV sciences and technology united in common activities
draws world leaders in this field together to conduct research and share their
knowledge and skills with undergraduate and graduate students. Few places in the
world offer this unique undergraduate study opportunity unified by the focus of
advancing laser and optic science and technology.

This experience will give students perspective on how research and engineering
design problems can be solved and how un-forecasted difficulties can be
overcome. The research projects are highly interdisciplinary, technically and
scientifically challenging, and contribute to the leading edge advancement of
EUV science and technology.

This EUV ERC REU program will:1)Present students with challenging technical and
scientific problems that will help them develop an approach for solving open-
ended problems requiring critical thinking and creativity;2)Improve participants
understanding of EUV science and technology by involving them in cutting-edge
research projects with state-of-the-art equipment in collaboration with
recognized EUV researchers;3)Generate interest among participants in pursuing
post-graduate careers in Photonics Engineering and provide the information and
the skills needed to make successful graduate school or industry
applications;4)Provide opportunities for and motivate women and underrepresented
minorities to enter careers in engineering and science.

"The site is co-funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program."