* 1157391
* Conference:   2012 Sensory Transduction in Microorganisms Gordon Research Conference; to be held January 15-20, 2012 in Ventura, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 12/31/2012
* USD 7,000.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The 2012 Sensory Transduction in Microorganisms
Gordon Research Conference (STIM) will be held January 15-20 at the Ventura
Beach Marriott in Ventura, California. This conference will focus on how
microorganisms, particularly bacteria, sense and respond to their environment.
This research will aid in understanding the basic mechanism of signal
transduction and motility in all living organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of the conference include: &lt;br/&gt;1)To provide a forum
for investigators from a range of disciplines that spans computational modeling
through biophysics to bacterial physiology to integrate their research results
on microbes across the scale of molecular to population biology.&lt;br/&gt;2)To
provide a mechanism for investigators with cutting-edge technical expertise to
share their expertise and establish collaborations. Techniques of interest to
the participants are modern high-throughput methods in bacterial genetics and
phenotypic screening, cryo-EM tomography, microfluidics, single cell microscopy
and in vitro reconstruction of signal transduction complexes.&lt;br/&gt;3)To
promote junior investigators in the field and to encourage diversity within the
research community.&lt;br/&gt;4)To stimulate interactions and collaborations
between established investigators and graduate students/ postdoctoral fellows
and to nurture the scientific development of early stage
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the sessions for this year?s
conference include: &lt;br/&gt;Diversity in chemotaxis&lt;br/&gt;Receptor
signaling and architecture design&lt;br/&gt;Small molecule
signaling&lt;br/&gt;Responses to the physical
environment&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorylation and acetylation in signal
transduction&lt;br/&gt;Flagella structure and
function&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;GRC STIM has a legacy
of bringing together researchers from a variety of disciplines at all stages of
their career. In 2010, approximately 40% of the participants were female and 49%
were graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Feedback from the conference
attendees in 2010 was solicited to help with broadening and sustaining
participation for the 2012 conference. Based on the feedback, approximately 65%
of the speakers for the 2012 conference have not spoken in four years and are
either assistant or associate professors. In addition, the GRC STIM actively
encourages participation of women and underrepresented groups.