* 1157675
* Reversing circulation structure in arid, tropical estuaries
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Arnoldo Valle-Levinson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2014
* USD 48,345.00

This award supports a new international collaboration between the University of
Florida and the Federal University of Pernambuco in Recife, and the Federal
University of Cear√°, in Fortaleza, Brazil. The collaboration will be focused on
studying the hydrodynamics of low-inflow estuaries in tropical, arid regions.
This type of estuaries may change the circulation structure from the wet to the
dry season because of excess evaporation or precipitation. A main outcome of the
seasonal change of the hydrodynamic regime in estuaries with marked dry and wet
seasons is the likely loss of flushing efficiency by the estuary during the dry
season. Specific objectives to be addressed with this collaboration consist of
(a) initial data collection with Brazilian scientists and students to
investigate the hydrodynamics of strongly seasonal arid estuaries during wet and
dry seasons; and (b) delivery of a short course on estuarine hydrodynamics at
the Universidade Federal de Pernambuco. At a later stage a visit of Brazilian
scientists and students to Florida is envisaged, with funding from Brazilian
sources. The Brazilian host, Dr. Schettini, has developed expertise in
identifying systems with seasonal reversals and the logistics necessary to study
them. The US Principal Investigator has the expertise to collect and analyze
necessary data to place the results in the context of theoretical and new
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This activity will foster international
collaborations and will expose graduate students to other scientific settings
and study areas. Future research will advance our understanding of the physics
of low inflow estuaries in tropical arid regions, a topic that has remained
essentially unexplored throughout the world. With increasing use of freshwater
resources for human consumption and sea level rise, it is evident that these
systems will be most vulnerable to a drastic change of function caused by
enhanced salt intrusion and hypersalinity conditions. This project will train
several Latin-American students (between 20 and 30 individuals) in the topic of
Estuarine Hydrodynamics through a course to be taught in Brazil. A US graduate
student will participate in the prospection trips, collect data, analyze data
and write a descriptive paper on the data that will be collected in the wet and
dry seasons.