* 1157615
* Photobiology of Vision & Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Klaus Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2016
* USD 1,000,191.00

This project focuses on two fundamental quantum biological phenomena in nature
that are related by similar physical mechanisms involving interaction of light
with living systems. The first phenomenon to be examined is animal
magnetoreception, the process by which certain animals employ a magnetic compass
for navigation. A specific protein, cryptochrome, is proposed to be responsible
for the magnetic sense. This project will determine how cryptochrome can
function as a magnetic sensor in the presence of thermal motion. The second
phenomenon to be studied is photosynthetic light harvesting, the primary process
by which the energy of sunlight is funneled into the life processes of living
cells. Again the effect of thermal disorder on light harvesting will be
investigated along with the role that quantum coherence plays. Extensive
stochastic quantum dynamics calculations will be carried out to account for
realistic system-environment interactions during light harvesting. The
composition and organization of a complete photosynthetic apparatus, the
chromatophore, of so-called purple bacteria, will be determined along with the
dynamics of its light-harvesting function, thereby connecting the photosynthetic
process across scales from individual pigments to entire cells.

The project will have two primary beneficial impacts. First, solar energy,
received on Earth at a rate of 120,000 TW, far exceeds the current worldwide
energy consumption rate of 15 TW. Therefore, solar energy, harvested by
biological, artificial, and bio-hybrid systems, constitutes a potential
renewable source for mankind's current and foreseeable future energy needs. The
project will guide efforts into biomimetic light harvesting materials for more
cost-effective solar technology. Second, damage by birds and other wildlife
striking aircraft, annually amounts to well over $600 million for US civil and
military aviation; over 219 people have been killed worldwide as a result of
wildlife strikes since 1988. Determining the mechanisms of animal navigation may
reduce the property damage as well as harm to wildlife. Additionally, this
project offers a basis for interdisciplinary cooperation between experimental
biologists, theoretical physicists, theoretical chemists, and computer
scientists, providing an excellent training opportunity for researchers. Lastly,
planned activities will complement an existing strong outreach program for
bringing science to the public at large. Advanced visualization and analysis
tools will be added to the freely available leading molecular visualization and
analysis tools developed by the PI and will be made available to an existing
base of 167,000 users. This project is jointly supported by the Biomolecular
Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Physics
Division.