* 1157632
* Functional Role of BYDV 3' RNA Translation Enhancer Element
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Dixie Goss, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2016
* USD 794,988.00

Intellectual Merit: Plant viruses cause diseases that affect a significant
number of food crops world-wide with potentially severe consequences on food
supplies and economic conditions. Most viruses 'commandeer' the host cell's
protein synthesis machinery to make viral proteins. Barley yellow dwarf virus
(BYDV) is one of the two most widespread and economically significant plant
viruses, affecting wheat, barley and oat crops worldwide. The aims of this
project will advance the basic science of plant viruses, while enabling
technologies for the improved control of harmful plant viruses and the
engineering of modified viruses for production of high-value proteins using
plants. BYDV contains an unusual RNA structure, a translational enhancer (BTE),
in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the mRNA that interacts with a 5' UTR
stem loop. This long-range interaction promotes efficient translation of the
viral mRNA by a mechanism that is not yet fully understood. The project will
employ the 3' UTR of BYDV as a model system to elucidate mechanisms of long-
range RNA interactions involving 3'UTR elements. The overall goal of the project
is to identify the molecular interactions that enable viral mRNA to compete
efficiently with the much higher concentrations of cellular RNA for access to
ribosomes and translation factors. The three critical steps in the assembly of
viral protein synthesis initiation complexes will be investigated: 1) The
binding of eIFs (eukaryotic initiation factors) to the viral 3'-BTE; 2) the
interaction of ribosomes with viral 3'-BTE and 5'-UTR sequences; and 3) the
interaction between viral 3'-BTE and 5'-UTR regions. A library of BYDV mRNAs
with varying translational efficiency will be used to determine the correlation
between eIF binding and translation, the binding affinity of ribosomes for viral
RNA sequences, and the role of the interaction between 3' and 5'-UTRs in each of
these steps. The project will employ a range of biochemical and biophysical
techniques to achieve these aims, including ribosome 'toeprint' analysis, direct
fluorescence assays, and RNA binding assays analyzed by mass spectroscopic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The significance of the research
and the range of experimental approaches employed will provide excellent
training opportunities for students, ranging from the high school to the
graduate school level, in both biochemical assays and quantitative biophysical
measurements. Students at each level will receive appropriate training in
molecular biology techniques including expression of cloned proteins,
translational assays, and other important biochemical techniques. Fluorescence
spectroscopy and mass spectrometry used in this project will provide
quantitative and biophysical training for more advanced students. Hunter College
recruits and enrolls significant numbers of minority students under-represented
in the sciences, and also sponsors a summer research program for them. Students
will be recruited from this program to participate in the research. Thus, the
project will contribute to training a diverse workforce in science and
technology. High school teachers will carry out research in the lab during the
summers, using quantitative fluorescence measurements to determine equilibrium
and thermodynamic properties and enhance their content knowledge of applications
of thermodynamics to biological systems. The Principal Investigator will work
with faculty from the Borough of Manhattan Community College (an Hispanic
serving institution) to increase research opportunities for their faculty and
students, providing access to state-of-the-art equipment and research guidance
when appropriate. By participating in the research project, high school teachers
and community college faculty will increase their knowledge of current research
techniques and their abilities to convey to their students the excitement of
science.