* 1157716
* Enveloped Virus Assembly and Budding
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Suchetana Mukhopadhyay, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2017
* USD 372,868.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;Viruses are the most abundant microbes on earth and
are able to infect a diverse range of organisms including plants, animals,
bacteria, and archaea. Virus assembly, the process of generating new virus
particles from an infected cell, relies on a precise coordination of cellular
and viral components. During assembly, some viruses will incorporate part of the
cell membrane from the host cell into the new virus particles. This project will
determine the viral components that are involved in incorporating the host cell
membrane during virus assembly. Using Alphaviruses as the model system, this
project will characterize specific viral membrane proteins known as 6K and TF
that are required during virus assembly, the post-translational modifications
required by these proteins to carry out specific functions, how the proteins
organize within the particle to create a stable particle, and where in the virus
particles these proteins are localized. The proteins being studied from the
Alphavirus family are thought to function similarly to proteins in other virus
families. Thus, this research could potentially reveal new assembly mechanisms
shared by different virus families that are not genetically
similar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS &lt;br/&gt;This research promotes
interdisciplinary collaborations and will provide training to undergraduate and
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows from virology, structural biology,
and nanoscience programs. Outside of the laboratory, the project will support an
outreach program with hands-on activities that emphasize size, symmetry, and
structure in microbes, eukaryotic cells, and viruses. The projects target high
school students to encourage them to pursue careers in science and science
education. The activities will also be incorporated into established outreach
programs at Indiana University allowing them to reach elementary-aged students,
teachers, and community members.