* 1157698
* Continuity and Change in American Economic and Social Life: The PSID 2012-2016
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2019
* Katherine McGonagle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 16,503,578.00

The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) is the world's longest running
household panel survey. With over forty years of data on the same families and
their descendents, the PSID is a cornerstone of data infrastructure for social
science research. Through its long-term measures of economic and social well
being, the study allows researchers and policy analysts to investigate the
dynamism inherent in social and behavioral process. The long panel, genealogical
design, and broad content provide scientists a unique and powerful opportunity
to study evolution and chance within the same family over decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds three primary activities: designing the
PSID questionnaire content to facilitate the investigation of emerging
scientific and policy questions in response to new events and new theories,
collecting two new waves of data from the several thousand PSID families through
computer-assisted telephone interviews, and methodological improvements in data
processing and distribution that will make the data available quickly and easily
to researchers around the globe through the PSID website. Collecting these
additional waves of data from the PSID families contributes to scientific
understanding of the dynamics of economic and social behavior. The extended time
series of data supports new and systematic investigation of a myriad of
questions in the full range of scientific disciplines that study how humans grow
and change over the life cycle. This includes the study of economic outcomes
(such as the changes that occur across business cycles such as the Great
Recession), of the intergenerational transmission of wealth and income, and the
study of how income and health in adulthood and old age depend on early-life
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent measures over time are important
for accurately estimating the dynamics of these behaviors. Gathering data from
the same families over a long time period improves the precision of the
measurement as multiple measures are collected within the same families as well
as from multiple families over a period of decades. In addition, because the
PSID now tracks up to four generations of a family, the data will allow
scientists to study several rounds of intergenerational changes. The core survey
content will remain stable to maintain comparability with earlier waves. The PIs
will carry out numerous innovations and enhancements, including new content on
the measurement of health and human capital; linkages to valuable administrative
data; and implementing a web/mail survey to study a new content area and
experiment with new interviewing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PSID creates
broader impacts in many ways. It is used by an interdisciplinary community and
is increasingly important in health research. The data archive is used to inform
public policy; at least nine federal agencies use PSID data. The PSID is also an
important resource for teaching and learning. The data are free and publicly
available, and are widely used by graduate and undergraduate students. The award
funds a number of web-based outreach activities that will make the PSID an even
more valuable tool for teaching and learning.