* 1157416
* Regulation of Genetic Recombination in Mammals
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Alan Waldman, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 04/30/2018
* USD 875,000.00

Intellectual Merit. The overall goal of this project is to increase
understanding of the mechanisms that govern genetic recombination in mammalian
chromosomes. The term "genetic recombination" refers to a process in which
segments of DNA are exchanged between two chromosomal regions. Recombination
plays an important role in the evolution of genomes, contributes to genetic
diversity, and provides a means for repair of DNA damage that occurs on a daily
basis. Although recombination is generally beneficial, it may be viewed as a
double-edged sword. While recombination helps to maintain the integrity of
chromosomes, it is critical that mechanisms exist to assure that exchanges are
allowed to occur only between appropriate chromosomal regions so that
potentially deleterious genetic rearrangements are avoided. For the most part,
recombination must be restricted to DNA segments that share a high degree of
identity in order for deleterious exchanges to be precluded, but little is known
about how cells regulate recombination. In this research project, a novel set of
engineered DNA molecules will be inserted into chromosomes in mouse cells, and
these molecules will allow recombination events to be monitored. The various DNA
molecules are designed to test the cell's ability to carry out recombination
between DNA segments sharing different degrees of identity. These studies will
illuminate the rules normally employed to decide which DNA segments can engage
in recombination, and which DNA segments are excluded from such exchanges. Also
to be investigated is the question of whether certain forms of DNA damage might
alter the rules of recombination. The roles played by certain proteins in the
regulation of recombination will also be explored. This project will provide a
clearer picture of how recombination can both shape and maintain the mammalian
genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will make substantive
contributions to general science education and practical scientific training.
The research will be conducted in a laboratory that is located in a large
undergraduate Department of Biological Sciences that is responsible for
educating more than 1600 undergraduate majors. The laboratory in which this work
will be done has a history of offering research experiences for undergraduates
and this project will continue this history. It is noteworthy that the
Department of Biological Sciences at the University of South Carolina has a very
diverse student body, and so this project will afford an important opportunity
for providing research experiences for traditionally underrepresented groups. In
the past, this project's Principal Investigator (PI) has served as mentor to
African American and women undergraduates, and these research experiences have
encouraged several individuals to choose careers in science. The PI has also
served as mentor to numerous masters and doctoral degree students from the U.S.
and abroad and this research project will continue this important training of
new scientists. Several Historically Black Colleges and Universities are within
proximity to the University of South Carolina. The PI will visit these
institutions to present scientific seminars reporting the results of the funded
work and will use such engagements to talk with students about graduate school
opportunities and the possibility of pursuing a career in science. The PI will
also visit with students in grades K-12 to discuss career opportunities in
science, research results, and general issues related to science. In addition to
potentially encouraging careers in science, these latter outreach activities may
serve to enhance the scientific literacy of the public.