* 1157058
* REU Site for Interdisciplinary Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Boyd Goodson, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 04/30/2016
* USD 315,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will focus on the training
of 14 undergraduate students [(12 x NSF) + (2 x SIUC)] for a 10-week period each
summer in the area of materials research, broadly defined. An interdisciplinary
team includes faculty mentors in Chemistry, Physics, and Engineering, as well as
members of relevant SIUC research centers (e.g. Materials Technology Center and
the Center for Advanced Friction Studies). Inclusion of mentors from various
disciplines and established multidisciplinary centers will enable the REU
students to develop skills needed to excel in both academic and industrial
research environments, where interdisciplinary teams are standard and
researchers must communicate effectively across disciplines. A detailed
assessment plan is utilized to gauge the performance of our program in meeting
its defined goals (which include increasing the numbers of US students pursuing
careers in STEM fields, particularly from underrepresented groups). The research
projects involving the REU student participants are highly interdisciplinary and
emphasize materials chemistry and nanotechnology, allowing students to be
exposed to projects at the forefront of science and engineering. Such projects
include: studies related to synthesis of advanced functional nanomaterials
(Carbon nanotubes, graphene, metal oxide nanowires, inorganic heterostructures,
polymer thin films/brushes, nanocomposites etc.); materials characterization
(for example via electron microscopies, solid- and solution-state nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, mass spectrometry (e.g. MALDI MS), low-
temperature electronic and magnetic transport measurements, UV/Vis/IR/Raman
spectroscopies, etc.); theoretical / computational studies (wherein students
will learn how to study materials via density functional theory (DFT)
calculations, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, etc.); and materials
applications related to energy storage, photovoltaics, and tribology (among
others). Students will also have opportunities to network with other scientists
and engineers through various social activities, and will present their work at
a summer research colloquium. This REU Site is made possible through generous
support from the Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research of
the National Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will focus on the training of 14
undergraduate students per summer in the area of materials research, broadly
defined. Inclusion of mentors from various disciplines and established on-campus
multidisciplinary centers will enable the REU students to develop skills needed
to excel in both academic and industrial research environments, where
interdisciplinary teams are standard and researchers must communicate
effectively across disciplines. Students will also be required to think about
the application of their research to new technologies and to consider issues
related to the manufacturing of new devices. This REU site has six primary
goals: 1) to create a positive image of science and engineering as a career
choice. Students will leave the program with a greater sense of the trials,
tribulations, and rewards that await them; 2) to instill a sense of confidence
in the art of discussing and practicing science; 3) to improve their oral and
written communication skills; 4) to teach basic research tools, including
literature searches and the operation of modern instrumentation; 5) to foster a
collaborative teamwork approach to research; and 6) to increase the number of
domestic students, especially those from underrepresented groups, who choose to
further their careers in science and engineering. A detailed assessment plan is
utilized to evaluate the program's success in meeting these goals. Students will
also learn to network with other scientists and engineers through various social
activities. The research proposed here is highly interdisciplinary and
emphasizes materials chemistry and nanotechnology. More generally, research
projects within the program are excellent training grounds for chemists,
physicists, and engineers working in materials and related fields. SIUC, the
host institution of this REU Site, is committed to involving underrepresented
groups and has a long history of success at building diversity on campus. In
particular, this program's previous REU participants included significant
numbers of underrepresented groups (~30%; ~40% counting women from physics and
engineering) and women (&gt;47%). Moreover, SIUC is the only research-intensive
university in the Southern Illinois region, which comprises a large geographical
area that is socio-economically disadvantaged. Thus, this Program serves a large
number of economically disadvantaged and first-generation college students. This
REU Site is made possible through generous support from the Office of Special
Programs, Division of Materials Research of the National Science Foundation.