* 1157852
* I-Corps:  Establishing an innovation ecosystem for technology transition of MEMS-based drug infusion pumps
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The pump proposed in this I-Corps effort addresses critical unmet needs by
providing a miniaturized mouse-compatible form factor, wireless power and remote
control features, and fully-customizable dosing capability for chronic drug
administration studies. The team addresses the immediate need from academia and
industry for pumps in both laboratory animal research for scientific discovery
and preclinical drug studies. Applying the pump technology at the earliest stage
of preclinical validation may improve the development of new drugs and enable
new treatment paradigms. The scalability of the technology also has the
potential to extends the addressable market beyond laboratory animal research to
human patient care, The long-term goal is to leverage this technology in
combination with novel therapeutics that cannot be delivered by other means to
provide patient-specific dosing profiles in humans in a manner that maximizes
therapeutic benefit while minimizing side effects. This I-Corps effort will
result in a plan to transition the proposed innovation to the marketplace,
fabrication of prototypes, and technology
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to transition innovative
technology, a miniature implantable infusion pump, for drug development and
treatment. The pump specifically addresses limitations of current technologies
and offers accurate and customizable dosing in a compact form factor. The
technology incorporates next generation capability through the integration of
wireless communication and information technology. These advanced delivery
systems and novel therapeutics present a fertile opportunity for advancing not
only research but technology commercialization and health care outcomes.