* 1157538
* State Legitimacy in West Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,11/30/2014
* Niklas Hultin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2014
* USD 112,127.00

Dr. Niklas Hultin, University of Virginia, in collaboration with the Isaac
Newton Trust at the University of Cambridge (United Kingdom), will undertake
research on the changing authority and legitimacy of the modern state through
the lens of small arms use, trade, and regulation in West Africa. Small arms
trade is an appropriate focus for such an investigation because attempts to
control the proliferation of small arms reveal the nature and limits of state
institutions. To stop proliferation, support sustainable development, maintain
good governance, and control transnational terrorist activity, states must have
robust and effective state institutions. But previous research has found that
some states lack the necessary legitimacy and have outsourced many functions to
non-governmental institutions. The researcher will investigate the relationship
between state legitimacy and its ability to control illegal trade in small
arms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in the Gambia.
Situated in a region which, over the last several decades, has seen several
civil conflicts and a rise in transnational crime, the Gambia offers a salient
case for the examination of the capabilities of African governments in the small
arms arena. The researcher will collect data on how people differently
positioned in relation to government and weaponry view the legitimacy of
government activities, the arms themselves, and the various efforts to take back
control. He will employ a mix of social science data collection methods
including interviews, focus groups, research in archives, and participant
observation. His information sources will include multiple stakeholders:
hunters, law enforcement officials, medical professionals, arms dealers,
blacksmiths (who traditionally made guns), black marketers, civil servants,
journalists, anti-arms activists, and members of the law profession. He also
will attend gun-destruction ceremonies, trials, national legislative debates,
hunting festivals, a pan-African human rights commission, and gun related
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute to theorizing the
modern state. In addition, findings will allow for a broad-based assessment of
current small arms control initiatives in Africa and, in doing so, will provide
for greater understanding of the political and legal solutions to an emerging
security issue for West Africa and elsewhere. The project also includes a
mentoring and training component for Gambian university students.