* 1157737
* Workshop on water quality and other environmental impacts from mining in Ecuador and neighboring countries
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* William Johnson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/2013
* USD 31,350.00

This award supports a workshop to be held in Ecuador which will focus on
investigating and developing capacity to mitigate impacts of mining on water
quality in Ecuador. Metallic mining (predominantly for gold) is a major emerging
development opportunity for Ecuador, and while there are significant mining
activities and impacts ongoing, the proposed mining concessions dwarf those that
presently operate. &lt;br/&gt; The workshop will address the following
overarching science question: what scientific approach is needed to determine
the fate and transport mechanisms that dominate for mercury, lead, and arsenic
in mining-impacted Ecuadorian rivers, groundwater, agricultural systems,
ecosystems, and human populations? Under this overarching question are many
smaller questions, such as: What approach is needed to understand the processes
that prevent methylation of mercury in the main sections of mining-impacted
rivers? What approach is needed to understand how far mining-derived trace
elements propagate from rivers into groundwater, agriculture, the ecosystem, and
human populations? What approach should be taken to develop a graphical
interface-based relational database to serve scientists and officials in the
region? &lt;br/&gt; The workshop will also address the question: What
combination of research, coordination, and training is optimal for a robust
institution to address the above science needs? Under this overarching capacity-
building question lie many related questions such as: What is the correct
balance of government and academic responsibilities? What is the proper balance
of providing scientific information to the population (including operators,
regulators and the general public) versus education and social intervention to
protect the environment? &lt;br/&gt; The workshop will bring together US
scientists and government experts with scientists and government officials from
Ecuador as well as Peru and Colombia, which will add expertise from the entire
affected region. The broader impacts of this work will be in a new understanding
of priority research questions including a range of disciplines, coordination of
international scientific efforts, and input for the Ecuadorian government in
terms of how to best coordinate the environmental research and monitoring. A
number of US graduate and undergraduate students will attend the meeting and be
involved in future collaborations.