* 1157375
* Developments in the understanding of processes in the P cycle: new concepts from the use of isotopic tracers
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2013
* USD 41,000.00

This is a request to support a workshop that will promote international
scientific collaboration on phosphorus (P) cycling for earth, ocean and
agricultural scientist as well as biologists, limnologists, archeologists and
climate scientists. Phosphorus (P) is an essential nutrient for all living
organisms; but while P resources are dwindling and in many environments, such as
the tropics, P limits agricultural production, excessive P loading can cause
eutrophication, reduce water quality and ecosystem alteration.

The workshop will be held in June of 2012 in the Centro Stefano Franscini (CSF),
Monte Verità, Switzerland, and will be co-funded by Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology in Zürich (ETH Zurich). The workshop will be organized by Drs. S.
Bernasconi, E. Frossard, and F. Tamburini (all form ETH Zürich) in collaboration
with Dr. Adina Paytan (UCSC). The Swiss organizers will arrange for on site
logistics and all of the organizers will share equal responsibilities in
coordinating the scientific program. The meeting will focus on: (a) the current
understanding of the P cycle and defining knowledge gaps, (b) introduction of
new methodologies and technologies (with focus on stable isotopes) that may fill
the gaps, and (c) fostering international collaborations that will use new tools
to advance our knowledge on P in our environment. Participants will include
researchers from universities and government research institutes, post docs, and
students from many countries. The activity will bring together a diverse
community of university professors, research scientists, post doctoral fellows
and graduate students from all around the world including the United States,
Europe, the Middle East and additional countries. Outcomes from the workshop
will lead to new insights regarding application of innovative methodologies to
the study of P in our environment and the impact of human activity on the P
cycle.

Support under this travel grant is targeted to young U.S. scientists, enabling
them to make important contacts in the international scientific community, and
contributing to the training of the next generation of environmental scientists.
Conclusions and outcomes from this workshop will be disseminated broadly in a
proceedings document and likely culminated in publication of manuscripts in a
special issue, dedicated sessions in international meetings and through relevant
web portals.