* 1157300
* CAREER: Polar Ordering in Low-Dimensional Perovskites and Its Control via Colloidal Processing
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Gabriel Caruntu, University of New Orleans
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2014
* USD 600,000.00

Gabriel Caruntu is supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry (MSN) and EPSCoR programs in a CAREER award investigating the
survival of ferroelectricity and geometrical ordering of the polarization at
sub-micrometer length scales. These still remain elusive despite the tremendous
increase in the technological importance of ferroelectric ceramics in the past
decades. This CAREER project is aimed at developing a robust predictive
methodology of polar ordering in nanoscale perovskites by correlating the
intimate relationship between their structural, vibrational, electronic and
other macroscopic properties. To this end, Prof. Caruntu designed a
comprehensive experimental framework to investigate the complex interrelations
between the atomic level distortions, phase transitions, evolution of
microstructures, polarization reversal and switching mechanisms using aggregate-
free monodisperse perovskite nanocrystals chosen as model systems. The ultimate
goal is to predict the extent to which the polar ordering can be induced and
manipulated at nanometer scales by finely tuning the composition, surface
structure, lateral dimensions and spatial ordering of tri-dimensionally confined
perovskites. The knowledge obtained from this work will conceptually broaden the
field of nanoscale ferroelectrics, thereby providing new insights into size
effects and surface curvature on the polar ordering in these materials. This can
potentially result in the improvement of the actual design technologies in smart
perovskite materials with programmable ferroelectric, dielectric and
piezoelectric properties. Also, this is critical for understanding how the polar
distortion and the surface structure influence the spontaneous polarization and
the way the atomic dipoles are organized in ferroelectric perovskite quantum
dots. Success in this research is therefore expected to extend this methodology
to other metal oxide systems and inspire the implementation of these
nanostructures in energy harvesting, water splitting and other energy and/or
environmental-related technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal and
educational impacts of this project are strong, taking into account the
technological importance of perovskite-based materials. The experimental
methodology established in the group will lay a solid foundation for the
development of ferroelectric-based functional nanomaterials with controlled
shape/morphology and predictable properties. The research is by nature inter-
disciplinary, requiring expertise from materials and computational chemistry,
device design, vibrational spectroscopy, electron holography, scanning probe
microscopy and colloid and surface science. Besides these fields, the project's
outcomes will have a significant impact on inter-related disciplines such as
energy conversion, piezoelectricity and nanomaterials design. The educational
component of this project is strong and varied. The integration of research and
educational components will generate broad outreach and educational activities
aimed at inspiring young students to consider education and careers in
chemistry, materials sciences and nanotechnology, introducing high school
students, K-12 teachers, undergraduate and graduate students to the
interdisciplinary field of ferroelectrics and broadening the participation of
underrepresented minorities. Students will be trained in a combination of
nanomaterials synthesis, physical characterization, data analysis and
measurement of the physical proprieties of perovskite nanostructures. The work
will also lead to the development of new courses and synergistic undergraduate
and high school classroom modules that demonstrate the broad possibilities of
perovskite nanomaterials for integration into different technological
applications. The educational objective of this project is to train
undergraduate and graduate students for future jobs in materials science, both
through mentoring students from freshman to graduate level in research and by
integrating the research into undergraduate and graduate level courses.