* 1157819
* RUI: Analysis of Epigenetic Modifications Regulating Genomic Imprinting in Mouse
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Tamara Davis, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2015
* USD 283,392.00

Intellectual merit: The majority of genes in mammals are expressed from copies
inherited from both the mother and the father, but a small number of genes are
only expressed from one of the two copies - these are called imprinted genes.
The two parental copies of imprinted genes must be distinguished from each other
via an imprinting mark in order to properly control their expression. For some
genes, the imprinting mark has been shown to consist of modifications to the DNA
and/or to the proteins DNA wraps around in the cell; such modifications are
called epigenetic because they affect DNA and chromatin structure but not DNA
sequence. This research aims to investigate the acquisition of epigenetic
modifications during mammalian development in order to better understand how
chromosome structure influences the expression of imprinted genes. One way of
addressing this question is by investigating the acquisition of DNA methylation
at a specific imprinted gene at different stages of mouse embryonic development.
The data obtained will then be compared to the pattern of DNA methylation
acquisition at an adjacent gene in order to test the hypothesis that
modifications to chromatin structure are coordinately controlled across
neighboring regions of the genome. In addition, this research will examine the
distribution of modified histone proteins at the imprinted Rasgrf1 gene. Rasgrf1
is expressed solely from the paternal copy in some tissues, but is expressed
from both copies in other tissues. Because DNA methylation is associated only
with the paternal copy of Rasgrf1, additional epigenetic factors must be
responsible for regulating tissue-specific imprinting of this gene. Overall,
this research will lend insight into the mechanisms governing the establishment
and maintenance of chromatin structure critical for imprinted gene
expression.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This work will be conducted at Bryn Mawr
College, an all-female undergraduate institution with an outstanding record of
training young women scientists. Undergraduate students will be the primary
researchers involved and will learn to conduct and critically evaluate
scientific research under the direct supervision and mentorship of the PI during
both the summer and the academic year. Students involved in this project will
conduct cutting-edge research in the emerging fields of epigenetics and genomic
imprinting, leading to an enhanced educational environment through the use of
current methodologies to advance scientific exploration. Students conducting
research in the lab will attend weekly lab meetings, present their research to
the College community annually, and disseminate their data to the broader
scientific community through publication in peer-reviewed journals and
presentations at both international scientific conferences and undergraduate
research symposia. All of these research-related activities will prepare
students for further education or careers in the biological sciences.