* 1157960
* The Hopkins Microbiology Course
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2019
* Alfred Spormann, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Intellectual Merit. The Hopkins Microbiology Course (http://hmc.stanford.edu) is
an intensive, 4-week course, targeting microbiology students, who seek to obtain
an integrated view of microbial life. The course also attracts non-
microbiologists, such as physicists or engineers who want to understand
microbial biology in order to begin molecular and population level studies. As a
"big picture" course, the Hopkins Microbiology Course requires students to have
already acquired a significant background in microbiology. While details are
important and stressed abundantly as required, the emphasis is on providing the
intellectual framework to weave together multiple disciplines into an integrated
perspective. This integration is further intensified by providing students with
an introduction and hands-on use of biocomputational tools and methods to
exploit large biological data sets in order to obtain new biological
understandings. Such a broad view is important for students entering not only
the academic environment, but also professional fields that involve microbes
(chemical, pharmaceutical, or environmental and water industry).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This advanced level summer course seeks
to provide students with an integrated conceptual framework and experimental
tools necessary to understand and study how the interplay of physiology,
ecology, evolution, and population genetics causes and maintains diversity of
microbes in diverse environments. The course emphasizes a critical, cross-
disciplinary integration and application of the knowledge gained and
experimental skills learned.