* 1157691
* Education Production and Peer Networks Among Out-of-School Children in India
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Leigh Linden, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2014
* USD 129,292.00

PROJECT SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes investigatomg the education production
function in the context of an informal&lt;br/&gt;community based model of
instruction targeted at out-of-school children in India. Using
the&lt;br/&gt;planned expansion of the program, the PI will conduct a three part
randomization that will&lt;br/&gt;allow us to distinguish the effects of
student, teacher, classmate, and non-class peers on
student&lt;br/&gt;achievement while also generally evaluating the effectiveness
of community based class model.&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation design comprises three
randomizations. First, from one hundred communities we&lt;br/&gt;will randomly
choose sixty-six in which to provide the intervention. In the
treatment&lt;br/&gt;communities, the PI will randomly choose from the out-of-
school children who indicate an interest&lt;br/&gt;in the program a subset to
receive the treatment. To generate variation in the coverage
of&lt;br/&gt;students peer networks, the PI will also varying the fraction of
out of school children that will be treated in&lt;br/&gt;these communities.
Finally, the PI will randomly assign students to classes and teachers to
classes&lt;br/&gt;to allow measurement of the effects of teacher and classmate
characteristics. The PI will track&lt;br/&gt;interested children in 100
communities (6,000 children) for two years. Student performance
will&lt;br/&gt;be measured through tests, attendance rates, and subsequent
enrollment rates.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed
Activity&lt;br/&gt;The study will expand the understanding of the education
production function in three ways.&lt;br/&gt;First, the PI will contribute to
the growing literature that employs randomized evaluations to estimate
the&lt;br/&gt;causal effects of educational interventions in the context of
developing countries. The PI's estimates&lt;br/&gt;taken in combination with the
existing literature will expand understanding of how
individual&lt;br/&gt;institutional structures shape students experiences. For
example, comparing the change in&lt;br/&gt;student performance due untrained
teachers through the Bridge Course program to the change in&lt;br/&gt;student
performance due to similar teachers operating in conjunction with normal school
teachers&lt;br/&gt;(Banerjee, Cole, Duflo and Linden, 2005) allows improved
understanding of the relative effectiveness of&lt;br/&gt;such teachers operating
in different environments and with different populations of
students.&lt;br/&gt;To complement these global estimates, the PI also seeks to
conduct micro-level analyses in which the PI&lt;br/&gt;estimates more
fundamental relationships underlying the education production function.
Drawing&lt;br/&gt;on the classic theoretical specifications of the education
production function and the newer&lt;br/&gt;models of peer effects, the PI
directly estimates the effects of teacher, classmate, and non-class
peer&lt;br/&gt;characteristics on student learning. Finally, the PI investigates
a richer set of characteristics than&lt;br/&gt;have been previously investigated
in the developing context. For example, the PI investigates
the&lt;br/&gt;influence of different types of peers by testing the effects of
peers that have different&lt;br/&gt;relationships to a child by surveying
described levels of closeness, shared activities, etc.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact
of the Proposed Activity&lt;br/&gt;The intervention the PI proposes to evaluate
is extremely cheap (about $1.50 per student per month),&lt;br/&gt;and operates
completely outside of traditional administrative boundaries (schools,
religious&lt;br/&gt;institutions, etc.). If effective, it could provide a viable
mechanism for educating the over 100&lt;br/&gt;million primary-aged children in
the developing world who are currently out of school. In&lt;br/&gt;addition, the
entire data set resulting from the proposed study will be made available to
other&lt;br/&gt;researchers once the PI has finished working with the data.