* 1157688
* Molecular Basis of Mediator Interactions With RNA polymerase II Transcription Machinery
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Yuichiro Takagi, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 930,000.00

Intellectual Merit: RNA polymerase II (Pol II) reads genetic information by
synthesizing messenger RNA from DNA in the process termed transcription.
Mediator is a large multi-protein complex that regulates most, if not all, gene
transcription by Pol II. It functions as a co-activator by conveying signals
from DNA regulatory sequences to Pol II and a set of general transcription
factors (GTFs) that assemble at the promoter to form a pre-initiation complex
(PIC) for transcription initiation. Mediator is evolutionarily conserved in all
eukaryotes. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mediator is composed of 21
subunits, with a total mass of over 1 megaDalton, organized into three three
distinct modules, termed Head, Middle/Arm and Tail. Since Mediator's function in
PIC assembly is proposed to involve direct interactions with Pol II and GTFs,
structural information of functional surfaces within Mediator that interact with
GTFs and Pol II is required to understand the mechanisms of Mediator functions.
However, the large size and complexity of Mediator has greatly impeded
structural studies of these questions. This fundamental bottleneck has been
overcome recently by determining a crystal structure of the Mediator Head module
at 4.3A resolution. This Mediator module comprises 7 subunits with a molecular
mass of 223 kDa and is essential for Mediator function. The Head structure
revealed a number of structural features that may be responsible for recruitment
and coordination of the PIC. These observations led to the hypothesis that
Mediator provides functional surfaces with which transcription factors and Pol
II interact to bring about transcriptional regulation. To test this hypothesis,
this project will determine functional surfaces by taking a structure-guided
mutagenesis approach to improve the resolution of the current structure.
Structural and functional studies will be combined to determine how the Head
module of Mediator interacts with a module of Pol II. Together, the results will
provide a picture of how Mediator spatially coordinates different components of
the transcription machinery to facilitate a sequence of event leading to
transcription initiation. Such structural and functional insights will greatly
transform understanding of gene expression regulation by
Mediator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will provide
research training opportunities for Indiana University graduate students and for
undergraduate students from Indiana University, Purdue University at
Indianapolis through the Life-Health Science Internship program. Research
training opportunities will also be available for summer students through the
STEM program for undergraduate minority students and the Indy SEED project for
underprivileged high school students. Students will learn and implement cutting-
edge technologies, including the latest molecular cloning and protein complex
engineering technologies, X-ray crystallography, bioinformatics, biochemical
assays, and yeast genetics.