* 1157751
* Ligand-Macromolecule Recognition: A Collaboration in Research and Education Between Vanderbilt and Leipzig Universities.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Jens Meiler, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2017
* USD 69,928.00

Vanderbilt and Leipzig Universities in the area of Chemical Biology will
establish a sustainable collaboration in education and research to study the
fundamentals of ligand-macromolecule recognition by combining chemical tool
compounds with biophysical techniques. The similar research foci of both
institutions combined with complementary technologies will provide students and
post-doctoral fellows with a comprehensive education. Jens Meiler of Vanderbilt
University (VU) and Annette Beck-Sickinger of Leipzig University (LU) spearhead
this initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Although ligand-
macromolecule recognition is at the core of biological&lt;br/&gt;processes, it
is still poorly understood. LU offers basic science expertise with unique tool
compounds&lt;br/&gt;such as carbaborane analogues, non-natural amino acid
peptides, leading technology for expression of labeled human membrane proteins
and solid-state NMR studies of such membrane proteins. This is complemented by
VU?s translational science expertise in liquid-state NMR and EPR studies, a
high-throughput screening facility to identify novel tool compounds, and
computational modeling technologies unique for ligandmacromolecule recognition.
The collaboration is further strengthened through&lt;br/&gt;the joint
development of novel biochemical assays. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
project will support a) planning visits, and b) exchange of students
and&lt;br/&gt;post-doctoral fellows on all levels. Four planning visits of Jens
Meiler and five other VU faculty to LU in&lt;br/&gt;Leipzig, Germany will occur
on an annual basis. During their stay the VU researchers will present at
scientific symposia, participate in roundtable discussions, and meet with
potential collaborators one-on-one. Technology exchange will
be&lt;br/&gt;fostered through tutorials offered by the faculty. The faculty will
also develop and implement mentorship&lt;br/&gt;plans for student exchanges. At
least six research visits per year will involve the exchange and co-
mentoring&lt;br/&gt;of students or post-doctoral fellows from VU. Participating
in an international program, teaching&lt;br/&gt;and learning new ideas,
publication of a scientific manuscript, and attending research seminars
are&lt;br/&gt;collectively experiences that are invaluable for a young
scientist. Their participation in international&lt;br/&gt;exchange will broaden
their perspectives, thus making them more competitive in their field. The
students&lt;br/&gt;will share ideas and techniques with their collaborators, and
similarly instruct their home laboratory with&lt;br/&gt;the knowledge gained at
LU. Additionally, their experiences will enhance applications to the
?International&lt;br/&gt;Research Fellowship Program? and ?Graduate Research
Fellowship Program?. Exchange visits are&lt;br/&gt;complemented by a
comprehensive set of off-site tools such as joint website
(www.leipzig.vanderbilt.edu),&lt;br/&gt;project wiki pages to exchange data and
tutorials, and video conferences. The proposal further
involves&lt;br/&gt;exchange of undergraduate students with focus on groups
underrepresented in science leveraging the&lt;br/&gt;PI?s CAREER award
undergraduate open house. The collaboration is mutually beneficial as it
provides&lt;br/&gt;access to complementary knowledge and technologies.
Researchers will travel in both directions: U.S.&lt;br/&gt;researchers supported
through the present proposal, German researchers through grant support from
the&lt;br/&gt;German Academic Exchange Service and the German Research
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;