* 1157906
* Analysis of a ribosome-binding 3' translational enhancer in a plus-strand RNA virus
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Anne Simon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2015
* USD 605,445.00

Intellectual Merit. All organisms, from viruses to man, must synthesize proteins
from their genomes by the process of protein synthesis (translation). Plant
viruses are especially intriguing, as they must compete with their host cells
for limited translation factors without killing the cell. Research on plant
viruses has revealed that the end of the RNA genome most distal to where
translation begins (the 3' end) is a critical region for attracting components
of translation to the genome, leading to substantially enhanced translation. The
3' region of one virus with an RNA genome, Pea enation mosaic virus, was
recently found to contain a translational enhancer that attracts ribosomes, the
central protein synthesizing machines, and may function by helping ribosomes
recycle following genome translation. In addition, this translational enhancer
also participates in a long-distance joining with another element near the other
end (the 5' end) of the virus. This project will examine how this translational
enhancer interacts with ribosomes and whether ribosomes can "bridge" the ends of
the viral genome by interacting simultaneously with both 3' and 5' RNA elements.
Since viral genomes cannot be replicated and translated at the same time, this
research will also investigate how the virus switches between these incompatible
activities. Finally, the research will explore the possibility that the host
plant's genome contains similar ribosome-binding elements that enhance
translation of host RNAs. Developing new paradigms for how the 3' region
participates in translation will prompt other investigators to correctly examine
their genes or viruses for 3' translational enhancers, which will be
transformative in the translation field. By understanding how these
translational enhancers function, it should be possible to include them when
designing new ways to produce higher levels of products in plants for
improvement of agricultural traits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This
research will be conducted by graduate and postdoctoral researchers, who will
learn state-of-the art techniques and model-building to enhance their
development as scientists. Undergraduate researchers will also participate in
all aspects of this project, learning about the excitement of scientific
discoveries. Enthusiasm for research-based discovery will continue to be
conveyed weekly to Advanced Placement high school students and teachers at DuVal
High School (98% minority) in Prince George's County, Maryland, with several
students already benefiting by being accepted at top colleges/universities and
majoring in STEM subjects. The principal investigator will also continue to
effectively represent science and scientists to the public, most recently as a
consultant for a Discovery TV Series and participation in activities such as the
Saturday morning science program at the University of Toledo. Specific examples
from this research will also be used to excite and enhance the education
experience of students in their first year as science majors at the University
of Maryland through an introductory biology course taught by the principal
investigator.