* 1157332
* RUI: Structural Biology and Mechanism of Intersubunit (Allosteric) Communication in beta-Carbonic Anhydrase
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Roger Rowlett, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 05/31/2016
* USD 406,473.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Beta carbonic anhydrases (beta-CAs) are
bicarbonate-utilizing enzymes that are essential for optimal growth in many
bacteria and yeast. Many bacterial beta-CAs have a unique non-catalytic
bicarbonate binding site that is thought to regulate the enzyme via a
conformational change that requires coordinated communication between individual
protein chains in a multi-chain protein complex. The molecular basis of such
inter-chain (allosteric) communication is not well-understood for this and many
other allosteric enzymes, despite the fact that allosteric enzymes are both
common and important in the regulation of metabolism in all organisms. This
research project will use methods of molecular biology (site-directed
mutagenesis), biophysical chemistry (enzyme kinetics and visible spectroscopy)
and structural biology (X-ray diffraction) to probe the molecular details of
intersubunit communication in beta-CA and critically test hypotheses of
potential mechanisms of action. Knowledge of the molecular mechanism of
intersubunit communication in beta-CA will not only provide insight into this
particular (and suggest possible means of interrupting its proper function in
host bacteria) but will also provide fundamental knowledge for application to
mechanisms of intersubunit communication for allosteric enzymes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;There are several broader
impacts of the research project, one of which is the involvement of
undergraduate students in research projects that provide training in advanced,
current praxis in protein chemistry and structural biology. A high percentage of
these students, trained in the PI's lab, enter into advanced degree programs in
the physical and life sciences, and ultimately join the domestic scientific work
force. In addition, a post-doctoral fellow with an interest in instruction in
undergraduate research and education will be trained in biophysical chemistry
and structural biology. Written laboratory guides appropriate for involving
undergraduates or other novice investigators in modern methodologies of protein
engineering and X-ray crystallography will be updated and freely disseminated to
the scientific community using a publicly accessible wiki. Finally, the
acquisition of critical laboratory automation will significantly enhance the
efficiency and productivity of the biophysical chemistry research infrastructure
at Colgate University.