* 1157121
* Neural mechanisms underlying categorical perception in the processing of faces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ming Meng, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 08/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Face perception is crucial for normal social interactions, and human observers
excel at rapidly and reliably categorizing visual patterns as faces or non-
faces. Even subtle impairment in this ability can have devastating consequences,
as evidenced by autism and other developmental disorders. Although the neural
mechanisms underlying face perception have been a major focus of primate
electrophysiology and brain-imaging research, the computational mechanisms
underlying how the brain processes faces are still far from clear. With support
from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Ming Meng of Dartmouth College is
addressing this question by synthesizing techniques drawn from psychophysics,
human brain imaging, statistical data mining, and computer vision. First of all,
this project is measuring brain activation in response to image sets that have
been compiled by using computer vision. These images vary in their image-level
facial similarity, ranging from non-faces to genuine faces. Computer vision
systems may falsely categorize many of the face-like non-faces as faces. By
contrast, categorical perception enables human observers to make unambiguous
perceptual judgments on whether these images are faces or non-faces. Second, to
understand the face processing neural network, it is more important to
understand causal relationships among several brain regions than average
response activation of each separate brain region. This project is applying
state-of-the-art data mining techniques to provide the basis for dynamic causal
modeling of the direct and indirect relationships among various factors, such
as, low-level visual features, face semblance and the face/non-face
categorization, linking neural processing stages from primary visual analysis to
perceptual decision. Finally, to determine bottom-up versus top-down modulation
on categorical face perception, sophisticated psychophysical paradigms are being
used to investigate potential interactions between visual awareness and the
neural correlates of categorical facial analysis. Through this approach,
stimulus-driven and feed-forward models of face processing that are assumed to
be independent of visual awareness can be compared to models that involve
cognitive feedback modulations and visual awareness.

The results of this project are expected to lead to a better understanding of
how the human brain processes visual information in the context of face
perception, a domain that provides one of the most compelling examples of
sensory organization. Understanding the process of how the human visual system
analyzes faces may ultimately lead to the successful design of artificial face
recognition systems. Moreover, continuous image-level facial similarity analysis
versus binary categorical judgment in face perception underlies the crucial
social ability to rapidly recognize a face. Teasing the two analyses apart may
help characterize the neural pathology in the developmental disorders that
involve face perception deficits. Based on the results, a cognitive therapy can
be strategically designed to pinpoint such deficits, and to therefore help
children and adults with these disorders.