* 1157806
* Isomer-Specific Interactions of X-Pro Motifs: Investigating Fundamental Mechanisms of Signaling by Pro-Rich Sequences
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Linda Nicholson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2017
* USD 415,093.00

This project addresses a novel hypothesis regarding how a particular "on/off"
switch inside a cell is regulated. The switch of interest involves a biological
signaling interaction between two specific proteins that connect innate immunity
signaling (a cell's first line of defense) to cell migration (the directed
movement of a cell). This work builds on the experimental observation that IRAK1
(a key signaling protein in innate immunity) adopts two very different and
slowly interconverting structures (cis and trans isomers of a specific Trp-Pro
peptide bond), exactly in the region where it binds to VASP (a protein that
regulates cell migration). VASP has two distinct domains (EVH1 and EVH2). Only
the VASP-EVH1 domain directly binds to IRAK1, and this interaction is selective
for only the trans isomer of IRAK1. Since IRAK1 has nearly equal populations of
cis and trans structures before VASP enters the picture, the initial IRAK1:VASP
binding utilizes only about half of the total IRAK1 that is present. This fast
initial binding step is followed by a slow binding phase, the rate of which
depends on the rate of flipping back and forth of the cis and trans isomers.
This slow rate can be greatly accelerated by an enzyme (cyclophilin A, or CypA)
that catalyzes the flipping process. Hence, CypA effectively catalyzes the
IRAK1-VASP binding interaction by facilitating rapid conversion of cis to trans
to replace the trans that has bound to VASP. The EVH2 domain of VASP self-
associates as a cluster of four (a tetramer); consequently, full-length VASP is
a tetramer that displays four EVH1 domains in close proximity. Interestingly,
recent discoveries suggest that when innate immunity signaling is triggered,
activated IRAK1 is also a tetramer. When placed into the context of a
tetramer:tetramer interaction (the "on" state of the switch), there is far less
IRAK1 tetramer in which all 4 IRAK1 components are in the VASP-binding competent
trans state. In this case, enzyme-catalyzed acceleration of the cis/trans
flipping (isomerization) rate is even more critical for achieving a binary
"on/off" switch, in which the time constants for turning the switch on or off
are short enough to be effective in the fast paced dynamics of the inner
workings of a cell. This project will provide 1) a kinetic and thermodynamic
description of the monomer:monomer IRAK1:VASP interaction, and 2) a quantitative
analysis of the binding enhancement associated with the specific clustering of
IRAK1 and the role of cis-trans isomerization in achieving this enhancement on a
biologically relevant timescale. Together, these results will reveal how a key
biological signaling interaction works to rapidly connect innate immunity
signaling to cell migration. This work synergistically couples to cell
biologists who study the participation of IRAK1 and VASP in biological processes
such as innate immunity and cell migration, and to systems biologists who
mathematically model signaling pathways and who require thermodynamic and
kinetic data for critical steps in such pathways.

The research in this project will be integrated in several ways into the
teaching of a large (70-80 students) graduate level 3-credit course on Protein
Structure, Function and Dynamics (BioMG 6310). As part of this class, a team-
based project is assigned in which students write a proposal to "save the world"
using proteins (with focus on energy and the environment), and projects are
presented at the end of the semester at a public poster session. This activity
has fostered connections with Cornell's Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future
(ACSF), including display of the posters at ACSF to a diverse audience of
visitors, and the appointment of the PI as an ACSF Faculty Fellow. This NSF-
sponsored research will be incorporated into BioMG 6310 lectures to illustrate
fundamental concepts. Outreach to underrepresented groups includes giving lab
tours for The Learning Web (a local youth development agency that serves a
diversity of rural and city children), and bringing excitement for science to
the 7th and 9th Wards of New Orleans during annual rebuilding trips with GEEKS
(Graduates Employing Empathy, Knowledge and Service), a Cornell graduate student
organization that the PI advises. The PI serves as research mentor for
undergraduate (independent study and summer research) and graduate students in
her lab. Students are trained in an interdisciplinary set of techniques that
include NMR, biophysical methods, mathematical modeling, biochemistry, and cell
biology.