* 1157099
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Approach to Challenges posed by Invasive Species
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Janet Rachlow, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2015
* USD 302,694.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site award has been made to the
Center for Research on Invasive Species and Small Populations (CRISSP) at the
University of Idaho. The project will provide training for 10 students for 9
weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. The program focuses on 1) threats posed
by invasive species to natural and agricultural resources; 2) conservation
challenges confronting small or declining populations of native species; and 3)
connections between these two issue areas. Student research takes an
interdisciplinary, team-based approach with faculty mentors representing diverse
disciplines from multiple departments and two colleges. Projects facilitate
development of critical laboratory, field and data analysis skills while
providing opportunity for interaction among students from different disciplines
working under shared research themes. In addition to conducting research,
students will participate in weekly seminars and workshops designed to enhance
understanding of interdisciplinary research, career/graduate school preparation,
critical thinking, natural resource economics, and ethics. Students have access
to the laboratories of faculty mentors as well as many shared facilities such as
the Geospatial Laboratory for Environmental Dynamics, the Idaho Stable Isotopes
Laboratory, and the Laboratory for Ecological, Evolutionary and Conservation
Genetics. Recruitment is through NSF-REU and UI websites, as well as direct
contacts with institutions serving diverse student bodies. Faculty encourage
applications from students from underrepresented groups through close
collaboration with colleagues at Native American colleges and by working
directly with the University Office of Multicultural Affairs, Native American
Center, and Tribal Liaison. Students are selected based on academic record and
potential to successfully complete research in a team-setting. Students'
progress in academic programs, applications for graduate school or other
professional opportunities, and preparation of scientific papers or
presentations is monitored. Facebook is used to facilitate communication among
faculty and REU alumni. Progress towards the project goals is assessed through
metrics such as student degree completion, number of graduate school
applications in STEM fields, as well as use of an REU common assessment tool.
More information is available by visiting
(http://www.cnr.uidaho.edu/crissp/reugrant.htm), or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Janet Rachlow at jrachlow@uidaho.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Jodi Johnson-Maynard at
jmaynard@uidaho.edu).