* 1157569
* Collaborative Research: Effective Management of Smart Grids and Smart Meters for Creating a Sustainable Energy Future
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/18/2011,06/30/2015
* Paat Rusmevichientong, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 147,000.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to design an effective
system for managing smart grids and smart meters for electricity production and
consumption, with the eventual goal of helping creating a sustainable energy
future. The scope of this research plan encompasses the robust management of
smart grids, adaptive usage controls based on real-time information provided by
smart meters, and the development of an effective mechanism for coordinating
supply and demands. Smart grids refer to a new and intelligent network of
electricity production facilities, transmission grids, equipped with automation
software and control systems for delivering and monitoring electricity to meet
the demands. Smart meters are a vital part of the smart grids technology. These
meters are equipped with intelligent sensors that track the real-time
consumption of energy, enabling users to monitor their electrical usage during
peak versus off-peak hours. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithms and systems for
making the smart grids more robust, and are able to withstand shocks within the
systems will be developed. There will also be a focus on developing a policy for
controlling energy consumption in real-time based on the information provided by
the smart meters. If successful, the project will facilitate the realization of
smart grid's potential by developing the necessary optimization methods, control
policies, and data analysis techniques for the management of smart grids and
smart meters. The results of the research will be included in the curriculum of
the Master of Engineering Program in Energy Markets and Risk by the IEOR
Department at UC Berkeley. The research will be translated into teaching modules
that can be used for Master's students in this program. Establishment of close
collaborative relationships with companies in the energy industry and DOE
national labs are planned.