* 1157101
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Environmental Biology at the University of Montana in Collaboration with La Universidad Autonoma de Chihuahua, Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2016
* Ruben Ceballos, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2016
* USD 345,631.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Montana that will provide research training for ten students, for
nine weeks during the summers of 2012- 2014. This REU site, and its
collaboration with the Universidad Autonoma de Chihuahua in Mexico, is supported
by the NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE) and the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO). Our REU program, the Introductory
Multicultural Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (IM-SURE) Program is
administered through the Division of Biological Sciences. IM-SURE is primarily
intended for undergraduate students (including college-bound high school
graduates) nationwide who are interested in environmental biology, but have had
little or no research experience to date. Each student will conduct original
hands-on research under the guidance of a faculty member and her/his research
group. Major areas of research include microbial ecology, plant ecology, and
ecological and evolutionary genetics. Students will be matched with a research
mentor and project based on their interests, skills, and experience. Projects
will be designed to help students develop their research skills and
independence, as well as their knowledge of a specific area of environmental
biology. REU researchers may be placed on the UM campus (or associated field
sites), at UM?s Flathead Lake Biological Station, or, for select students with
some prior experience, at our partner institution in Chihuahua, Mexico (along
with a UM mentor). Students will gain experience in a variety of aspects of
scientific research, such as formulating research questions and hypotheses;
designing experiments; analyzing data; and communicating research results.
Initial orientation, midsummer social activities, and capstone meetings of the
entire group will offer opportunities for IM-SURE students to share their
experience and develop a sense of scientific community. We seek to provide a
collegial and supportive environment for all participants and measure our
success and student satisfaction and accomplishments through the national REU
Assessment Tool (URSSA) and our own brief surveys. Students are tracked to
determine their continued interest in their academic field of study, their
career paths, and the lasting influences of their research experience. IM-SURE
participants are selected based on academic record, personal interest statement,
research experience essay (although prior experience is not required), and two
reference letters. We especially encourage applications from graduating high
school seniors, Native American students and other underrepresented groups in
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). For more information, visit
&lt;http://im-sure.dbs.umt.edu/index.php&gt; or contact the IM-SURE PI (Dr.
William Holben at im-sure@mso.umt.edu), or phone (406) 243-5670.