* 1157944
* Evolutionary analysis of heterotrimeric G-protein function in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Sona Pandey, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 578,344.00

Intellectual Merit: Heterotrimeric G-proteins consisting of Galpha, Gbeta and
Ggamma subunits regulate some of the most important signaling pathways in
eukaryotes. In metazoans, evolutionary diversification has led to the presence
of a large number of G-proteins and associated components that regulate a
multitude of signaling pathways with a high degree of specificity. In contrast,
plants have a very limited number of G-proteins that integrate a plethora of
signaling pathways to modulate overall growth and development. This observation
has led to the hypothesis that the plant G-proteins have evolved differently
from the metazoan G-proteins in accordance with the sedentary lifestyle of
plants. Detailed studies of the structure/function attributes of plant
G-proteins is currently mostly limited to Arabidopsis which restricts the
knowledge of why and when during evolution the plant G-proteins emerged as
modulators of multiple signals. It is also not known if the G-proteins have
evolved to play critical roles in biological processes that are unique to
specific plant lineages. Furthermore, the presence of certain unconventional
G-protein components in plants suggests their role(s) in regulating novel, as
yet unexplored G-proteins signaling mechanisms. The availability of fully
sequenced genomes from a number of plant species at important evolutionary nodes
and the PIs extensive experience working with G-protein signaling using
complementary approaches including biochemical, molecular-genetics and
genome/proteome-scale analyses, puts her in an excellent position to address
some of the key questions related to the plant G-protein signaling. Towards
this, important preliminary data have been generated related to G-proteins
components and their activity from Arabidopsis, rice, soybean, Physcomitrella,
Selaginella, Brachypodium and Aquilegia. This research has been developed with
the overall objective to understand the functional evolution of the G-protein
core components and their interaction in plants, and to infer the conventional
and novel signaling mechanisms and their role in regulating signaling pathways
involved in plant adaptation and yield. To accomplish this objective, following
specific aims will be pursued: Aim 1. Biochemical characterization of the
enzymatically active proteins of the G-protein complex in the context of their
evolutionary diversification Aim 2. Evaluation of the role of G-proteins from
across different taxa in regulating the signaling pathways important in the
context of land plant evolution The material and intellectual resources
generated from this research will be made publicly available through the
Arabidopsis stock center and through our website. The long term benefits of the
research include comprehensive knowledge of the evolution of G-protein
components and signaling mechanisms in plants and their roles in regulating
pathways controlling agronomically important traits.

Broader Impact: This research addresses the fundamental aspects of plant
signaling and evolution. Given the involvement of G-protein in regulating
important agronomic traits such as seed development and physiology, abiotic
stress tolerance and water use efficiency, the knowledge gained from this
research will be useful for engineering important agricultural traits to the
benefit of society. Moreover, the research specifically incorporates training
for high-school students and teachers through the STARS program and
undergraduate students through the REU program. The PI is actively involved in
recruiting, mentoring and training of undergraduate students as a co-director of
the Danforth Center REU program; and graduate students through her participation
in Washington University plant biology recruitment, thesis committees and
teaching. The proposed research offers multidisciplinary training to the post-
docs in various aspects of modern plant biology. The PI is strongly committed to
provide training and mentoring opportunities to post-docs to help them establish
their independent careers. The PI is actively involved in developing scientific
awareness in the local community through multiple volunteering programs offered
at the Center, including participation in the ¡¥Ask a Plant Scientist¡¦ column
and ¡¥Conversations¡¦ series, which offers an interactive session between local
public and scientists.