* 1157105
* REU-RET Site: Willamette Valley Mathematics Research Consortium for Undergraduates and Teachers
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2015
* Colin Starr, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 02/28/2015
* USD 513,069.00

The Willamette Valley Mathematics Research Consortium for Undergraduates and
Teachers is a summer REU-RET program at Willamette University, Linfield College,
Lewis & Clark College, and the University of Portland. Our program consists of
four research teams, one per partner institution, each with four students, one
teacher, and two faculty mentors for an eight-week REU and seven-week RET. Each
team will focus on one of four challenging research projects from a faculty
mentors? area of expertise, such as matroid theory, graph theory, combinatorial
game theory, stochastic modeling, artificial intelligence, tiling theory,
complex algebraic geometry, computational biology, knot theory or digital sensor
networks. Consortium meetings will bring together the four research groups
regularly to speak about their projects, learn about the progress of their
peers, listen to presentations by invited speakers from academia and industry,
and network with other students and faculty. Recruitment for student applicants
is nationwide and includes targeted recruitment from underrepresented groups in
consultation with the Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation. Teacher applicants are recruited regionally in Oregon and
southwest Washington.

The primary goal of the Willamette Valley Mathematics Research Consortium for
Undergraduates and Teachers is to immerse undergraduates and teachers in a
challenging, transformative research experience that will reveal the nature of
mathematics research. Throughout the summer undergraduates and teachers will
develop new content knowledge, research skills, and an increased understanding
of the process of mathematical discovery and research. Within their research
teams and at Consortium meetings, participants will improve their ability to
communicate current mathematical research in an effective and engaging manner.
All participants will develop a greater awareness of career opportunities in
STEM fields. As in previous years, REU research results will be disseminated
through student co-authored publications, through public presentations, and
online. Teachers will create materials to be used in the classroom and
disseminated at professional meetings; the REU-RET provides partial funding for
students and teachers to present at conferences. Through these program
activities our broader goals are to increase the number of students who pursue
advanced study and careers in STEM fields, increase the number of teachers with
an understanding of mathematical discovery and research, and increase the
effective communication of mathematical research.