* 1157282
* Workshop:  Major Research Initiative in Sedimentary Geology and Paleontology: Production of a Science Plan
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2013
* Judith Parrish, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 11/30/2013
* USD 65,261.00

Major Research Initiative in Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology: Production of
a Science Plan&lt;br/&gt;Judith Parrish-Jones, University of
Idaho&lt;br/&gt;EAR-1157282&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last three decades,
scientists who study the Earth?s sedimentary crust and the history of life have
conducted innumerable workshops and produced dozens of white papers outlining
critical research opportunities in the disciplines. This community may represent
the most integrative part of the earth sciences. The community addresses issues
of the history of life on Earth and the dynamics of evolution and extinction,
the history of climate and climate dynamics, and the history of sedimentation
and the dynamics of sedimentary basins. The entire record of climate and life is
preserved in sedimentary rocks, and is understood through integrated studies of
tectonics, climate, life, and sedimentology. Our sample of modern processes is
limited, yet understanding of these processes is important to many societal
concerns. Fundamental knowledge about these processes is recorded in the
sedimentary record. Without understanding the full range of process behavior we
do not truly understand processes such as climate change, extinction, and
resource distribution and quality. This workshop will integrate research
opportunities identified by the community over the last several years in order
to provide a framework for moving forward with major research initiatives. This
workshop will be held in Arlington, Virginia at Marymount College on October 24
and 25th, 2011.