* 1157771
* Molecular Basis for Pre-Receptor Modulation of Plant Hormones by Acyl Acid Amido Synthetases
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Joseph Jez, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/29/2016
* USD 687,763.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Plants need to respond to their surroundings and
changes in their environment. As part of those responses, plants use various
hormones, which are chemically unrelated to those found in animals, to alter
their growth and change metabolism. Two major types of plant hormones are the
jasmonates and auxins. The presence or absence of these molecules is sensed by
receptors, which if bound to the hormone trigger a pattern of biological changes
in the plant. This project focuses on proteins of GH3 enzyme family that
chemically modify the hormones to either promote or prevent the receptor from
recognizing these molecules. The GH3 proteins attach different amino acids to
the hormone, which can lead to production of an active molecule, as occurs with
jasmonates, or an inactive molecule, as with the auxins. Through their
biochemical activity, the GH3 proteins can control if the receptor is on or off
and act as pre-receptor modulators of hormone responses in plants. Although the
GH3 proteins are widespread across the plant kingdom, little is known about
their biochemical function. This project aims to understand the molecular
structure of the GH3 proteins by using x-ray crystallography, to investigate how
the GH3 proteins catalyze their reactions on chemically diverse plant hormones,
and to provide insight on the physiological roles of each GH3 protein in plant
hormone responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Exploring the
molecular foundations for control of plant hormone action will provide new
insight on the biochemical networks involved in allocating resources for plant
growth, pest defenses, and crop sustainability. For example, jasmonates are
critical in altering metabolism of various compounds related to environmental
changes, pest/pathogen defenses, and production of compounds useful for biofuels
and industrial feedstocks. The project also focuses on training the next
generation of multidisciplinary scientists. The research methods and questions
used in this project cross the boundaries between biology, chemistry, and
physics by integrating x-ray crystallography, biochemistry, and plant biology in
both the lab and in teaching. In addition, to training graduate students a large
portion of the broader impact efforts focus on undergraduate education. The PI
actively recruits undergraduate students through undergraduate thesis work
(Bio200, Bio500, and Chem490), the Washington U. HHMI-SURF, CD-BioRAP (an NSF-
REU program), and the pre-freshman Summer Scholars in Biology and Biomedical
Research program, and mentors high school students through the Pfizer-Solutia
Summer Students and Teachers as Research Scientists (STARS) program. The PI is
course-master for Bio4522: Protein Biochemistry Lab and has a record of
developing research-oriented projects in undergraduate teaching lab courses (Jez
et al., 2007 Biochem. Mol. Biol. Educ. and Arkus &amp; Jez, 2008 Biochem. Mol.
Biol. Educ.). Bio4522 is a research-oriented lab designed to have students
progress through different stages of research to examine a scientific question
and to work as a team. The success of the Spring 2010 &amp; 2011 classes in
generating some of the preliminary data on the Arabidopsis GH3 proteins for this
proposal highlights the value of this approach for undergraduate education.
During the timeframe of this proposal, each semester of the course will focus on
investigating the development of GH3 protein function across evolution by
examining these enzymes from different organisms in the Tree of Life.