* 1157633
* GOALI: Novel Integration of AC/DC Charger and DC/DC Converter for Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/23/2011,07/31/2012
* Alireza Khaligh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/2012
* USD 71,910.00

The objective of this research is to develop a 20kW novel integrated bi-
directional converter for plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEVs). The
integrated converter has fewer components and is smaller and more cost
effective. The approach is to integrate the AC/DC rectifier and bi-directional
DC/DC converter in one topology for PHEVs. This issue has not been tackled in
any PHEV conversion kit by the industry because of its high level of
complication and highly research-oriented nature. However, major environmental
and economical benefits for the nation make it a suitable timely project for the
NSF support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The intellectual merit of this project is in
the design, optimization, and development of the integrated bi-directional
converter to provide much higher fuel economy via charging the battery installed
on the vehicle through outlet and regenerative braking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The broader impact is ensuring highest quality integrated education, research,
and engineering to meet the emerging workforce and needs of the nation's
automotive industry. The project team promotes education as an integrated part
of this project. Female and minority graduate students will participate in the
proposed project. The PI plans to use the results of the investigations in his
teaching classroom (ECE 764-Vehicular Power Systems). The project will benefit
society by developing cleaner and more efficient vehicles and by training
engineers to develop automobiles with higher fuel economy and lower emissions.
This is of significant importance for society and the environment considering
that more than 15 million cars are manufactured every year in North America.