* 1157536
* US-Germany Collaboration: Satisfiability-Based Test Generation for Small-Delay Defects in Nanoscale Integrated Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2015
* USD 37,296.00

The goal of this collaborative project between Duke University and University of
Bremen in Germany is to develop new techniques for detecting small-delay defects
(SDDs) in nanoscale integrated circuits (ICs). The PI?s group at Duke University
has developed a gate-delay-defect probability measure to model delay variations
for nanometer technologies and test-selection techniques to reduce pattern
count. The University of Bremen team has carried out extensive research on
satisfiability (SAT) and its role in test generation. The proposed collaboration
is based on the premise that a probabilistic and pseudo-Boolean SAT framework
can be developed for test generation to target SDDs, and the collaborative
effort will lead to better-quality solutions than the individual efforts of the
two groups. The outcome of this seed project will be a follow-up grant proposal
to NSF in the US and DFG in Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have
a lasting and significant influence on the testing of next-generation nanometer
ICs. Theoretical advances in SAT will be driven by and applied to the difficult
practical problem of screening SDDs. Lower defect escapes will lead to higher
shipped-product quality and lower test cost. Benefits for society include:
reliable electronic systems for healthcare; zero-defect ICs for safety-critical
systems; cheaper and dependable computing platforms for servers, weather
forecasting, climate-change prediction, financial-transaction processing, etc.
The innovations resulting from this research will be used to enhance existing
courses and develop new courses at both universities. US researchers will
benefit from cross-cultural interactions and learn to collaborate with foreign
researchers in today?s global workplace. &lt;br/&gt;