* 1157007
* REU Site: Surface and Thin Film Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,12/31/2016
* J. Floro, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* jose caro
* 12/31/2016
* USD 309,125.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Division of Materials
Research at the National Science Foundation, the proposed REU Site: Surface and
Thin Film Science and Engineering at the University of Virginia, will strengthen
the nation's science and engineering workforce through the professional, social,
and cognitive development of the next generation of scientists and engineers.
The opportunities for undergraduates to conduct hands-on research during their
initial years at college will stimulate their interest in science and
engineering and encourage them to consider advanced degrees and careers in these
fields. Accordingly, one of the goals of the program is to recruit women,
underrepresented minorities, and individuals with disabilities to participate in
the summer research experience. The chosen technical focus on surface and thin
film science and engineering represents a strength of the university. The topic
is inherently multidisciplinary, hence students will be exposed to the full
range of core disciplines that support the field. Many technologies hinge on
controlling surface and thin film properties, including heterogeneous catalysis,
nanoelectronics, solar cells, corrosion protection, and immunological responses
at cell surfaces. Any class of materials, metals, ceramics or polymers (or
hybrid composites of each) can be made in thin film form. There is similar
diversity in processing: thin films can be deposited by vacuum processes such as
evaporation or sputtering, by chemical vapor deposition, by surface reactions
such as oxidation and nitridation, from solution, and from the melt. In concert
with their faculty mentors, REU students will isolate discrete research problems
that they can reasonably expect to address during the eight-week session. The
students will then review the relevant literature, design experiments, analyze
the data, draw conclusions, generate a written report, and present their work to
a gathering of the cohort at the end of the session.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Division of Materials
Research at the National Science Foundation, the REU Site: Surface and Thin Film
Science and Engineering, at the University of Viriginia will bring 11
undergraduates to the University of Virginia (UVa) for an 8-week, actively
mentored, summer research experience. The program is designed to promote the
professional, social, and cognitive development of the REU students, encourage
them to consider careers and graduate study in science and engineering, and help
create a more diverse workforce and professoriate. The projects chosen for
inclusion in this program reflect areas of strength for the University of
Virginia and address substantive science and engineering research questions.
Insights generated during the REU program will have implications for aircraft,
corrosion, electronics, catalysis, and nanomaterials research. Surface and thin
film science and engineering is inherently multidisciplinary, hence students
will be exposed to the full range of core disciplines that support the field.
Significant scientific progress requires collaboration, an aspect of the twenty-
first research paradigm that is essential for students to experience, and by
working in the labs at this REU site, students will have this opportunity.