* 1157559
* 2012 Academic Careers Workshop for Underrepresented Participants
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Valerie Taylor, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 04/30/2014
* USD 70,229.00

Texas A&amp;M proposes to run career mentoring workshops and assess their
impact. Mentoring activities are critical for successful promotions in the
professoriate, and they are particularly needed for underrepresented faculty in
the field of computing. The number of minority faculty or faculty with
disabilities at most institutions is very small, making it difficult to find
role models and mentors with similar experiences and backgrounds. To address
this problem, the PI has developed a series of Academic Career Mentoring
Workshops for Underrepresented Participants. The series started in 2005 and has
been funded by an NSF BPC grant from 2007 through 2011. The Academic Career
Mentoring Workshop series targets junior faculty and senior graduate students
from the following underrepresented groups: African American, Hispanic, Native
American, and people with disabilities. The Workshops will include senior
faculty from these groups that can serve as role models and present proven
strategies for academic careers in computing. With this proposal, the PI
requests funding to continue and to assess these
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshops will cover cultural issues and
their influence on topics such as starting a research program, networking, and
navigating the tenure process. Panelists will be asked to address issues such as
"Maintaining One's Identity" and "Overcoming Misconceptions," that address
frustrations unique to underrepresented faculty and potential faculty (or senior
graduate students). For example, ethnic minority faculty often struggle with the
dilemma of maintaining one's culture given the significant time necessary to
launch a research program. Further, underrepresented faculty must make a
concerted effort, well beyond the norm, to find outlets and support communities
of similar ethnicity. These problems can result in disillusionment that may
result in young faculty choosing other career opportunities outside of academia.
The proposed workshop complement the existing CRA-W Workshops, which focus on
gender, and CRA Workshops, which do not target issues faced by women or ethnic
minorities.