* 1157986
* RUI:   The origin and function of mature Nur77low T cell subpopulations in the thymus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Jennifer Punt, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Liliana Jaso-Friedmann
* 05/31/2014
* USD 300,000.00

T lymphocytes, a group of white blood cells, continually scan our tissues for
evidence of infection. They can recognize cells that have been infected and
initiate powerful immune responses against these cells as well as against the
pathogen responsible for infection. Immature T lymphocytes (also known as
thymocytes) have to be "trained" to distinguish uninfected from infected cells.
This research team has developed an elaborate system to select young T
lymphocytes that have potential to make this distinction from among the millions
that are generated daily. This selection process occurs in a specialized organ
called the thymus and is a critical step in keeping us safe from autoimmune
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to mature successfully, thymocytes must
interact extensively with specialized cells known as thymic epithelial cells.
These interactions determine which immature T cells can safely enter
circulation. This project examines the interesting possibility that mature T
lymphocytes, themselves, play a role in shaping these all-important
interactions. Using genetically modified mouse strains and a set of imaging
tools that can be used to identify and trace cells in the thymus, these
investigators will test an original hypothesis that a special group of fully
mature T lymphocytes stay in the thymus and enhance the ability of epithelial
cells to select the most useful and least dangerous immature T lymphocytes for
further maturation. By improving our understanding of the molecular and cellular
participants in T cell selection, these studies will shed light on what can go
awry and contribute to autoimmune disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
investigation will also contribute directly and significantly to the training of
young scientists. The studies described will be performed exclusively by
undergraduates, who were also the inspiration for the project. The investigator
has a very strong track record of educating young scientists: 95% of the
seventy-five senior undergraduates mentored in her lab over the last sixteen
years have pursued post-graduate studies in medicine, research, education, and
public health.