* 1157373
* SEP Alignment of Small Molecules for Collision Dynamics Studies - Seeding a New Collaboration Between Howard University (US) and Heriot Watt University (UK)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Joshua Halpern, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2014
* USD 38,680.00

Intellectual Merit: Support from the NSF Catalyzing New International
Collaborations Program will establish a new collaboration between two groups who
have developed different methods for studying the stereodynamics of elastic and
inelastic rotational energy transfer (RET): the Halpern group at Howard
University in Washington, DC and the McKendrick-Costen group at Heriot-Watt
University in Edinburgh, Scotland. The expertise and instrumentation at Howard
and Heriot Watt are complementary. The award will support travel of Prof.
Halpern and students to Heriot-Watt to undertake proof of concept experiments.
The goal is to prepare oriented samples of vibrationally excited, ground state
CN radicals using simulated emission pumping and probe the prepared states by
frequency modulated transient absorption spectroscopy. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project brings together two groups that have
contributed to the study of collisional polarization transfer and quenching. The
collaboration will substantially advance our understanding of this basic
process, which is a severe test of the ability to calculate potential energy
surfaces and carry out dynamics on them. It will provide qualitative insights in
areas such as atmospheric and combustion chemical dynamics where small radical
energy transfer and reactions are basic. Both sides of the collaboration view
this preliminary work which will support further proposals, publications and
student training. &lt;br/&gt;The international nature of the collaboration
advances NSF?s goal of global science. Howard University is an HBCU, serving
African Americans and with a substantial number of international students of
African descent. The new collaboration, involvement of Howard students in the
research visits and the opportunities for them that will grow out of the
collaboration in the future will support NSF goal of growing participation from
groups that are under-represented in STEM fields in the US as well as having a
global outreach.