* 1157030
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Plant Systematics, Conservation Biology, and Ethnobotany at the Missouri Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Sandra Arango-Caro, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 03/31/2016
* USD 338,878.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the Missouri Botanical Garden
that will provide research training for 10 students, for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2012- 2014. The program focuses on the three basic areas of plant
systematics, conservation biology, and ethnobotany. The Garden has a pool of
about 20 resident researchers who will serve as mentors. There is a wide range
of very interesting and exciting projects for the students, including taxonomic
description of new species from the tropics, DNA sequencing and phylogenetic
analysis, DNA barcoding, pollen analysis, pollination biology of rare species,
seed morphology and anatomy, conservation biology of threatened species, ecology
of invasive species, herbarium study of historically important collections,
Native American ethnobotany, and revisionary studies of economically important
plants. Students are expected to do full-time research as well as participate in
biweekly lunch-time seminars and workshops, including subjects on botany and
conservation, and also professional enrichment activities such as responsible
conduct and ethics in research, writing and communication skills, career
opportunities in botany and academia, and the graduate school application
process. Students are also provided tours of local natural and cultural
attractions. In addition to the research mentor, REU students have access to a
herbarium of 6.2 million specimens, an excellent botanical library, rich garden
collections, a 2,400 acre natural area, and a laboratory with facilities for
plant anatomy, microscopy, digital imaging, SEM, and DNA analysis. The program?s
multi-phase recruitment effort consists of a program website and flyers,
personal contact with local and regional universities, and advertisement on
digital newsletters and organization websites. Students are selected based on
academic record, research performance, and potential for outstanding research in
botany, conservation, and ethnobotany. Students are tracked to determine their
continued interest in their academic field of study, their career paths, and the
lasting influences of the research experience. Information about the program
will be assessed by various means, including use of an REU common assessment
tool. More information is available by visiting
http://www.mobot.org/mobot/research/reu/reu.shtml , or by contacting the PI (Dr.
David Bogler at david.bogler@mobot.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Sandra Arango-Caro at
sandra.arango@mobot.org).