* 1157463
* High-Resolution Empirical Reconstruction of the Geomagnetic Field as a Space Weather Research Tool
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* Mikhail Sitnov, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Janet U. Kozyra
* 07/31/2016
* USD 301,869.00

Data-based modeling and forecasting of the geomagnetic field is a key element of
space weather research. Storm and substorm perturbations of the Earth's main
magnetic field are among the main indicators of space weather disturbances, and
they also help assess other effects such as particle precipitation and plasma
heating. A dramatic increase in the amount of data for the terrestrial
magnetosphere has made possible a new generation of empirical geomagnetic field
models with much larger numbers of degrees of freedom and sophisticated data-
binning techniques. A set of the corresponding data-binning, data-fitting and
visualization procedures known as the TS07D model is available and widely used
in magnetospheric applications. In the project the TS07D model will be improved
in three critical aspects. First, the data-binning process will be optimized to
achieve a balance between the number of system-level parameters, such as the
solar wind electric field, and their forecasting accuracy. As a part of this
task the data-binning method will be tested as a pattern-recognition tool, which
helps reveal new classes of magnetic storms such as the storms that include saw
tooth events. Second, the model output in the form of the effective hot plasma
pressure inferred by assuming static force balance for an isotropic plasma will
be investigated. The inferred pressure can be used in global MHD models to
improve the plasma equation of state and to describe the ring current buildup
and decay. It can also be used for the improvement of external boundary
conditions in kinetic ring current models, as well as for direct comparison with
global plasma patterns retrieved from the energetic neutral atom imaging of the
inner magnetosphere. Third, a modification of the field-aligned current part of
the model will be studied to transform it into a flexible set of current modules
whose foot-point distributions are consistent with low-altitude observations.
The model will also be rewritten as a single-language code assuming different
platforms and multi-thread operations on computer clusters.

The results of this investigation will be an improved magnetospheric magnetic
field model. While direct research with the model described above will be
valuable, the model will have an even greater value. Magnetospheric magnetic
field models are widely used in other applications in magnetospheric physics by
other researchers. Since phenomena occurring in different parts of the
magnetosphere and the ionosphere are coupled by the magnetic field the model can
be used to map phenomena between these two regions. The models can be used to
determine the trajectories of charged particles. Finally they can be used to
give an investigator an estimate of the magnetic fields in regions where they do
not have observations.