* 1157279
* SICB 2012 Society Symposium:   Poecilogony, polymorphism or polyphenism: a window on larval evolutionary transitions in marine invertebrates; Charleston, SC; Jan. 3-7, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2011,11/30/2012
* Damhnait McHugh, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 11/30/2012
* USD 12,270.00

Poecilogony is a phenomenon observed in marine invertebrates whereby a single
species is capable of producing two different larval forms (small free-swimming
larvae that have to feed to grow, as well as large brooded larvae that get their
nutrition from yolk supplied by the mother). Such species provide the
opportunity to elucidate the cellular and genetic mechanisms leading to
differences in early development, as well as the consequences of different
larval types for a population. These funds will support a symposium on
poecilogony in January 2012 at the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology annual meeting in Charleston, SC. Speakers will present the most recent
research on poecilogonous species that draws on cutting-edge approaches in
population genetics, genomics &amp; transcriptomics, developmental biology, and
ecology. The aim is to foster communication among these researchers and
encourage studies that integrate methods across disciplines so variations in
development within a species can be better understood. The symposium will impact
the research careers of the diverse group of 11 speakers, which comprises nine
women (including one Latina) and two men at various career stages (tenured
faculty, tenure-stream faculty, two postdocs, and three graduate students),
representing four countries (Canada, Finland, Panama, and USA). The institutions
they represent are also varied, with two primarily undergraduate colleges
(Colgate University; Acadia University), several research universities, and a
government agency (Smithsonian Institution). The abstracts from the symposium
are published on the society website and symposium manuscripts will be submitted
for publication in the journal, Integrative and Comparative Biology. These
publications will be of wide interest to evolutionary developmental biologists,
invertebrate biologists, and other scientists interested in understanding how
the same genome in a single species can lead to very different larvae.