* 1157763
* Developing a New US - Spain Collaboration in Mygalomorph Spider Systematics and Conservation
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Marshal Hedin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 12/31/2014
* USD 40,849.00

The purpose of this project is to catalyze a new set of collaborations and
initiate a partnership with project PIs Jason Bond (Auburn University), Marshal
Hedin (San Diego State University), and Brent Hendrixson (Millsaps College) and
Miquel Arnedo, at the University of Barcelona in Spain. The project-planning
trip to the Barcelona will bring together a group of investigators who have
interests in the evolution, systematics, conservation, and taxonomy of
mygalomorph spiders. The spider infraorder Mygalomorphae (trapdoor spiders,
tarantulas, and their kin), are a biologically unique clade of early diverging
spiders; many of its members are well known to non-arachnologists and include
the world's largest (tarantulas), most venomous (Australian "funnel-web"
spiders), and most long-lived spiders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning trip
will focus on reviewing the status of mygalomorph classification to identify
"problem" lineages, bring together all of the genetic data currently available
with the aim of developing a more comprehensive set of molecular markers,
develop a workflow for identifying a set of morphological character ontologies
and a means by which to share morphological data, and formulate a general
paradigm for evaluating species boundaries and conservation status. The planning
trip will culminate in a 10-day collecting trip in the Andalusia region of
Spain. In addition to developing a number of tangible outcomes to include a set
of molecular markers for broad scale analyses of spider phylogeny, significant
broader impacts of the project will involve training students (undergraduate,
graduate and postdoctoral) in conceptual issues related to systematics,
biodiversity conservation and evolutionary biology.