* 1157646
* Using the Second Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX2) Observations and Idealized Simulations to Understand the Lifecycle of Tornadoes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Paul Markowski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 07/31/2017
* USD 1,076,764.00

Following on a successful two-year multi-investigator field data collection
campaign, this research effort will focus on identification of physical
processes and interactions pivotal to the genesis, maintenance, and demise of
tornadoes developing within broader rotational flows ("mesocyclones") that
characterize supercell thunderstorms. The need for improved understanding and
development of more reliable means to identify and provide advance warning of
tornado formation are key objectives of the joint NSF-NOAA sponsored VORTEX2
(Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes) project, which
encompassed multi-platform field activities providing a wealth of radar and in-
situ thermodynamic data within severe thunderstorms, tornadoes, and their
supporting environments. The intellectual merit of this effort will rest upon
this research team's specific plans to exploit these data in their study of
controls on tornado genesis, maintenance and demise, as well as the potential
role of storm mergers in influencing these processes. Model-based data analysis
and assimilation will be conducted in tandem with more idealized numerical
simulation approaches. The specific research objectives to be addressed during
this project are to: (1) Determine the relative roles of environmental versus
storm-generated vorticity in the genesis and evolution of tornadoes (2)
investigate the roles of the rear- and forward-flank downdrafts in the genesis
and evolution of tornadoes, (3) examine the origin and characteristics of
secondary rear-flank gust fronts and their possible role in the genesis and
evolution of tornadoes, (4) explore how tornadoes are influenced by changes in
the thermodynamic properties and circulation of their mesocyclone-scale
surroundings, and by changes in the strength or location of the overlying parent
thunderstorm updraft, and (5) to investigate the dynamics of storm interactions
and cell mergers and the ways in which they can influence the development of
vorticity in the storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this effort
will hinge upon transfer of physical understanding and potential analysis
techniques to operational meteorologists in order that they may ultimately
provide more precise tornado warnings and decreased false alarm rates, as well
as in providing the opportunity for training of students and early-career
scientists including individuals drawn from underrepresented groups in the
atmospheric sciences.