* 1157131
* Travel Support for the 2012 ECI Conference:  Water Treatment and Reuse III and the Water Energy Nexus, January 8-13, 2012, Cancun, Mexico
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* John Pellegrino, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rosemarie D. Wesson
* 02/28/2013
* USD 15,000.00

1157131 &lt;br/&gt;Pellegrino&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel stipends are requested
for a total of ~15-18 participants made up of graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, early career academics, and a few invited speakers from the United
States to present their research and participate in the Engineering Conferences
International (ECI) conference entitled "Water treatment and reuse III and the
water-energy nexus" to be held January 8-13, 2012 in Cancun, Mexico.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will have at least 8 technical sessions
covering the spectrum of leading-edge fundamental and applied separation science
and technology as applied to water processes. Among these, there will be 3
sessions dedicated to the nexus between water and all facets of energy
technology and policy. The meeting will feature at least two plenary lectures
and ~8 keynote lectures (one in each session) to broaden the attendees'
awareness of both the cutting edge technical hurdles and the connections across
disciplines. It is important to note that the sessions are intended to foment
disruption of the attendees' initial perspectives and challenge the conventional
notions of how technology, policy, and economics should "connect water and
energy" in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting co-chairs will produce a
white paper based on the presentations, posters, the question and answer
periods, and dedicated discussion periods. This white paper will be framed to
address the question of whether strategic new initiatives need to be considered.
For example, perspectives about the relative emphasis on novel materials science
versus sensors and process engineering versus manufacturing advances to make
novel unit operations, will specifically be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of the NSF support for the meeting will be the interaction
between internationally renowned and up and coming researchers. The anticipated
attendance for the meeting is 100-130 researchers from all parts of the world
representing industry, government and academia.