* 1157095
* REU Site:  Regional Atmospheric Chemistry: State-of-the-art Measurement and Modeling in the Pacific Northwest
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Shelley Pressley, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2015
* USD 309,324.00

This is a renewal of the REU site at the Laboratory for Atmospheric Research
(LAR) at Washington State University (WSU), which for many years has
successfully engaged undergraduate students in research activities involving
atmospheric chemistry, air quality, and climate change. Ten students will be
recruited each summer, targeting underrepresented communities in the Pacific
Northwest (including Northwest Indian College and Columbia Basin College) and
students funded through WSU's Undergraduate Research Opportunity (URO) program.
During the 9.5-week program, students will participate in several half-day
workshops focusing on atmospheric chemistry, measurement and modeling
techniques, data interpretation, and scientific communication. In parallel with
the workshops, students will be trained on the specific research tools required
for their individual projects and will conduct these projects under the
mentorship of faculty and graduate students. The individual projects will be
part of LAR externally-funded research programs that focus on current problems
in atmospheric chemistry. The summer will culminate with poster presentations at
the WSU Undergraduate Research Symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus on
atmospheric chemistry, air quality, and climate change will foster the
participants' appreciation for the importance of interdisciplinary and
collaborative research. It will also encourage some students to pursue graduate
school opportunities and careers in an environmental field. By targeting
underrepresented groups outside WSU, the REU renewal will help increase
diversity both within the program and across broader engineering and scientific
disciplines. Before, during, and after their summer at WSU, REU participants
will be interviewed to determine how their views of research were affected by
the program. This assessment of the program's impact on participants' beliefs
and perspectives regarding scientific research will contribute to the broader
education community and also help guide future REU programs nationally.