* 1157142
* Into Africa: The Initial Colonization of Africa by Early Cenozoic Anthropoids
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,06/30/2014
* K. Christopher Beard, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 06/30/2014
* USD 384,119.00

This project investigates the evolutionary consequences of the initial
colonization of Africa by early anthropoid primates (extinct relatives of
monkeys, apes and humans). Working in Eocene strata exposed along the Dur At-
Talah escarpment in southern Libya, an international team of scientists based at
the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, the University of Poitiers
in France, and Tripoli University in Libya will search for additional fossils
and related forms of data bearing on the earliest known African anthropoids. The
project will provide training opportunities for two postdoctoral researchers
based at the Carnegie Museum as well as undergraduate and graduate students from
the United States and Libya. Results will be disseminated through scholarly
publications, popular media, museum exhibitions, and public lectures and
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the colonization of new
landmasses by invading groups of organisms affects both the invaders themselves
and the local biota they encounter is a widespread problem in organismal
biology. Only recently has it become apparent that anthropoid primates
experienced such a pivotal event during their evolution, when they colonized
what was then the island continent of Africa from their ancestral homeland in
Asia. This research project provides new data that will help constrain the
nature and timing of this colonization event by focusing on fossil sites in
southern Libya that have recently yielded the oldest known African anthropoids.
By recovering additional fossils and other geological data from these sites, it
will be possible to assess: (1) whether early African anthropoids are
descendants of one (as opposed to multiple) ancestral Asian forms; (2) whether
early African anthropoids experienced a dramatic evolutionary radiation after
their successful colonization of that landmass, which may have been related to
the evolution of modern anthropoid anatomical features; and (3) whether other
Asian mammals may have colonized Africa at roughly the same time that
anthropoids achieved their initial toehold there.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project and its international components are receiving joint support within NSF
from the Global Venture Fund of the Office of International Science and
Engineering.