* 1157590
* Safe, High-Performance, Polymer Electrolyte for Lithium Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Peter Kofinas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 04/30/2016
* USD 274,447.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1157590&lt;br/&gt;Kofinas,
Peter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
key barriers to the widespread use of lithium-ion batteries is their potential
for catastrophic failure. When cells are thermally or electrically abused, their
temperature can rise and exothermic reactions between the combustible, liquid
electrolyte and the charged electrodes can cause the battery to combust, giving
rise to safety concerns. While improvements in the electrode would ultimately
make the future battery more energy efficient, requiring less active material,
safety and shape are still largely controlled by the electrolyte. By combining a
polymer electrolyte with ionic liquids, the resultant solid system will possess
all the desired properties and be conductive enough to be useful as a battery,
which will be inherently safe because there is no longer a flammable liquid
component. Battery power would also benefit greatly from the conformal and safe
nature of solid polymer electrolytes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to better understand the electrochemical properties and
microstructure of novel thin film solid polymer electrolytes with enhanced
performance. Experiments have been designed to explore new ionic liquid
chemistries, and at the same time fully characterize the electrochemistry and
microstructure of the polymer IL blend, while developing a better understanding
the nature of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). The following objectives
will be pursued:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Never synthesized before IL chemistries
will be developed consisting of sulfonium and tetrahyrdothiophenium
architectures. The chemical structure of the novel ILs will be characterized
using nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Solid electrolytes consisting of polyethylene oxide (PEO)-based homopolymers and
block copolymers of PEO blended with the synthesized ILs will be prepared via
solution casting, and optimized for high power and energy delivery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Upon optimization, a full electrochemical
characterization will be completed to allow better understanding of the movement
of lithium ions in the bulk and at the SEI. The SEI will be investigated by
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and accelerated rate calorimetry (ARC),
to determine the reaction rates and mechanisms of the constituent materials
within the cell. AC impedance experiments will allow the determination of the
bulk and interfacial resistance. Overvoltage studies will determine the
stability of this interphase. SEM imaging and mass spectroscopy will identify
the extent of the SEI and breakdown products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
development of novel sulfur based ionic liquid compounds proposed in this
research, improved performance characteristics are expected of the solid polymer
electrolyte. Such shape-conforming materials could be easily wound up into coils
or processed as coatings or sheets, thus providing large area devices with
integrated electronics. Effectively understanding the mechanism behind the
enhanced electrochemical performance of the proposed solid electrolyte systems
will greatly benefit the design of the next generation of
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impact of this research is that it will ultimately help push forward an
attractive alternative technology to combustible and corrosive liquid
electrolytes. The proposed polymer electrolyte system offers flexibility in both
mechanical properties and product design. Ionic liquids offer an attractive
option and the electrochemical understanding of novel architectures based upon
sulfur will lead to further potential uses for these novel compounds. The solid-
electrolyte interphase (SEI) is among the most important yet least understood
elements of a battery. Further insight into the polymer electrolyte SEI, would
enable the design of tailored interfaces for a future generation of safer
batteries with longer lifetimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges
fundamental concepts of electrochemistry, polymer science, and chemical
engineering. In addition to the impacts on science, the proposed project will
also broadly impact engineering education, training students of different
educational levels and from diverse backgrounds. This training will poise them
for successful careers in a wide range of industries or academia. Findings from
this work will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at
professional meetings. Several initiatives are planned including specific
programs that assist in undergraduate and graduate education, graduate student
mentoring, and training of high school students from schools in minority-rich
communities. The PI also plans to mentor a diverse undergraduate "Gemstone" team
project on energy storage at the University of Maryland. Gemstone students are
members of a living-learning community comprised of fellow students, faculty and
staff who work together to enrich the undergraduate experience. This community
challenges and supports the students in the development of their research,
teamwork, communication and leadership skills. The mentored team of students
will presents its energy storage project in the form of a thesis to leaders in
the field, and the students complete the program with a citation and a tangible
sense of accomplishment.