* 1157089
* REU Site: A Partnership of NSF-funded Centers to Advance California Community College Students in Science and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Sharnnia Artis, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 02/29/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Energy Efficient Electronics Science
(E3S) at the University of California Berkeley will expand the existing
Transfer-to-Excellence Research Experiences for Undergraduates (TTE REU) program
into a TTE REU Site program with the following objectives: 1) increase the
number of community college students, particularly women and underrepresented
minority students who receive baccalaureate degrees in science and engineering;
2) help expand and diversify the pipeline of future graduate school students;
and 3) attract a diverse body of community college students to science and
engineering disciplines that are seeking solutions to the nation's energy
problems. To accomplish these goals, this REU Site will bring together E3S and
two other NSF-funded centers, the Center of Integrated Nanomechanical Systems
(COINS) and the Synthetic Biology Engineering Research Center (SynBERC), to
expand the research opportunities available to community college students,
particularly in the science and engineering fields of clean energy,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology. In addition, this site will collaborate with
the UC Berkeley Transfer Alliance Project (TAP), to provide academic advising
and enrichment programs that prepare community colleges students to be
competitive applicants to 4-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Serving as a bridge between two- and four-year colleges, this
REU Site's primary goals are to: 1) increase the number of community college
students, particularly women and underrepresented minority students, who go on
to receive baccalaureate degrees in science and engineering; 2) help grow and
diversify the pipeline of future graduate school students; and 3) attract
students to science and engineering disciplines that are seeking solutions to
the nation's energy problems. These goals support America's need for a clean
energy revolution and to accelerate biotechnology and nanotechnology
advancements. In addition, the REU Site leverages and contributes to the
missions of three of NSF's funded centers.