* 1157574
* US-France Collaboration:  Architectures and Interaction Paradigms for Multi-Surface Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Bjoern Hartmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2014
* USD 40,619.00

This project will establish a collaboration between the University of California
at Berkeley in the United States and the University of Paris-Sud and INRIA in
France to explore architectures and interaction paradigms for multi-surface
computing environments. Multi-surface environments are interactive workspaces
that combine wall displays, handheld computing devices and traditional laptops.
Such environments can be used to explore and manipulate "big data" in a variety
of application domains, including product design, scientific discovery,
decision-making and crisis management. &lt;br/&gt;Multi-surface computing
environments raise multiple challenges: What are the appropriate interaction
paradigms that make teams working in such spaces most effective? How can we
facilitate successful collaboration among remote sites? What authoring tools and
abstractions enable researchers to rapidly explore the space of multi-surface
applications? This collaboration will contribute new theory, technology and
empirical findings to understand remote collaboration in multi-surface
environments. &lt;br/&gt;The project will build on the French DIGISCOPE project,
which is creating a network of multi-surface environments for interactive and
collaborative visualization. The researchers will extend the research from
France to the US, and develop new techniques for remote collaboration between
workspaces in both countries. The provided funds will be used for two main
activities: 1) site visits to France to learn about the current DIGISCOPE
architecture and hold research meetings; and 2) the construction of a high-
resolution wall prototype at Berkeley to enable research into remote
collaboration techniques. This prototype itself will serve as the primary
communication tool between the US and French teams after initial visits.