* 1157758
* Consortium for Materials Properties Research in Earth Sciences (COMPRES): National Facilities and Infrastructure Development for High-Pressure Geosciences Research
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Jay Bass, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2015
* USD 9,796,521.00

COMPRES is a community-based consortium, comprised of and governed by 57 US
member institutions, that supports research in the properties of materials that
comprise the interiors of Earth and other planetary bodies, with particular
emphasis on highpressure science and technology and related fields. It is
charged with the oversight and guidance of specialized high-pressure
laboratories at several national synchrotron facilities. COMPRES supports the
operation of beam lines, the development of new technologies for high-pressure
research, and advocates for science and educational programs to the various
funding agencies. In addition to the US membership, 39 foreign institutions are
non-voting affiliates of COMPRES. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The member institutions
guide the direction of the consortium and define its missions. The intellectual
and scientific goals of COMPRES are described in the report "Understanding the
Building Blocks of the Planet: The Materials Science of Earth Processes", which
came out of a 2009 planning workshop (www.compres.us). Through its support of
advanced tools for Earth science experimentation, COMPRES enables research on
the compositional and thermal structure of Earths interior, its evolution
through time, and the dynamical behavior of the crust, mantle and core. There is
an intimate relationship between the scientific goals of COMPRES and other
geophysical disciplines. The results of mineral physics measurements carried out
at COMPRES-supported facilities are critical for interpreting seismological and
other geophysical observations in terms of the physical, chemical, and dynamical
state of Earths interior. Many of the scientific objectives of the seismological
community require investigations of the material properties of Earth materials
at extreme pressures and temperatures, as pursued by the COMPRES community.
Research done at COMPRES-supported facilities also addresses questions of direct
societal impact, such as the causes of earthquakes, carbon sequestration,
natural resources, and basic research into new advanced
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COMPRES supports the operations and equipment
needs of three synchrotron beamlines at the National Synchrotron Light Source
(NSLS, Brookhaven National Laboratory), and one at the Advanced Light Source
(ALS, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory). X-ray beam line X17B2 at NSLS is a
center for rheology and equations of state measurements on materials at high
pressures and temperatures, using the Large-Volume Multi-Anvil Press (LVP) and a
Drickamer deformation apparatus. Beam lines X17B3 and X17C at NSLS are for high-
energy X-ray studies of materials using the diamond-anvil cell (DAC) high-
pressure apparatus, with resistance and laser heating. Beam line U2A is the
worldleading facility for high-pressure infrared spectroscopy. Beam line 12.2.2
at the ALS is the COMPRES West-Coast facility for high-pressure high-temperature
research using the diamond cell, and is developing into a center for resistance
heating for DAC applications, as well as for laser-heating experiments. COMPRES
also supports nuclear resonant inelastic X-ray scattering and synchrotron
MÃ¶ssbauer research at Sector 3 of the Advanced Photon Source (APS). Under the
new 5-year cooperative agreement, COMPRES will establish a COMPRES Technology
Center (COMPTECH) at the APS to develop high-pressure capabilities utilizing
other advanced synchrotron techniques, such as single-crystal micro-diffraction,
and momentum resolved inelastic scattering. With the planned completion of the
NSLS-II - the newest US synchrotron ? in 2015, COMPRES will support high-
pressure experimentation at the Project beam line XPD. In addition to providing
facilities for large volume and diamond cell experiments upon startup of NSLS-
II, a COMPTECH office at NSLS-II will help to exploit the unique capabilities of
this new world-leading facility for a new generation of experiments at extreme
pressure-temperature conditions.