* 1157323
* Optical Tomography of the Atmospheric Surface Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Albin Gasiewski, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 06/30/2015
* USD 594,122.00

Owing to predominant exchange processes that govern weather and climate on
local, regional, and global scales, the atmospheric surface layer (ASL) is one
of the most important parts of the atmosphere. While the ASL is easily
accessible to point measurements, quantifying with high precision and accuracy
line- and areal-averages micrometeorological variables such as heat and momentum
flux remains a major scientific and technological challenge. A central goal of
this effort is to enhance, refine and apply the science and technology of
optical tomography of the atmospheric surface layer, where we focus on
exploiting the ubiquitous vertical and horizontal angle-of-arrival (AOA)
fluctuations of horizontally propagating light in the visible part of the
spectrum. Such AOA fluctuations, which carry information about mean values and
fluctuations of the transverse wind velocity components and of the transverse
temperature gradient components along the propagation path, will be observed
with one or two large-aperture telescopes equipped with CCD cameras observing an
array of test lights in the field(s) of view. The three primary
micrometeorological observables that can be retrieved with a single telescope
are (1) temporal fluctuations of instantaneous, path-averaged, horizontal and
vertical temperature gradients; (2) path averages of the horizontal and vertical
components of the path-transverse wind velocity; and (3) path averages of the
temperature turbulence structure parameter. A pair of laterally spaced
telescopes will lead to range-resolved observations. The possibility to retrieve
other turbulence statistics, such as variances of vertical and horizontal
velocity components as well as vertical and lateral fluxes of heat and momentum,
will also be explored. Optically retrieved quantities will be compared with
independent in-situ measurements along the propagation path in order to test the
underlying hypotheses qualitatively and quantitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this research program is centered on means to obtain and
perform combined analysis of optical AOA fluctuation measurements and in-situ
wind velocity and temperature measurements so as to obtain lead to a deeper
understanding of the spatiotemporal characteristics of the wind and temperature
fields in the atmospheric surface layer. Both strengths and limitations of
optical AOA tomography based on the geometrical-optics and Markov approximations
and the assumption of locally homogeneous and isotropic turbulence will be
explored theoretically by means of the Rytov theory and empirically by means of
comparing optically-retrieved observables with collocated in-situ measurements
so as to complement existing ASL remote sensing techniques, such as lidar,
scintillometry, and acoustic tomography. Broader impacts of this effort will be
derived through graduate student education and exploration of more economical,
readily portable and perhaps more sensitive means of probing the ASL. Improved
characterization of atmospheric light transmission and derived flux quantities
offer the potential to mature into a more powerful standard technology for both
research and operational objectives in micrometeorology, hydrology, renewable
energy and climate physics.