* 1157690
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Traders and Farmers: The Multi-Settlement Community Organization in the Rio Sonora Region, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Paul Fish, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2013
* USD 17,806.00

Under the direction of Dr. Paul Fish, Mr. Matthew Pailes will conduct research
for his doctoral dissertation. He will investigate community structure and
household exchange patterns in northeastern Sonora, Mexico, which developed
between AD 900 and 1600. In this region, the interests of households to maintain
subsistence autonomy, in conflict with the need to form larger groups for
security and other reasons, led to unique organizational patterns. This research
is broadly important because it provides insight into how groups and alliances
form in traditional small scale societies and how they are maintained or altered
over substantial periods of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sixteenth century
accounts of Spanish explorers describe hierarchically organized territorial
communities in northeastern Sonora. Previous researchers argued defensive needs
and elite control of long distance exchange were the foundation of community
organization. A pilot study in the Moctezuma Valley provided data contrary to
this reconstruction. Communities appear to be small, relatively unorganized, and
integrated through local exchange. The insights from this pilot study are the
basis for two research questions: 1) Were communities actually composed of small
settlement groups lacking in inter- or intra-community political
differentiation? and if so, 2) Did the small scale of communities encourage
households to maximize local settlement ties as a means of risk mitigation? To
answer these questions Mr Pailes will intensively map and excavate a sample of
structures at the largest sites in three settlement communities. This will
provide data on internal settlement organization and test whether the
settlements held structurally equivalent roles in their respective communities.
A second line of research will employ microscopic techniques to investigate the
provenance of ceramic artifacts. Provenance data determined from petrography
will indicate the extent and variability in household economic ties to other
communities and will serve as a proxy for inferring social relationships. The
project also will refine the poor chronology of this region through ceramic
seriation and thermoluminescence dating of pot sherds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project has broader impacts for several
reasons. It will provide detailed information on an understudied region between
the better-known U.S. Southwest and Mesoamerica and contribute significantly to
reconstructions of pan-regional political trajectories. Simply refining the
chronology in northeastern Sonora will have significant impacts. Community
outreach is a focus of the planned work. To foster a sense of connectivity to
the past, local residents will be employed during excavation. The project will
invite local students and residents to visit the excavations. These efforts will
inform local residents of the value of archaeological remains and discourage
their unneeded destruction. A Mexican collaborator will be involved with the
project to encourage international cooperation and interest in shared research
questions. The project will provide experience to undergraduate and graduate
students at the University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be
disseminated through a variety of means. Traditional scholarly journal articles
and formal conference presentations will be produced for Spanish and English
audiences. M. Pailes will give several public lectures in the United States and
will lead site tours to the area for avocational and other interested groups.
Copies of the dissertation will be provided to Mexican government offices and
institutions.