* 1157074
* REU Site: Back to the Future II
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* William Cross, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2015
* USD 330,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Site activities are integrated into a
10-week summer undergraduate research program in Metallurgical Engineering under
a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site themed Back to the Future.
Research activities focus on a wide range of important topics in Metallurgical
Engineering including alloy development, materials joining, extractive
metallurgy, biomaterials, and corrosion engineering. Engineering faculty members
have also teamed with faculty in the humanities to provide students with a
historic and cultural framework for current research. There is significant
evidence that suggests a richer learning environment can be created in
engineering by establishing a context within the liberal arts. Students also
participate in a number of supplemental workshops in the art and history of
metallurgy. The unique supplemental activities of the site contribute to the
development of students with different learning styles and have implications for
recruiting students from underrepresented groups in engineering and science.
Site activities also support student professional development beyond the
laboratory, including professional seminars and an integrated technical
communications program. Finally, a comprehensive assessment program has been
implemented to assess student gains in skills related to research, the impact of
the program on students of different typology, and long-term professional
development. The research and educational activities are supported by the
National Science Foundation, Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation "Back to the
Future" Research Experience for Undergraduates Site at the South Dakota School
of Mines and Technology has been established to expose a diverse group of
undergraduate students, including Native American students and women, to the
research environment and to help them develop as professionals. The focus of the
student research is the study of metals and metal production, an area of vital
technological importance to national interest in areas of defense,
manufacturing, and energy. Students are also engaged in workshops and activities
that underscore the importance of metals throughout history, hence, the 'Back to
the Future' theme. This context gives students a broader appreciation for the
nature of current and future research as well as the impact of engineering in
society. The research and educational activities are supported by the National
Science Foundation, Office of Special Programs, Division of Materials Research.