* 1157549
* Mechanisms of RNA polymerase-specific transcription complex assembly on U1 and U6 snRNA gene promoters
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* William Stumph, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 618,918.00

Intellectual Merit: The small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) known as U1, U2, U4, U5, and
U6 comprise a highly abundant class of RNA molecules that are required for pre-
messenger RNA splicing in higher organisms. These snRNAs are synthesized by RNA
polymerase II with the exception of U6, which is synthesized by RNA polymerase
III. Despite this difference in RNA polymerase specificity, U6 genes and the RNA
polymerase II-transcribed snRNA genes utilize similar regulatory signals and
overlapping sets of transcription factors for their expression. The main goal of
the project is to gain an understanding of the structure-function relationships
that are involved in recruiting the correct RNA polymerase to initiate synthesis
of the correct snRNAs. Transcription of both classes of snRNA genes requires a
unique protein factor referred to as the snRNA-activating protein complex
(SNAPc). This factor recognizes an essential promoter element termed the PSE
located in the DNA 40-75 base pairs (bp) upstream of the start site of RNA
synthesis. In the fruit fly D. melanogaster (the model organism used in this
project), DmSNAPc is composed of three subunits that together carry out
sequence-specific recognition of the ~21 bp long PSEA (the fruit fly PSE). Even
though a U1 PSEA and a U6 PSEA differ at only 5 of 21 nucleotide positions, this
sequence difference plays a major role in determining the RNA polymerase
specificity of fly snRNA genes. Furthermore, the three subunits of assume a
different conformation when bound to a U6 versus a U1 PSEA. This conformational
difference is believed to be responsible for the recruitment of the correct RNA
polymerase. To better understand the conformational differences of DmSNAPc bound
to U1 and U6 PSEAs, a novel technique developed in the PI's lab will be employed
that uses site-specific protein-DNA cross-linking combined with chemical
cleavage of the protein at defined sites. Contact points made between the
largest DmSNAPc subunit and U6 promoter DNA will be compared with the contact
points made between this subunit and U1 promoter DNA. Next, pre-initiation
complex (PIC) assembly on U1 and U6 promoters will be investigated, with primary
emphasis on RNA polymerase II recruitment to the TATA-less U1 promoter, but
analogous experiments will be performed to investigate Pol III PIC assembly on
the U6 promoter. Finally, the overall contour shape of DmSNAPc bound to the U1
and U6 PSEAs will be studied by cryo-electron microscopy, and X-ray
crystallography will be employed to investigate the structure of DmSNAPc and it
subunits at the atomic level. The results of the research will contribute widely
to the scientific community's understanding of gene expression at the level of
RNA synthesis. Fruit fly U1 genes serve as a particularly tractable paradigm for
investigating RNA polymerase II transcription complex assembly on TATA-less
promoters, a process that is currently very poorly understood. More generally,
this system serves as an excellent model for understanding how very subtle
changes in macromolecular interactions and assembly can lead to significantly
different biological outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
research will be performed by students in satisfaction of their B.S., M.S., and
Ph.D. degrees in biochemistry/molecular biology. The project will provide
training for their future careers in the biotechnology industry, for advancement
to graduate and professional schools, or to careers in academia as well as
teaching at the community college level. San Diego State University, due to its
border location and emphasis on undergraduate as well as graduate instruction,
serves a large body of undergraduate students from underrepresented ethnic
groups. The PI is active in undergraduate classroom teaching and has a strong
track record and history of involving underrepresented students in research,
from high school through the graduate level.