* 1157188
* Evaluation of the National Science Foundation's Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and Similar Programs in Other Federal Agencies
* O/D,EPS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Kevin Finneran, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Denise Barnes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Director: Kevin
Finneran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal:
EPS-1157188&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: National Academy of
Sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Evaluation of the National Science
Foundation?s Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and
Similar Programs in Other Federal Agencies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study is being conducted by the National Academy of Sciences? Committee on
Science, Engineering and Public Policy (COSEPUP) to support the National Science
Foundation in its efforts to comply with directives of the America COMPETES
Reauthorization Act of 2010. This act became Public Law 111-358, when signed by
President Obama in January, 2011. The Act contains numerous elements dealing
with initiatives to strengthen the nation?s science, engineering, and education
enterprises and contains language specific to several of the Foundation?s
Offices and Directorates, including the Office of the Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). It also contains language specific to
the six other federal agencies with congressionally authorized EPSCoR and
EPSCoR-like programs. Specifically, Section 517(f) calls for an assessment study
of the federal EPSCoR programs at all seven agencies, and states that the
National Academy of Sciences should conduct the assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The EPSCoR programs seek to
expand and enhance the nation?s research capacity by working with the
jurisdictions that receive lesser amounts of research funds from seven federal
agencies. These programs have achieved various levels of success and have been
evaluated and assessed individually. This study seeks to conduct a comprehensive
study of all EPSCoR and EPSCoR-like programs and provide recommendations for
their enhancements and improvements to achieve program goals consistent with the
specific agency missions, as appropriate. The National Academies have long
demonstrated their ability to assemble committees to perform rigorous
assessments of government programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Collectively, the EPSCoR jurisdictions have developed research
and education capacity and capability needed to address many of the science and
engineering challenges facing the nation. Specifically, many of the
jurisdictions have developed areas of expertise in energy, water and the
environment, and workforce development. In addition, many of the nation?s future
researchers are receiving their undergraduate or graduate training at
institutions of higher learning within these jurisdictions, particularly
students currently underrepresented in STEM. This study is expected to lead to
recommendations to enhance coordination across the agencies with EPSCoR programs
to maximize the impact of federal funding for building and sustaining
competitive research infrastructure nationally. In addition, strengthened
research capability in EPSCoR jurisdictions can contribute to their economic
success as local industries often benefit from direct interaction with
researchers who have access to infrastructure that sustains knowledge-based
innovation.