* 1157942
* Genetic and Molecular Dissection of Meiotic Silencing by Unpaired DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Patrick Shiu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2017
* USD 599,702.00

In many organisms, genome surveillance systems are present to control the gene
expression and spread of viruses and other selfish DNA elements. The goal of
this project is to elucidate the underlying mechanism of a phenomenon termed
Meiotic Silencing by Unpaired DNA (MSUD), a gene silencing system in the orange
bread mold Neurospora crassa. In this system, the cell examines the pairing of
genes with their partners during reproduction; any gene that is present in one
parental chromosome but not the other is inactivated. As the fungus behind the
Nobel Prize-winning "one gene-one enzyme hypothesis", N. crassa is an ideal
organism for studying MSUD due to its wide mutant selections, the availability
of its full genome sequence, and its long history of gene silencing research. As
with fungi, DNA lacking a pairing partner in worms, mice, and humans are also
targeted for silencing during development. The study of MSUD will provide
valuable insights into the role of unpaired DNA in gene silencing in fungi and
higher organisms. The objectives of this research are to characterize mutants
defective in MSUD and examine genes that are important for this
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: To broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups, the investigators of this project will recruit and
train undergraduate students from their own university as well as from other
non-Ph.D.-granting and minority-serving institutions (through a variety of
campus and NSF diversity programs). Research activities from this work will be
used to develop lesson plans for various outreach projects. Efforts will also be
made to promote scientific literacy and interdisciplinary partnership.