* 1157215
* Bridging Spatial Scales Using Phenological Measurements to Improve Understanding of Autumn Atmosphere-Biosphere Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Mark Schwartz, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 12/31/2014
* USD 74,273.00

The timing of leaf senescence (coloring and subsequent fall; i.e., phenology)
during autumn has potentially large impacts on energy and carbon exchange
between mid-latitude land surfaces and the lower atmosphere. However, spatial
variations in autumn phenological timing at the plant community level have not
been widely measured or analyzed, and underlying environmental drivers are not
well understood. Thus, detailed autumn phenological data offer considerable
opportunities for assessing landscape-level spatial variations crucial for
accurate scaling-up measurements to larger areas or downscaling information from
atmospheric general circulation models. In this project, spatial variability of
autumn phenological data will be measured and analyzed at the community level,
compared to microclimatic, carbon flux, and remote sensing measurements, with an
overall goal of contributing to increased accuracy of energy/carbon flux
estimates at continental to global scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address issues that are significant for advancement across the fields of
climatology, plant physiology, ecology, and remote sensing. The nature of autumn
phenological variability in space and time has not been previously recorded over
a large area and combined with supporting measurements. Results from recent
studies strongly suggest that understanding stand-level (~50 x 50 m) spatial
patterns of autumn plant phenological development (and the environmental
processes that drive them) will provide key knowledge needed to improve
landscape level estimates of carbon accumulation across the entire growing
season when combined with existing data for spring phenology. The spatially
concentrated phenological measures produced by this project will provide future
near-surface and satellite-derived remote sensing studies with a record of
autumn plant development and growth involving species differences, spatial
variability, and precise event timing that has not been recorded in the past.
Overall, the results of this project will contribute to better understanding of
the impacts of climate change on the biosphere, which will increase knowledge of
potential future changes, and may allow for better planning relative to societal
impacts of anticipated forest vegetation change.