* 1157020
* REU Site: An Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research Experience in Solar and Space Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2018
* Martin Snow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 02/28/2018
* USD 499,160.00

The Principal Investigaotrs (PIs) will continue their successful summer research
program that introduces undergraduate students to the interdisciplinary nature
of solar and space physics in a research setting. As part of the overall
program, this Colorado REU site will offer a one week summer school covering
research topics related to the Sun, the heliosphere, the Earth's magnetosphere
and upper atmosphere, and the coupled Sun-Earth system. This week of academic
lectures and laboratories will adapt and exploit the graduate summer school
curriculum developed by the Boston University team that managed the NSF's
Science and Technology Center known as the "Center for Integrated Space weather
Modeling" (CISM), in which the University of Colorado was a partner. This
Colorado REU curriculum will emphasize practical computer skills for solar and
space physics research. After the one week summer school experience, REU
students will perform individual research projects guided by scientist mentors
from collaborating institutes in the Boulder area, spanning the full range of
scientific research topics in solar and space physics. The REU program will
conclude with each student creating a workshop-quality poster and giving a 30
minute oral presentation covering their research and their scientific
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs note that the National Research Council's
decadal survey of solar and space physics raised concerns about declining
enrollments in academic departments related to solar and space physics, as well
as reductions in the availability of academic courses relevant to the field.
Since this threatened the supply of future researchers in the community, this
Colorado REU team has been determined to reverse this trend by encouraging
undergraduates to pursue research careers in solar and space physics. This
highly successful REU program has already provided over 70 undergraduates with
the motivation and technical background needed to pursue research in solar and
space physics, and the majority of these students have entered graduate programs
in the field after having earned their undergraduate degrees. This success is
expected to continue.