* 1157904
* I-Corps:  Flexible, Low Cost Cooling Technology for LED Lighting
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Light emitting diode (LED) lighting has the potential to reduce US electricity
consumption for lighting significantly within the next two decades, saving
billions of dollars. Better thermal management is key to increased commercial
adoption of LED lighting as system efficacy, reliability and cost are dependent
upon heat dissipation. Commercial LED systems typically use cast aluminum heat
sinks for cooling. Heat pipe technology, although well known for enhanced heat
dissipation, finds limited commercial use in LED lighting systems because of (a)
high cost and (b) limited design flexibility. Heat pipe technology that is (a)
highly efficient at heat distribution/dissipation, (b) flexible in terms of
design/manufacturing and (c) cost-effective would significantly enhance the
commercial viability of LED lighting systems by simultaneously improving system
efficacy and reducing cost. Innovations made by the PI in surface enhanced
boiling technology are expected to yield highly efficient heat pipes that are
flexible in design/manufacturing and cost-effective for use in varied LED
lighting systems. The proposed product, which includes an innovative air-cooled
condenser integrated with the LED light engine, will be able to provide
significantly higher heat removal capability without encountering problems
commonly experienced by commercial heat pipes such as dryout or critical heat
flux condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of LED lighting - superior
energy efficiency (lumens output per input watt), long life, consistency and
reliability - are highly dependent on thermal management as LEDs generate heat.
Unlike conventional lighting devices which dissipate by radiation, heat
generated by LEDs must be conducted away from the diodes quickly and
efficiently. Inadequate thermal management of heat generated by the LEDs leads
to consistent deterioration in light output and shorter LED lifetime. The
implementation of this technology will directly address the issues of the LED
industry and the nation's energy management mandate. This will allow for more
compact LED lighting systems especially for commercial lighting applications,
such as street lights and stadium lights, where high heat dissipation rates are
necessary. Providing more effective cooling will increase LED life and
significantly reduce the high replacement costs in these applications.
Ultimately, this project will demonstrate the technical and economic viability
of using enhanced heat pipes for LED cooling and accelerate the market adoption
of LED lighting for varied applications in commercial and industrial lighting.