* 1157982
* Plant Transverse Microtubule Array Organization
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,02/28/2017
* Sidney Shaw, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 02/28/2017
* USD 706,961.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Plants use the sun's energy to convert carbon
dioxide gas into the organic materials required for life. Key to this primary
productivity is the axial extension of plant stems into the atmosphere where
leaves can capture sunlight and exchange gases. The same axial growth process
drives roots into the soil to find water, nutrients and a stable footing for the
organism. This project is focused on elucidating the molecular mechanisms by
which seed plants execute this axial growth plan at a cellular level. Seed
plants have taken one of the major polymer systems found in all eukaryotic
cells, the microtubules, and repurposed them as patterning agents. The plant
cell creates specific patterns of microtubules just underneath the cell's
membrane that act as templates for the construction of the fibrous walls created
on the outside of the cell. It is the cell wall that ultimately gives the plant
its structure and rigidity. The finely detailed nanofabrication of the plant
cell wall underlies the ability of all seed plants to extend axially up into the
sunlight or down into the soil. This work employs modern molecular genetic
techniques and advanced cell biological methods in the Arabidopsis model system
with the aim of discovering what genes are specifically required for organizing
the microtubule arrays for axial cell growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impacts&lt;br/&gt;The basic science being performed impacts several areas of
practical and commercial interest. Crop plant plot density is directly dependent
upon the axial growth habit (e.g. corn or soybean fields). This work will
further elucidate the genes involved in mechanical extension of the hypocotyl
during seed germination, a critical period in crop plant development. This work
provides valuable information about plant microtubule dynamics, a common
herbicide target, and the patterning of cellulose polymers in the cell wall, the
major biofuels feedstock. This project provides advanced training for a post-
doctoral fellow and two (sequential) graduate students. The training will
include exposure to leading-edge imaging technologies and integrated
mathematical modeling. At least 2 undergraduate students will be working on this
project as part of their undergraduate honors thesis requirements. Specialized
techniques developed for acquisition and analysis of live-cell image data are
being presented as technical reports and in seminars to advance the field.