* 1157150
* Collaborative Research: Formation of Basement-involved Foreland Arches: An Integrated EarthScope Experiment
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2011,04/30/2014
* Kate Miller, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 04/30/2014
* USD 173,362.00

This EarthScope project, herein called the Bighorn Project, is an integrated
geological and geophysical investigation of contractional basement-involved
foreland arches. It addresses how these foreland arches form and how they are
linked to plate tectonic processes. The research in the Rocky Mountain Bighorn
Arch of northern Wyoming and southern Montana combines geological investigations
of surface geometries and kinematic indicators with geophysical imaging of 3D
crustal and upper mantle geometries from an active/passive seismic experiment.
The resulting 4D (3D spatial and temporal), lithospheric-scale model of foreland
arch deformation tests current hypotheses for basement-involved foreland thrust
belts both in the Rockies and in active orogens of Asia and the Andes. These
hypotheses include: 1) fault blocks defined by lithosphere-penetrating thrust
faults, 2) subhorizontal detachment within the crust, 3) lithospheric buckling,
and 4) pure shear lithospheric thickening. Our investigation to determine the
mechanism driving basement-involved arch formation is advancing our
understanding of continental lithospheric rheology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
three year (2009-12) collaborative project defines a lithospheric volume of 1.5
x106 km3 by integrating arch-scale upper crustal geometries derived from surface
exposures and petroleum industry subsurface data (Eric Erslev, University of
Wyoming; Christine Siddoway, Colorado College) with the results of a hybrid
seismic experiment. The passive component of this experiment consists of a 1.25
year (2009-10) deployment of 27 broadband seismometers that densify the
EarthScope transportable array (Megan Anderson, Colorado College), a 6.5 month
deployment of 220 short period seismometers (Anne Sheehan, University of
Colorado), and a 9 day deployment of 800 high frequency "Texan" seismometers
(Kate Miller, University of Texas at El Paso). The active component consists of
9 shots (summer 2010) recorded by the above instruments and an additional 1600
"Texan" seismometers deployed for 5 days. These instruments are arrayed in a
grid consisting of three SW-NE lines and two NW-SE lines with a total line
length of 1000 km. Joint inversion of active and passive results defines crustal
and upper mantle velocities and interface structures within the Bighorn Arch.
These new seismic results are integrated (2010-12) within a GIS-based, 3D
geospatial framework including data from exposures, geologic maps and industry
subsurface data for the study area. Kinematic information from fracture
transects (Erslev, Siddoway) and gravity modeling (Miller) is used to guide 3D,
lithosphere-scale structural restorations to test the compatibility of different
components in our 3D geometric model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact
of the Bighorn Project partially lies in the development of fundamental methods
for quantitative integration of geological and seismological research. In
addition, the Bighorn Project involves a broad range of geoscientists, including
one post-doctoral fellow, 4 graduate students, and &gt;15 undergraduates, who
will participate in IRIS and Keck Consortium sponsored research. The results
have key implications for energy resources, allowing the prediction of open
fractures that are critical to hydrocarbon production. The development of a
dramatic animation showing the 4D structural development of the Bighorns Arch
during the Laramide Orogeny provides important public outreach.