* 1157471
* GRC: Protein Folding and Dynamics in Ventura, CA January 7-8, 2012
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Nancy Gray, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2012
* USD 20,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Protein Folding Dynamics and the
accompanying Graduate Research Seminar (GRS) on Protein Folding Dynamics will
take place at the Ventura Beach Marriott, Ventura, California from January 7-8
(GRS)and January 8-13 (GRC). The main goal of the conference is to discuss
Protein folding and the development of a framework to describe how proteins fold
using the energy landscape perspective and concepts in polymer physics. The
Graduate Research Seminar in Protein Folding Dynamics is organized as a
satellite to the GRC in Protein Folding Dynamics. This workshop serves as a
venue for graduate students and postdoctoral scientists to i) develop background
on current techniques, theories and models in preparation for the GRC in Protein
Folding Dynamics, ii) share their knowledge of protein folding methodologies and
techniques and iii) meet each other and discuss their own research. The bulk of
the workshop will be devoted to research presentation and posters. All sessions
will be chaired by the students and post-docs enrolled at the GRS. The strong
participation of young researchers will be of high value for the next generation
of biophysicists. The conference is co-funded by the Division of Physics and by
the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.