* 1157712
* Protein DNA Specificity Determinants by Paramagnetic Metal-Based ESR Distance Measurements
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Linda Jen-Jacobson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 833,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;There are two major accomplishments associated
with this project: (a) Developing copper-based pulsed ESR experiments with the
aim of generalizing the technique to proteins that do not normally bind metals,
achieving up to a three-fold enhancement in signal-to-noise ratio through double
quantum coherence (DQC) methods for paramagnetic metal ions and exploiting such
techniques to learn about the packing of the side chain that is typically used
to spin label proteins. The distance measurement methodology will have a
significant impact on the ability to understand structure-function relationships
in proteins that cannot be studied by traditional biophysical methods. A series
of distance constraints between copper(II) centers site-selectively labeled on a
protein, X-ray structures and molecular modeling will provide detailed insights
into the packing and flexibility of side chains used to place paramagnetic metal
ions at selected sites in proteins. Such information will be especially
important for paramagnetic relaxation enhancement based structure determinations
in NMR. (b) Probe the relationships among structure, protein dynamics, and
thermodynamics in the restriction endonuclease EcoRI to adduce general
principles of site-specific protein-DNA recognition. Pulse-ESR distance methods
(both DEER and DQC) and X-band and W-band continuous wave ESR spectroscopy will
be applied to study the differences in dynamics and distance distributions
between complexes of EcoRI endonuclease bound to specific, miscognate (one
incorrect base pair) and nonspecific DNA sites. A newly acquired W-band ESR
spectrometer greatly enhances the ability to distinguish protein backbone
dynamics from motions of the spin label and provides the exciting opportunity to
characterize motions on the sub-nanosecond timescale. This will be one of the
first examinations of how ESR-based dynamic parameters differ not only at
different locations within a macromolecular complex, but also at corresponding
locations in a set of related recognition complexes. Such comparative
measurements will provide information on how microscopic differences in
structure and dynamics contribute to macroscopic differences in thermodynamic
parameters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:&lt;br/&gt;Six to eight
undergraduate researchers and two to three graduate students working on this
project will be trained at the interdisciplinary interface between chemistry and
biophysics. The PI will seek to recruit undergraduates from 4-year colleges by
actively presenting research at those institutes. Workshops will be organized
for high-school teachers, in the Pittsburgh area, to orient them with this
research as well as provide modules for use in high school curricula. Workshops
for high school students will expose them to careers in Chemistry. Software for
the extraction of distances from metal-based ESR data will be disseminated. Two
women will be trained in ESR as part of the support from this project. Research
ideas and themes developed in the project will be used to modernize the
undergraduate Physical Chemistry course. This initiative is in line with the
American Chemical Society's call for the incorporation of interdisciplinary and
integrative trends of chemical research into undergraduate curricula without the
creation of new course work.