* 1157515
* I-Corps:  Silicon Terahertz Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Michael Shur, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 09/30/2012
* USD 50,000.00

This project is to test the feasibility of nanoscale FET antenna arrays with
elements of new, previously unexplored configurations for THz radiation
interaction with objects. This work will be based on prior NSF-supported
research that demonstrated unique Si THz MOSFET and FINFET detectors. The
current approach will take advantage of inexpensive readout and image processing
electronics based on commercial Si VLSI technology. The project will result in
the fabrication of new nanoscale FET elements forming the THz detection units
with antenna. Design and simulation of antennas has been performed in HFSS to
ensure maximum efficiency. A major challenge of determining device impedance to
reduce reflection and maximize antenna gain has been resolved using software
tools developed by the PI group. The project will include studies of the THz
interaction with the device and coupling to antenna structures and analysis of
sensitivity, gain, noise, temperature dependencies, and Noise Equivalent Power.
The PI group will later combine individual Si THz detectors into large arrays to
form Focal Plane Arrays (FPA) for THz imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of terahertz systems to be developed in this program is in the areas of
national security, medical imaging, manufacturing, communication, and
spectroscopy. Today's terahertz detectors are hampered by high cost, low
responsivity at room temperature, high noise, and limited speed. The airport
security industry has grown to be over $130 billion per year. One of the most
widely used and effective airport security tools are the body scanner, which are
typically X-ray based, posing substantial health risks, especially to frequent
travelers. These systems suffer from relatively low resolution causing many
false-positive detections. In comparison, THz technology is safe and effective
for airport security. THz imaging can provide high resolution images and
irradiates the subject with a fraction of the energy of X-rays, thus being a
much safer solution. THz radiation cannot penetrate metal and detects plastic,
making it a prime candidate for detecting hidden weapons. It can also be used to
detect explosives, toxins, and other potential security threats. The proposed
detectors could establish a new generation of THz systems which would exploit
these unique opportunities.