* 1157779
* The evolution of deafness: the causes and consequences of ear loss in frogs
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Kim Hoke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 04/30/2014
* USD 26,825.00

This award addresses the evolution of sensory system reductions, that is, the
decreases in structural size or complexity or functional changes that limit an
animal?s capacity to sense the environment. Most terrestrial tetrapods have
tympanic ears that convert the external vibrations of air particles to
vibrations within the fluid-filled inner ear cavity containing the sensory end
organs via middle ear structures. Diverse frogs and toads, however, have
secondarily lost the outer and middle ears in independent evolutionary events,
despite the general tendency for anurans to use acoustic signals for the social
interactions that facilitate reproduction. This award supports an international
collaboration designed to integrate natural history, auditory physiology,
functional morphology, and evolutionary development to detail the causes and
consequences of evolutionary transitions. The study system chosen is
Pristimantis in Ecuador. Initial trips will provide the opportunity to locate
populations of earless Pristimantis frogs, describe basic natural history of the
earless species, and collect specimens for preliminary genetic and morphological
analyses. The intention is to expand on this preliminary information in future
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-disciplinary, international team will
include scientists from Ecuador, Denmark, and The Netherlands. This award will
support two female graduate students from the US in for trips to Ecuador,
introducing them to fieldwork in South America and to the diverse expertise of
the collaborating key individuals. Furthermore, Ecuadorian researchers and
students would have a unique opportunity to learn about auditory physiology via
an educational workshop. Results of this project are to be shared with the
broader public via undergraduate teaching and lectures for the public in the US
and in Ecuador. Finally this work will aid in frog conservation efforts.