* 1157907
* BRIGE: Translating Robotic Technology for Inclusive Fitness:  An Innovative Robotic Rowing Exoskeleton (RRE) Development Project
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/20/2011,09/30/2014
* Ashish Deshpande, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2014
* USD 218,999.00

Intellectual Merit: The opportunities for inclusion in fitness activity for
disabled individuals, particularly those with severe disabilities, are extremely
limited due to intrinsic, environmental, and social factors. This BRIGE project
focuses on advancing robotic technology as a strategy to promote fitness
opportunities for a range of individuals with disabilities. This project will 1)
design, test, and build a prototype robotic device called Robotic Rowing
Exoskeleton (RRE) that will augment movement, coordination, and strength in the
activity of rowing; 2) yield a complete dynamics model of rowing biomechanics
and parameter determination via human subject data; 3) provide a model system
through which biomechanics and parameter determination using human subject data
can be translated into precise robotic-assisted movement; 4) integrate
electromyography and robotics to create a prototype that will be responsive to
individual user needs; and 5) advance the development of an ongoing research
program in robotic devices for improved quality of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project will be used as the
foundation for the CIDER (Creating Investigator Diversity in Engineering
Research) model with five major components. First, diverse students for whom the
research agenda is personally relevant and compelling will be recruited to
participate in all phases of the program. Second, each of the student
researchers will engage in outreach in schools and a summer camp program for
middle and high school students to perpetuate ongoing recruitment of diverse
students into engineering research careers. Third, a video of RRE, its
development, and its use will be made for on-site and virtual dissemination
nationwide. Fourth, we will continue an ongoing program which hosts robotics
demos for middle school and high school students, especially, women, to
encourage them to pursue a career in Engineering. Finally, the model will be
formalized and evaluated so that it can be expanded to encourage the involvement
of other underrepresented groups in engineering.