* 1157919
* I-Corps:  Accelerated Innovation and Technology Transition in Semiconductor-Based Hydrogen and Hydrocarbon Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Jason Gu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The purpose of the proposed program is to quantify the technical and economic
viability of the sensor technology towards commercial deployment of the sensor
through strategic partners within the electrochemical and energy markets. The
value proposition of this effort is to provide chemical detection in industrial
processes at locations where no monitoring previously existed due to the
harshness of the operating environment. The effort is centered on the deployment
of a novel, robust chemical sensor technology developed by the proposing team at
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). The team has demonstrated the sensitivity of
the sensing technology to hydrogen and various hydrocarbons ranging from parts-
per-million levels to 20%. This range covers the lower explosive limit of
hydrogen and hydrocarbons in an oxidizing environment (typically 4-10%), making
this technology a viable candidate for detection of faulty conditions that may
lead to explosions in industrial processes. Devices have been operated at
elevated temperatures and in the severe environment of wet chlorine without any
observed degradation of the device sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empowering
this commercial endeavor will have the following three overall broader impacts:
1. Prevent explosions, which may endanger lives, damage capital equipment and
cause plant down-time; 2. Advance complementary technologies (e.g. electrical
contacts, data transmission). These technologies can be subsequently used to
deploy other capabilities (e.g. in-situ flow control and feedback) into similar
harsh environments; 3. Develop entrepreneurial expertise required for
transitional research. This aspect includes the training of a graduate student
who will gain valuable experience with innovative and entrepreneurial processes.
Chemical monitoring is of prime importance within industrial processes that deal
with flammable gases such as hydrogen and hydrocarbons. Oftentimes, chemical
monitoring is not available at the point of flammable gas evolution due to
corrosive environments or elevated temperatures. Improvements to existing
monitoring can be readily achieved by deploying sensors capable of operation at
the point of flammable gas evolution. Development of complementary technologies
(e.g. electrical contacts, wireless communications in industrial plants) will
contribute to the general understanding of device operation in these
environments, which will empower deployment of other innovations.