* 1157094
* REU site: Introduction to Multiscale Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Cecilia Richards, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2015
* USD 317,398.00

This three year REU Site award at Washington State University (WSU) entitled
"Introduction to Multiscale Engineering, is dedicated to using modern
processing, modeling and analysis techniques to understand the relationships
between the structure and properties at various length scales spanning the
spectrum from the atomic scale to the macroscopic scale. Ten undergraduate
students will participate each summer in individual projects over the course of
10 weeks. A group of 9 faculty members in the College of Engineering and
Architecture at WSU will be dedicated to mentoring and research supervision.
Each project will introduce the student to basic concepts in multiscale
engineering and, thus, each project will include components (experimental and/or
analytical and numerical) that deal with at least two different length scales.
Students will work with a team including faculty, post docs and graduate
students on projects such as multiscale models of materials behavior, discrete
particle simulation of granular materials, collective behavior of carbon
nanotubes, mechanical behavior of sheet metals under dynamic loading, modeling
and simulation of microfluidic fuel cells, thermoacoustic electricity
generators, scaling of hydrogenic twin-screw extruders for the fueling of fusion
energy machines, fabrication and characterization of thermal interface
materials, scaling issues in resonant heat engines, and multiscale effects in
composite laminates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site program will provide a
research experience for a diverse group of students, ranging from ethnicity,
gender, academic, and economic backgrounds. Recruitment efforts will focus on
students from demographic groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering
and science, students from schools that have limited research, and students who
are 1st and 2nd year undergraduates who are often not given research
opportunities. The goal for this REU site is to increase participation by
underrepresented groups from the current 45% to over 50%. In particular, the
program will increase participation by Hispanic students through mentoring
programs. By actively recruiting students who have finished their first and
second years, the program aims to attract students to engineering who otherwise
might have changed majors later in their undergraduate studies. This strategy is
designed to attract and retain students from many disciplines of engineering and
science to careers in multiscale science and engineering.