* 1157432
* Neural Mechanisms of Memory Targeting
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Sean Polyn, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Alumit Ishai
* 04/30/2015
* USD 408,619.00

Despite their importance, the neural and cognitive mechanisms underlying memory
search and recall are poorly understood. With funding from the National Science
Foundation, cognitive neuroscientist Dr. Sean Polyn of Vanderbilt University, is
developing a computational model of the human memory system. His goal is to
understand how the brain supports memory formation and memory search. The human
brain contains sophisticated neural circuitry that allows humans to form
detailed memories of past experience and to carry out flexible, goal-directed
searches through those memories. Major issues being addressed in this project
include determining how and why distraction impairs the ability to remember
recent events, and determining how memory can be searched for a particular class
of items as opposed to another (for example, if one is trying to remember which
vegetables one needs to buy at the supermarket, it doesn't help to recall the
baked goods one needs).Dr. Polyn's computational model, the Context Maintenance
and Retrieval model, suggests that studying for a later memory test (for
example, a student studying vocabulary for the SAT) results in associations
between neural representations of the to-be-remembered material and a retrieval
cue that is used in later reactivating the memory representations of the studied
material. In experiments, participants study a series of items presented one at
a time, and at the end of the series they are asked to remember in order as many
of the studied items as they can. During the task, investigators record brain
activity using electroencephalography, which records fluctuations in voltage at
the scalp that are generated by the brain. This brain activity is used
computationally to predict whether a particular piece of information will be
remembered and also to predict the order in which the memories will be
retrieved. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to engage in self-initiated memory
search is critical to a healthy, independent life. Performance on recall-based
memory search tasks is a sensitive predictor of cognitive decline and is one of
the tests used to diagnose Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and other
neurocognitive disorders. This project is providing insights into the mechanisms
of memory deficits that might be related to deficits seen in the many brain
disorders affecting memory. The project will potentially lead to new treatments,
once the roles of these brain regions are better understood.