* 1157070
* REU: AERO-U: Aerospace Engineering Research Opportunities for Undergraduates
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 12/31/2016
* USD 383,116.00

This three year REU Site award will engage 10 undergraduate students in research
focuses in computational and experimental multi-scale physics in the Department
of Aerospace Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University. The objectives of this REU
are to: (1) Involve a total of ten students, for ten-weeks in each of three
summers, in three key research areas of multi-scale physics (solid mechanics,
fluid and plasma dynamics, system dynamics and control); (2) Encourage
participation of students from underrepresented minorities, which includes
females; (3) Provide information on graduate school and encourage students to
apply; (4) Provide opportunities for REU students to present and publish with
faculty and collaborate beyond the summers if possible; and (5) Provide
networking and community-building opportunities among REU, TAMU students, and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable access to limited research
opportunities in multi-scale physics. Specific research areas include plasma
flow physics and electromagnetic space propulsion systems, novel turbulence
physics models, and hypersonic flow physics. Many of these areas are critical to
national goals, USA leadership in space exploration, future aerospace
transportation needs, and homeland security, in addition to connecting to
current research and challenges faced by engineering on a global
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program also seeks to enhance and diversify the
pool of talented students considering research careers in multi-scale physics by
enabling access for women and underrepresented groups to aerospace engineering
research. Participating students will be involved in research that can
contribute to increased understanding of meso-scale and multi-scale physics and
new approaches to modeling such phenomena. Faculty and student mentors will work
closely with the College of Engineering's Institute of Engineering Education and
Innovation on ensuring the experience includes aspects of multi-disciplinary
design, experiential learning, systems thinking/engineering, and professional
development for the students. In addition, the students will be a part of a
larger group of undergraduate researchers through our collaboration with the
College of Engineering's Undergraduate Summer Research Grant program, which
works with in excess of 60 students each summer. Students who complete the
program will be tracked through professional and social networking sites
(Linked-In, Facebook, etc.). After participating, REU students will receive
information they can use in recruiting for the REU or for outreach visits that
they can initiate on their own and continue keeping this access to the careers
open. Participating students will be required to display their posters and
recruit future REU students at their home institutions, i.e., practice each one,
reach one and teach one.