* 1157305
* Mechanisms and Evolution of the Telomere Protective Complex Cdc13-Stn1-Ten1
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Neal Lue, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 04/30/2017
* USD 845,398.00

Intellectual merit: Telomeres are specialized structures located at the ends of
linear eukaryotic chromosomes. These structures consist of repetitive DNA
sequences and a complex array of proteins that cap chromosome ends and protect
chromosomes from deleterious rearrangements. The overall goal of this research
is to investigate the mechanisms of the Cdc13-Stn1-Ten1 (CST) protein complex,
which constitutes a critical and widely conserved component of telomeres.
Despite a great deal of analysis, there are numerous gaps in the current
understanding of how this complex is put together and how it protects telomere
DNA. Preliminary studies uncovered two unexpected features of the CST complex:
it is dimeric and contains more copies of Stn1 than the other subunits.
Moreover, a second Cdc13-like protein (called Cdc13B) that regulates telomeres
was identified in many Candida species. By analyzing the detailed interactions
among the CST components and those between CST and telomeric DNA, this research
will provide critical insights on how the cells maintain chromosome stability.
In addition, by studying the functional overlap or diversification between Cdc13
and Cdc13B, this investigation will expand current understanding of the
evolution of telomeres. The findings are also likely to influence telomere
research in other organisms.

Broader impact: This project includes the training and development of
underrepresented minority undergraduates at Hostos Community College (HCC), part
of the City University of New York (CUNY). Motivated students will receive
initial training at their home institution in a specially tailored laboratory
course. They will then directly participate in the project during summer
internships. Due to the well-established nature of the protocols for subsets of
the experiments, the students will have realistic opportunities for making
meaningful contributions to the project. The students' achievements will be
showcased at HCC and other forums. Scientific reports authored by students will
be published in the HCC on-line journal Hostos Journal of Student Research. They
will also be presented at the Annual Biomedical Research Conference for Minority
Students (ABRCMS). These activities should generate interest among peers at HCC
and beyond, and help motivate and encourage these students to pursue careers in
science. Moreover, while the project has a primary focus on telomere biology,
the findings will also provide general insights on protein-nucleic acid
interactions as well as on the co-evolution of proteins and their DNA-targets.