* 1157392
* Generation of Unsaturated Alpha-keto Acids using Engineered Acetoacetate Decarboxylase-Like Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Nicholas Silvaggi, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 708,621.00

Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;The acetoacetate decarboxylase-like superfamily
(ADCSF) is a new and largely unexplored group of en-zymes that may be a source
of new "green chemistry" biocatalysts. The long-term goal of this project is to
define the structural features responsible for reaction and substrate
specificity in selected ADCSF enzymes with potential as useful biocatalysts in
research or industrial settings. With this knowledge, it may ultimately be
possible to engineer these enzymes for specific applications. The objective of
this work is to determine the mechanisms of catalysis and substrate specificity
in the ADCSF enzymes Sbi_00515 from Streptomyces bingchenggensis and Swit_4259
from Sphingomonas wittichii. Our central hypothesis is that both enzymes are
hydratase-aldolases, catalyzing the formation or breakdown of alpha-keto acids
using a mechanism involving a lysine Schiff base. The rationale for these
experiments is that, since these two enzymes do not have decarboxylase activity,
the acetoacetate decarboxylase structure must have been adapted to perform other
catalytic functions. A thorough understanding of the structural aspects that
determine reaction specificity will not only facilitate efforts to engineer
these enzymes as biocatalysts, but will also broaden our understanding of the
relationship between enzyme structure and function. These objectives will be
attained by pursuing the following specific aims. First, the preferred substrate
and catalytic mechanism of the putative hydratase-aldolase Sbi_00515 will be
determined. Sbi_00515 will be screened for activity against a panel of potential
substrates. These kinetic experiments will be supported by structural studies of
the enzyme with potential substrates bound. Transient and steady state kinetics
on wild-type and mutant forms of Sbi_00515, together with kinetic isotope
effects, will be used to probe the catalytic mechanism. Second, the reaction
catalyzed by Swit_4259 will be defined, and structural features favoring C-C
bond breaking or formation will be identified. X-Ray crystallography, steady-
state kinetics, and bioinformatics approaches will be used to characterize the
interaction of Swit_4259 with candidate substrates. The observation of
significant differences between the Swit_4259 and Sbi_00515 active sites
suggests that the two enzymes have different substrate specificities and may
catalyze different reactions. Comparisons of the structures of unliganded and
substrate-bound forms of both enzymes should allow us to discern relationships
between structure and function in these enzymes. This work is original, because
it will expand the ADCSF field beyond the few decarboxylases studied thus far.
Due to the dearth of research on this superfamily, it is virtually impossible to
predict the functions of family members discovered by genome mining. The
outcomes of the research will be detailed mechanistic information about
Sbi_00515-catalyzed aldol condensation and cofactor-independent dehydration,
which will help us understand how evolution has modified the decarboxylase
scaffold to perform a new catalytic function. It is also expected that the
principal determinants of substrate specificity will be identified, which will
facilitate subsequent work aimed at engineering Sbi_00515 and Swit_4259 to
produce alpha-keto acids with tailored side chains. These outcomes will have a
positive impact by expanding and helping to define the burgeoning ADCSF field,
as well as improving the ability of researchers to more accurately predict the
functions of ADCSF enzymes identified by genome
sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
use a number of strategies to promote teaching, training and learning. First,
the PI's group has an established record of including undergraduates in research
projects. The structural enzymology work proposed is readily divided into
semester-long sub-projects that allow undergraduates to make significant
contributions to the progress of the research. The PI will also incorporate
actual research data into the two courses he teaches each year, both of which
are primarily undergraduate offerings. These data will be used to illustrate
principles of data interpretation, as well as fundamental aspects of protein
structure and function. Particular attention will be paid to the overall
development of the graduate students and postdoctoral scholars funded by this
proposal, not only as researchers, but as fully-integrated members of the
scientific community. In order to achieve this goal, all trainees will receive
instruction in both written and oral presentation of research results, academic
integrity, and professional development. To maximize the number of students who
will benefit from the proposed research, the PI is participating in the
"Students Modeling a Research Topic" (SMART) program offered through the
Milwaukee School of Engineering. SMART Teams introduce 10th-12th graders to
structural biology as they work in collaboration with their teacher and faculty
research mentor. Finally, the PI will disseminate the results of the research
not only to the scientific community, but also the general public through a
series of podcasts. Thus, the research will have positive social impact, applied
benefits, and advance the ADCSF field.