* 1157368
* Managed Migration and the Value of Labor
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Kerry Preibisch, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 186,425.00

Dr. David Griffith (East Carolina University) and Dr. Ricardo Contreras (East
Carolina University), along with collaborators Dr. Elizabeth Juárez Cerdi (El
Colegio de Michoacán) and Dr. Kerry Preibisch (University of Guelph), will
undertake research on the sending community effects of managed migration
(guestworker) programs. There has been a global increase in managed migration
programs; therefore, increasing numbers of guestworkers from Mexico and Central
America have had the opportunity to experience United States and Canadian labor
markets and work regimes. At the same time, however, many families across Latin
America are struggling to maintain traditional livelihoods, such as fishing and
farming, based on domestic production -- household economic operations that draw
on family labor and are oriented toward the maintenance and reproduction of the
domestic unit and its supporting cultural traditions and social institutions.
The co-occurrence of workers who sell their labor in North America and workers
who work in traditional contexts provides an exceptional opportunity for a
comparative study of work, labor values, and well-being.

Working with a multinational team in Mexico and Guatemala, the researchers will
investigate how the migrants' experiences compare to each other and to others in
their home communities, with a particular focus on how they understand and value
labor. The researchers' overarching question is whether the experience of
selling labor in Western labor markets affects the culturally based economic
logic of how labor is valued at home. The research will be carried out in four
communities that have a range of domestic producer operations (artisanal,
farming, and fishing) and also send large numbers of guestworkers to the North
American labor markets. The researchers will gather data using a combination of
qualitative research methods, including: community mappings, several time-staged
phases of interviewing, focus groups, transect walks, and cultural domain
analyses employing cultural consensus testing, sentence frame tasks, and pile-
sorting tasks.

Findings from this research will contribute to social scientific theorizing of
the relation between economic activities, culture, and social well-being. The
focus on nonmonetary values attached to labor is important in light of the
current global economic crisis, which has challenged prevailing economic logic.
Understanding how labor in different kinds of economic operations produce
happiness, dignity, and social legitimacy can assist policy-makers across both
North America and Latin America in promoting economic alternatives that have
beneficial individual and social outcomes and in developing more effective
managed migration programs. Funding this research also supports international
research collaboration and education.