* 1157478
* CNIC: U.S.-Danish Research Planning Visit to Catalyze Computational and Engineering Research on Scour Protection of Offshore Wind Farms
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Xiaofeng Liu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/2013
* USD 19,654.00

This research planning visit to the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) will
enable Prof. Xiaofeng Liu from the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) to
initiate collaboration with Danish counterpart, Prof. B. Mutlu Sumer, on the
emerging topic of foundation scour protection for offshore wind farms. Prof.
Liu, accompanied by one U.S. graduate student, will bring modeling and
computational expertise to the envisioned joint research while the DTU research
team headed by Prof. Sumer will contribute significant expertise in the area of
erosion and scour effects on wind turbine foundations. Through a series of
technical presentations, group discussions, and site visits to wind energy
companies based in Denmark, the researchers intend to focus their plans for a
more extensive examination of fluid dynamic mechanisms that are involved in the
scouring of offshore foundations. Preliminary results should provide new insight
into the turbulent flow structures around piles protected by porous stone
layers, with the goal of defining new engineering solutions that address issues
related to the stability and construction of off-shore wind
farms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this award will catalyze a new US-
Danish research collaboration. Broader impacts may include new knowledge
applicable to future efforts to prevent damages to offshore installations on
seabed. Furthermore, the U.S. student's early career involvement will provide a
valuable professional introduction to individuals and Danish institutions with
expertise in a wide range of topics associated with the generation of carbon-
free wind energy.