* 1157218
* Chinese Immigration and Family Encounters in Italy
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Elizabeth Krause, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2016
* USD 169,418.00

Dr. Elizabeth L. Krause, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, will conduct
qualitative research on how families transform and cope in the context of
transnational capitalism and immigration. The Province of Prato (Italy) will
serve as an ethnographic laboratory for investigating the conditions of
globalization. Here, a historic textile district known for its Made in Italy
"brand" hosts one of Europe's largest overseas Chinese communities. The research
will examine instances where Chinese workers in the textile industry encounter
state officials concerning workplace health and safety conditions; the health
and well-being of area residents; and the sending of Chinese children back to
China to be cared for by relatives. This research will investigate how family
arrangements have shifted as a result of economic, political, and social
transformations, thereby illuminating the cultural logics and values that emerge
from encounters between workers and state institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will involve three types of data collection: 1) structured data
elicitation, in the form of tasks such as free lists; 2) semi-structured
interviews with Chinese parents who work in the textile industry and who have
experience sending their children back to China; and 3) unstructured interviews,
in the form of naturally occurring speech at public and other social events, as
well as participant observation in work and health environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaboration with a Prato-based research institute will
take place at all levels: research design, data collection, data analysis,
writing, and policy-making. A training component focuses on developing
systematic approaches to qualitative data analysis, and findings will be
disseminated through academic and public outlets. Contributions will also be
made to an urban diversity management plan in the Province of Prato. The results
of the research will deepen understandings of emerging values and increase the
possibilities for well-being in the context of globalization and immigration.