* 1157921
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Metabolomic Characterization of Red Light and CO2 Signaling in Guard Cells and Mesophyll Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Sarah Assmann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 04/30/2018
* USD 723,188.00

Intellectual Merit. The research team plans to use modern biological tools to
investigate the functions of metabolites in the processes of red light and
carbon dioxide (CO2) regulated stomatal movement at the plant leaf surface.
Stomata are microscopic pores enclosed by pairs of highly specialized epidermal
cells called guard cells. Stomatal movements (enabled by volume changes in guard
cells) control both CO2 uptake for photosynthesis and water loss from the plant
to the atmosphere, and thus are closely related to plant growth, acclimation to
environmental stresses such as drought, agricultural yield, bioenergy and human
life. Red light and CO2 provide energy and the substrate for photosynthesis and
biomass production. Red light and CO2 also regulate stomatal movement via
intricate intracellular and extracellular signaling and metabolic networks. This
research will elucidate and analyze these networks by studying the roles of
metabolites synthesized by the guard cells or secreted by the major
photosynthetic cells of the leaf in response to these signals. Dynamic changes
of intracellular and extracellular metabolites upon red light and CO2 treatment
will be characterized and correlated with the physiological output of stomatal
movement. The project is expected to identify novel metabolites, place them in a
functional context, and construct predictive molecular models of red light and
CO2 signal transduction. The resources from this project will be distributed via
a publicly accessible web interface for maximum scientific impact. The project
is expected to contribute positively toward future biotechnology of enhanced
plant yield and bioenergy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project is
expected to generate results with broad societal impact, e.g., leading to
rational plant metabolic engineering for enhanced stress tolerance, more food
and bioenergy. The results will improve understanding of plant metabolism and
signaling in guard cells and photosynthetic mesophyll cells, unravel the
metabolic networks regulating stomatal function, and advance basic biological
science. The techniques, data and resources developed during the project will be
of immediate value to studies of other plant cells, pathways and species and
will be disseminated via a web interface as well as in publications and at
scientific conferences. The project will provide cross-disciplinary training of
personnel, including high school students, undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral scientists, in the frontiers of modern biological
sciences. Because large-scale and high-throughput metabolite analysis
(metabolomics) is still in its infancy, a hands-on plant metabolomics
workshop/symposium will be offered to graduate students and postdoctorates
nationwide. Graduate students and postdoctoral scientists from the Chen and
Assmann laboratories will be involved in developing and running the workshop,
thus gaining valuable experience in teaching outside the standard classroom
setting. Women and under-represented students will be recruited for the training
opportunities. Overall, the training and outreach program is designed to
integrate research and education to help prepare the next generation of plant
scientists in the frontier areas of metabolomics, computational biology and the
emerging disciplines of systems biology.