* 1157613
* CNIC: US-Spain Cooperation on Building Hybrid Nano-Communication Networks: RF Meets Molecules
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Eylem Ekici, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 23,485.00

Through this catalytic planning visit, Prof. Eylem Ekici of Ohio State
University (OSU) will initiate cooperative research with partners in Spain to
examine nano-scale communication systems. Spanish counterparts, led by Prof.
Albert Cabellos with the Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, have expertise in
molecular communication in nanoscale networks and are based at the
Nanonetworking Center (N3Cat) in Catalonia. Their strengths complement those of
the OSU research team in carbon nanotube antennas. Together, the goal is to
refine and develop plans for a cooperative research project to build hybrid
nano-communication networks that combine desirable characteristics observed in
electromagnetic wave information transmission (RF-based) and in molecular
diffusion information transmission. If successful, their efforts may lead to
innovative design approaches to nano-scale communication components and networks
that are capable of acting together to handle complex tasks.

Contributions to development of new communication paradigms with integrated
nano/molecular subsystems are among the broader impacts anticipated from the
planned long-term collaboration. Results may lead to improved nanosystems with
future applications in environmental and biomedical situations where nanodevices
provide an interface between biological phenomena and electronic devices.
Furthermore, because graduate students will be part of this US-Spanish
collaboration, they are expected to benefit from interdisciplinary course work
inspired by the team's latest findings and from their early career introduction
to international research in the emerging field of communications engineering.