* 1157909
* Making Global Capital Work: Economic Openness and Corporate Governance in Chinese Capital Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Douglas Guthrie, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* mo wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 136,178.00

In this project the investigators examine how global investors in China's
nascent capital markets shape firm outcomes including firm performance,
technology transfer, and domestic research and development (R &amp; D); where
they fail and what the problems are; and in which institutional contexts they
succeed, and why. Most financial-economic studies of global capital agree on the
positive effects of opening a country's stock market to foreign investors. But
political economists and sociologists emphasize countries? institutional
configurations and local variation that often constrain, weaken, and even
disable the benefits of economic globalization. The investigators call for a
more balanced perspective on global capital by integrating these two theoretical
accounts. Three datasets on China's publicly-traded firms are combined: the
WindDB dataset covering these firms' financial information, and the China Center
for Economics Research (CCER) and the Chinese Securities Markets and Accounting
Research (CSMAR) datasets detailing organizational information. The resulting
dataset provides company-by-year observations from 1994 till 2011. Acknowledging
that quantitative analysis may not capture sufficient empirical details about
how processes work, the investigators will conduct case-studies of 9-12 firms as
supplementary data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, this
research contributes to the thriving interdisciplinary literature on the
institutions of corporate governance around the world. In recent years, China
has deepened its integration into the global market and developed its corporate
governance regime. But the Chinese model of corporate setting where state
entities are dominating and controlling shareholders is not well understood.
This research will provide both theoretical and practical insights into how
countries can initiate organizational and institutional changes to take
advantage of the potential benefits brought by foreign investments over time.
Findings should have practical implications for both corporate managers and
public policy.