* 1157431
* Elucidation of Peptide Surface Structural Effects on the Catalytic Activity of Bio-Inspired Pd Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/19/2011,08/31/2014
* Marc Knecht, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 318,815.00

1033334&lt;br/&gt;Knecht&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bio-inspired strategies have
emerged as potential approaches to prepare and employ technologically important
nanomaterials as catalysts that use eco-friendly and energy efficient reaction
conditions. As a result, sustainable and efficient catalytic methods may be
developed using these techniques. Peptide-based fabrication strategies have
become unique examples of synthetic approaches as the sequences are composition
specific, are able to generate nanoparticles of &lt;20 nm, and result in final
structures which are highly active. However, the source of this activity is not
understood. Principal Investigator Marc Knecht through the University of
Kentucky Research Foundation believes a unique surface architecture is
established leading to the activity. He intends to elucidate atomic-level
structural information concerning the peptide surface ligands of biomimetic Pd
nanoparticulate catalysts to isolate the motifs responsible for their enhanced
catalytic reactivity for carbon-coupling reactions in water at room temperature.
Unfortunately, little information is presently known about how the peptides
coordinate to the surface of the catalyst particle, as it is this interaction
which is likely responsible for the enhanced reactivity of the materials. The PI
believes that the sequence binds in such a manner that it exposes a significant
fraction of the metallic surface, from which reactivity occurs. By understanding
this surface structure, the PI will be able to explore the catalytic mechanism
for C-coupling, which could subsequently be exploited to expand the reactivity
spectrum of these efficient catalyst materials. By understanding the surface
structure and mode of sequence interactions, the rational design of peptides and
other ligands could be possible to develop further enhanced nanocatalytic
architectures. This is the broader technical impact of the project. The work has
immediate potential to impact energy efficient and environmentally friendly
catalytic schemes for use in delivering "green" chemical synthetic
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader outreach impact of the proposal
employs the very visual nature of the catalytic research as a mechanism to
increase interest in STEM disciplines in rural Kentucky students. The PI
proposes to use the visual and colorful aspects of this research as a mechanism
to grasp and maintain student interest in hopes of increasing their future
educational development. From this topic, student exposure to eco-
friendly/energy efficient catalysis, nanotechnology, and organic
chemistry/molecules can occur.