* 1157772
* Dynamics and Structure in Complex Molecular Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Fayer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2015
* USD 626,817.00

This project by Professor Fayer of Stanford University is supported by the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Chemistry, and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry and Condensed Matter
Physics Programs in the Division of Materials Research. The research involves an
interrelated set of experimental and theoretical investigations of dynamics in
complex liquids using optical nonlinear experimental methods and theory. The
term complex liquid is used to describe systems that have significant nanoscopic
structures that arise from anisotropic intermolecular interactions and give rise
to complex structural dynamics. Such liquids include liquid crystals in both the
isotropic phase and in macroscopically ordered phases and room temperature ionic
liquids (RTILs). Very simple liquids like argon or carbon tetrachloride have no
significant liquid structure other than that described in terms of featureless
solvation shells. However, highly anisotropic molecules with strong interactions
arising from large dipole moments or charges can have extended structures that
span many nanometers. The range of the liquid structure can depend on
temperature or solutes. Solutes can induce or disrupt structure. Long range
ordering occurs in liquids in molecular systems that range from technological
applications to biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of experimental methods
will be employed to study the interrelations ships among intermolecular
interactions, structure, and dynamics. Optical heterodyne detected optical Kerr
effect (OHD-OKE) experiments that cover a time scale from hundreds of
femtoseconds to microseconds using a new phase cycling methodology will be
employed. The OHD-OKE experiments, which measure the orientational dynamics
(polarizability-polarizability correlation function) of liquids, will be
combined with ultrafast 2D IR vibrational echo experiments, which measure
spectral diffusion (structural dynamics). In addition, polarization selective IR
pump-probe experiments will be used that measure orientation relaxation of
specific solutes. The 2D IR vibrational echo experiments produce two dimensional
spectra which depend on both phase and intensity to provide detailed information
akin to 2D NMR. The vibrations of a set of novel probe molecules will be used in
the 2D IR studies that provide distinct perspectives on the systems, structures,
and dynamics. The aim is to understand the interrelationship between structure
and dynamics in these nanostructured systems by making measurements with
different techniques as a function of the structure of the molecular units that
comprise the systems, temperature, solute type, and concentration. The
experiments will be combined with theoretical calculations and simulations, a
number of which will be conducted in collaboration with theoretical research
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed experiments will have a broad impact
on our understanding of molecular systems that are important in many fields of
science. The development of new experimental methods will be shared widely and
will be useful to many in the broad research community. The systems under study
are both of fundamental interest and technological importance. Liquid crystals
are found in many products. RTILs are being used or considered for a wide
variety of applications. This work will broaden the scientific community's
understanding of important chemical and materials systems, particularly how
nanostructuring influences system properties. In addition to the scientific
impact, the Professor Fayer is the faculty head of an outreach program that
sends graduate students into local high schools to work with the high school
students conducting sets of experiments that are tied into the high school
chemistry curriculum. Finally, Professor Fayer is involved in the wide
dissemination of teaching materials at both the graduate and under graduate
levels and has written a book, "Absolutely Small: How Quantum Theory Explains
Our Everyday World" to explain molecular quantum theory and it applications to
laymen, high school students, college students, and scientists who are not
specialists in quantum theory.