* 1157136
* Conference: 2011 Meeting of the Society for Social Neuroscience; Washington , DC
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2011,10/31/2012
* Steven Phelps, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 10/31/2012
* USD 17,832.00

Social behaviors are among the most complex and interesting traits exhibited by
any organisms. Social behaviors can vary tremendously across different species,
yet recent work suggests that there are often common neural and molecular
mechanisms that produce such diverse behaviors. Such common themes could prove
tremendously important for our understanding of social behavior and how it
contributes to a range of contemporary concerns, ranging from wildlife
conservation to racial bias. This project will help to launch a new scientific
society, the Society for Social Neuroscience, by bringing together outstanding
researchers and students from a diverse array of fields. The researchers and
students will present original research findings, which together can illuminate
how genes and environment interact to shape the neuronal basis of social
behavior. The resulting meeting will integrate viewpoints from fields as diverse
as molecular evolution, neuroethology, primatology, social psychology and
economics. By immersing students and researchers in the many scholarly fields
that contribute to social neuroscience, we hope to foster new, interdisciplinary
insights into the basis of social behavior among humans and non-human animals.
The presentations at the meeting will be available online for members of the
society and the organizers are seeking publications in several journals. The
society will also formulate plans for managing the wealth of genomic and neural
imaging data currently being generated in attempts to advance the field by
generating useful data and knowledge.