* 1157881
* I-Corps:  Replication of Laser-Generated Surface Textures for Anti-Icing and Sun-Light-Trapping Applications.
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Mool Gupta, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

A proposal is made to enable the I-Corps team to properly test the value
proposition of using high power laser processing to create superhydrophobic
surfaces for anti-icing and also for anti-reflection coatings. This
superhydrophobic material, initially named "TexCone" for textured cones, has
been created through NSF I/UCRC Center supported research. The micro/nano
surface textures on metals and semiconductor surfaces have also been replicated
on low cost polymeric surfaces and these also show superhydrophobic
characteristics as well as anti-reflection properties which would be of
significant value to the solar power industry due to enhanced light trapping.
Under this program, the team will develop a process to replicate samples of at
least 5 cm x 5 cm for evaluation by industrial members and in doing so will
establish the price point for mass -production of TexCone. Also, initial
durability data under realistic environmental conditions will be generated,
allowing the proper evaluation of commercial potential. A business plan specific
to laser etching and micro-textured replicated coatings based on scientific data
and market analysis will be developed under the I-Corps workshop which defines
sales channels, partners for testing and investment as well as a budget for
defining resource requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial potential
of the technology is significant as anti-icing technology would create value for
commercial and military airplanes, blades for wind energy generation, large
refrigeration systems used in biomedical applications and many other industries.
In the US aviation industry alone, it has been estimated that over 25 mn gallons
of anti-icing chemicals are used annually at a purchase cost of $8 - $12 which
does not include environmental impact. Success with anti-icing applications
would encourage investment and innovation in laser textured materials and its
replicated microstructures such as TexCone. The project will also enable the
team to introduce the potential benefits of TexCone to many industrial
companies. The technology will also promote significant enhancements in the
competitiveness of solar power. There are potentially many other industrial
areas that will benefit from a formalized review and investigation of complex
laser etchings. The NSF I-Corps workshop will provide a structured approach for
the team to investigate the vast potential of microscopic TexCones.