* 1157231
* Mechanisms of Lipid Import into Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Christoph Benning, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2016
* USD 739,995.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;The chloroplast is the defining organelle of plant
cells. It contains the photosynthetic membrane, which converts sunlight into
chemical energy, a process essential to most forms of life on earth. The
photosynthetic membrane is not able to make its building blocks, the polar lipid
constituents, but relies on lipid precursors assembled at the inner and outer
chloroplast envelope membranes and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), a membrane
system outside the chloroplast. Therefore, lipid transfer into the chloroplast
and through the envelope membranes to the photosynthetic membranes is essential.
Gaining a mechanistic understanding of lipid transfer processes involved in the
assembly of the photosynthetic membrane is the long-term goal of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The isolation of genetic mutants of the model
plant Arabidopsis disrupted in ER-to-chloroplast lipid transfer has enabled
first mechanistic studies of the underlying phenomena. The tgd mutants of
Arabidopsis are disrupted in chloroplast lipid import and are named for their
characteristic phenotype, the accumulation of the oligogalactolipid
trigalactosyldiacylglycerol. Availability of these mutants led to the
identification of four key proteins (TGD1,2,3,4) involved in the process. TGD1,
2 and 3 resemble components of ATP Binding Cassette (ABC) transporters and are
hypothesized to assemble into a complex that facilitates transfer of lipids
between the chloroplast envelope membranes and through the inner envelope
membrane. The TGD4 protein on the other hand is integrated in the chloroplast
outer envelope membrane and is hypothesized to transfer lipids from the ER to
the TGD1,2,3 complex. This project will investigate how TGD4 and TGD1,2,3
complexes assemble and form a lipid conduit from the ER through the chloroplast
envelope membranes, an essential feature of chloroplast membrane
biogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS &lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms of
interorganelle lipid transfer in any eukaryotic cell are poorly understood but
essential to organelle formation. Thus, it is expected that the analysis of
chloroplast lipid import will provide mechanistic insights into general lipid
transfer phenomena relevant beyond plant cells. The project also provides
excellent training opportunities for a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate
student, and undergraduate student, who collaborate effectively in a team.
Elements of the project are specifically designed for the participation of
undergraduate students, and will provide training in basic laboratory techniques
in molecular biology and biochemistry and require critical thinking towards
proper experimental controls and data analysis. All participants including the
undergraduate students present their results in weekly lab meetings, present
posters or talks at scientific meetings, and participate in the publication of
the results as coauthors. All coauthors actively participate in manuscript
writing. Co-mentoring of the graduate and undergraduate students by the
postdoctoral researcher provides experience in the management of people and
projects. In addition, undergraduate students working on the project participate
in a summer training program in Plant Genomics at Michigan State University.
This program has successfully recruited a diverse group of students and faculty
in the past five years.