* 1157725
* Sustainable Environmental Governance in Important Natural Environments: A U.S. - Brazil Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Lee Alston, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/2013
* USD 15,952.00

The goal of this project is to solidify an important network focused on
governance of natural resources. Natural resource governance entails the
negotiation, monitoring and enforcement costs associated with the management of
natural resources, e.g., land, forests, water, and minerals. This network will
bring together scholars from academic and governmental research institutions in
the United States and Brazil, and create a long-term research and educational
agenda. The research will contribute both theoretically and empirically to the
literature on natural resource governance. In addition it will have policy
implications. The network will hold two planning meetings to develop a multi-
year research and educational agenda on the governance of natural resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators and senior personnel on this
project have extensive expertise in natural resource as well as in conducting
collaborative research involving U.S and Brazilian partners. U.S. lead
participants in this network include the Institutions and the Environment and
Society Programs in the Institute for Behavioral Science at the University of
Colorado; the Center for the Study of Conflict, Collaboration, and Creative
Governance also at University of Colorado; and the Latin American, Caribbean,
and Iberian Studies Center at the University of Wisconsin. Brazilian lead
participants include the University of São Paulo Graduate Program in
Environmental Science (USP); the National Institute of Amazonian Research
(INPA); the State University of Santa Cruz Graduate Program on Environment and
Sustainable Development (UESC); and the Federal University of Maranhão Graduate
Program in Social Sciences UFMA). The network brings together partners with
complementary topical and geographical expertise. For example, the USP
professors have expertise in diverse aspects of natural resource governance such
as water management and community-based conservation in forested regions, while
the other Brazilian partners are located in places where these governance issues
are best studied. UESC resides in one of the world's top endangered ecosystems,
the Southern Bahian Atlantic Forest, and has a strong environmental graduate
program. UFMA lies in a region long known for conflict over land. The Biological
Dynamics of Forest Fragments project of INPA and the Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute are interested in developing collaborative research and
education to bring together natural and social scientists to better understand
forest degradation and conflicts over land in the Brazilian Amazon. The goal of
the project is to harness the collective expertise to study governance across a
range of natural resources.