* 1157696
* MOSFET-embedded Microcantilever-based Multiplexed Sensor Platform for Continuous Physiological Monitoring of Biomolecular Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2014
* USD 30,122.00

Sensing of biomolecular species with required sensitivity, specificity and
engineering constraints is critical to numerous fields; ranging from
environmental monitoring of toxic species to personalized health diagnostics.
The diverse and multiple considerations for such a viable sensor system require
interdisciplinary approach that combines the innate specificity of biological
binding events, a signal transduction platform that is widely deployable and the
necessary economic, ergonomic and systems-level constraints. &lt;br/&gt;Given
such needs for diverse and multifaceted approaches, international collaborations
are essential to advancing our understanding of multiplexed integrated sensor
arrays for biochemical sensing. Bio-engineered sensors research requires
numerous device engineering simulations, process iterations and high-level
laboratory experimentation in which Northwestern (NU) and University of Basel
(UB) have substantial complementary resources and expertise. &lt;br/&gt;This
OISE collaborative project will bring together US and Swiss researchers to
address the critical needs in biomolecular sensing. The project leverages strong
existing cantilever-based sensors research activities in individual groups at NU
in Evanston, IL and UB at Basel, Switzerland. The project aims to develop sensor
systems that are simple-to-use, cost effective, widely deployable, and amenable
to massively parallel (multiplexed) detection of diverse biomolecular species
that are critical to many technologies ? ranging from environmental monitoring
to personal health markers. These would include DNAs, proteins and viral
pathogens; for example. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed collaboration will provide
scientists and students access to facilities and expertise not available at
respective individual institutions. The international collaboration will also
help industries to engage highly-trained personnel in fields involving
applications of multiplexed sensor technologies. The collective effort through
this OISE international collaborative program between Northwestern and Basel
will set the stage for biomolecular sensor development and applications using
silicon-based detection platform that has considerable promise as a point-to-
care, handheld, cost-effective and widely deployable detection system.