* 1157535
* CSHL Computational Cell Biology Course being held in Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 07/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

Intellectual merit. The discipline of computational cell biology seeks to
develop mathematical models of living systems, such as the molecular
interactions that take place during cell division. The goals for such models are
twofold: 1) predict outcomes from dynamical systems in the cell, thereby
allowing scientists to 2) explain how cellular processes go awry in disease. To
build successful models, mathematicians and computer scientists must work
closely with experimental cell biologists. In this partnership, experimentalists
collect quantitative information about cellular processes and how they change
over time, while mathematicians use the information to build and improve upon
computer models that accurately reflect the biology. The Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory (CSHL) short course on Computational Cell Biology has taken place
every summer since 2008. The course provides intensive, hands-on training over a
three-week period that prepares participants to initiate their own research
projects in the modeling and simulation of cellular processes or systems.
Perhaps most importantly, the course provides experimental cell biologists with
the language and tools necessary to launch effective collaborations with
mathematical and computational scientists. Indeed, the primary audience for the
course is experimental cell biologists, as the curriculum is optimized to
introduce biologists to fundamental principles of mathematical modeling and not
vice versa. The Computational Cell Biology course seeks to meet this special
need for interdisciplinary training in advanced methodologies that is not
generally available in other formal learning environments. The CSHL
Computational Cell Biology course encompasses several topics that have long been
studied using mathematical approaches, such as calcium signaling, the cell
cycle, molecular motors, cell motility, and gene expression during development.
In addition, the CSHL course provides an intellectual base for the development
of newer areas of inquiry, such as the dynamics of intracellular second-
messenger signaling, programmed cell death, mitotic chromosome movements, and
synthetic gene networks. The course has a proven track record of bringing
together theoreticians who develop the mathematical framework at the heart of
the discipline with experimentalists who test the relevance of the models on
real-world examples, and this creates a synergistic, interdisciplinary
environment in the classroom. The course also has a high faculty-to-trainee
ratio, ensuring maximal opportunity for interactions with experts in the
discipline.

Broader impacts. Both the staff at CSHL and the course instructors make
materials from Computational Cell Biology as widely available as possible via
the Web, allowing broad dissemination of the materials to interested scientists
who were not selected or were otherwise unable to attend the course. Such
dissemination takes a number of forms. Materials given directly to course
students are shared with members of their laboratories and other colleagues;
examples include the informal manual and the course Web site, both of which are
updated and produced annually. A separate online resource based on course
material is aimed at educators in computational cell biology. In addition, a
number of textbooks co-authored by course instructors and available to the
general public include material related at least in part to the Computational
Cell Biology curriculum. Applicants are selected for the course by its
instructors based on several criteria. Talented students from institutions where
it may be difficult to learn the course material are given special
consideration, particularly if their participation will lead to dissemination
within their home institutions of the methods taught in the course. Instructors
strive to ensure that representative numbers of women and minority scientists
are selected for their course, and U.S. citizenship or permanent residency is
another important consideration. The course has a good track record of
involvement from populations traditionally underrepresented in the mathematical
and computational sciences, particularly women. Of particular note, the set of
four course instructors for 2012 includes two women who are senior, established
researchers in their respective disciplines.