* 1157647
* U.S. - China Workshop and Planning Visit on Sustainable Fuels and Clean Vehicles
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Jacqueline Huntoon, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 05/31/2014
* USD 48,660.00

This project will support a workshop on the topics of sustainable fuels and
clean vehicles that will be held in conjunction with a planning visit to
Zhejiang University and Shanghai Jiaotong University in China. The project aims
at establishing new international collaboration in both research and education
on sustainable fuels and clean vehicles. We face a critical challenge of
transforming our current dependence on fossil-fuel-based energy to sustainable
energy sources. The workshop provides an opportunity to bring together
researchers from academia, national laboratories, and industries to exchange
research experience and develop a coordinated strategy to increase competencies
in transportation sustainability. The specific focus of the near- and long-term
collaborative research programs will be in sustainability analyses of advanced
biofuel transportation systems, biomass and biowaste for liquid fuel conversion,
bioscience and engineering of biomass production, enabling technology for the
utilization of alternative and renewable fuels in transportation vehicles, and
advanced hybrid and clean vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have
an impact on realizing the maximum fuel economy, meeting the environmental
constraints, and increasing the potential for utilizing bio-fuels in vehicles to
ensure the timely achievement of energy security and emissions targets. The
workshop and visit will lay the foundation for future collaborative research.
The international engagement and collaboration on sustainable fuels and clean
vehicles will advance sustainable energy solutions, which are adaptable to
different locations with diverse climates and geopolitical structures. The
planned collaboration will engage women and early career faculty members. The
established international educational partnership will have a positive impact to
the training of the next generation workforce in the U.S.