* 1157222
* Initiating a New Collaboration between East Carolina University and Universiti Malaysia Terengganu: Post-Glacial Variations in the East Asian Monsoon
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Eduardo Leorri, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2015
* USD 49,974.00

This award provides funding to support a planning visit and subsequent
preliminary field work to establish a joint research effort between an
interdisciplinary team from East Carolina University (ECU) and the Institute of
Oceanography at the Universiti Malaysia Terengganu (UMT), which is on the east
coast of peninsular Malaysia. The planned program of research and associated
educational activities are aimed at understanding post-glacial variations of the
East Asian Monsoon through chemical analyses of sub-seafloor strata in the
basins of the Sunda Shelf. UMT owns a new research vessel that will be used in
the field work. The data collected will be the basis for more complete research
proposal to NSF. Little information is currently available concerning the
paleoclimate of the Sunda Shelf and SE Asia. The collaboration with UMT and
access to its research ship provide an opportunity to broaden the geological
database and to compare the results in this region with existing knowledge from
the deeper South China Sea to the north.

The East Asian Monsoon and changing sea levels have a major impact on the
populations of SE Asia, particularly through flooding and coastal erosion. A
better understanding of past variations in these factors can help populations
prepare for future challenges. The planned collaboration will engage both young
faculty members from ECU as well as undergraduate and graduate students.
Finally, this is an excellent opportunity to promote broader engagement of the
US scientific community with Malaysian counterparts, which has been relatively
rare.