* 1157600
* Catalyzing New International Collaboration Between Stevens Institute and Eindhoven University:  Catalytic Gold and Silver Nanoparticles for Green Chemistry and Sustainability
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/2013
* USD 27,643.00

Commercial production of many large scale oxygen-containing commodity chemicals
currently relies on multi-stage, energy inefficient processes with undesirable
byproducts. The development of new green and energy efficient oxidation
technologies to replace such processes is essential for sustainable chemical
production. This project will catalyze a new collaboration between researchers
at Stevens Institute of Technology and Eindhoven University in the Netherlands
to advance the molecular-level understanding of how oxygen interacts with gold
and silver nanoparticles for green chemistry and sustainability in the chemical
industry. The collaboration brings together the novel experimental and
computational methodologies at Stevens with unique testing capabilities at
Eindhoven. The project activities will entail (a) preparation of catalytic
materials with a controlled size of gold and silver nanoparticles, (b)
utilization of a specially developed photonic crystal fiber with immobilized
gold and silver nanoparticles for dramatically improved detection sensitivities
of molecules on surfaces, (c) testing of chemical reactions and spectroscopic
studies under reaction conditions, and (d) surface modeling of silver and gold
nanoparticles with quantum-chemical calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
international project will establish the basis for the transformative
development of new efficient and environmentally friendly technologies to insure
sustainability of chemical production. U.S. students will spend an extended
period of time at the collaborating laboratories in the Netherlands, working on
closer integration between experimental and computational methods. The
researchers will also be engaged in undergraduate and K-12 educational outreach
programs at Stevens. For example, teaching modules on metal nanoparticles for
green chemistry and sustainability will be used in a summer camp for more than
200 high school students from across the U.S.