* 1157678
* Contextual Research-Empirical Research--Detecting, Tracking, and Modeling Cognitive, Affective, and Metacognitive Regulatory Processes to Optimize Learning with MetaTutor
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2014
* Ronald Landis, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2014
* USD 1,002,172.00

This 3-year project conducts laboratory based experimental research to extend
and apply a multiagent intelligent hypermedia-based learning environment to
detect, track, and model college students' multiple self-regulatory processes
while learning biology. The hypothesis examined by the researchers is that many
college students may be hampered in learning biology by their inability to self-
regulate themselves. The researchers have developed a Tutor that is expected to
provide cognitive, affective, and metacognitive (CAM) support. The proposed
research will test experimentally different versions of the Tutor program to
examine how self-regulatory processes emerge and the effects of program
variations on self-regulatory behaviors.

The investigators will conduct experiments in a laboratory with college students
in Memphis Tennessee and Montreal, Canada. The experiment will detect, track,
and model the CAM processes in college students' learning about a complex
biology topic. During the experimental session they will collect data using a
remote eye-tracker to record participants' eye gaze, fixations, saccades, and
regressions. The participants' verbalizations will be recorded with a headset
microphone. They will use a Pressure Mouse to capture the amount of pressure
placed on the mouse throughout the activity, and the Body Pressure Measurement
System (BPMS) to assess gross body movements. They will revise and develop new
pretest and posttest learning measures for the circulatory system which will
include approximately 15 multiple-choice questions, 10 inference questions,
labeling tasks, and mental model essays. The measures will assess declarative,
procedural, inferential, and mental models of the circulatory system.

The research investigators will examine several theoretical, empirical, and
educational questions about self regulation intended to forge new directions of
science learning. The team includes psychologists, computer scientists,
psychometricians, and electrical engineers. Methodologies will be incorporated
from psychology, education, computer science, and electrical engineering to
detect, trace, model, and assess students' CAM self-regulatory processes during
learning about a complex and challenging science topic. The proposed research
activities are intended to advance the science of learning, methodologies, and
quantitative analysis of complex sensing data, and education, research, and
evaluation, and demonstrate the power of multi-method research tools, software,
and sensing devices capable of analyzing and predicting students' self-regulated
learning about complex science topics.