* 1157152
* REU Site: Agriculture, Horticulture, Ethnobotany and Climate Change (AHEC) - International Research Experiences from Indigenous America to Indigenous India
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2015
* Ruben Ceballos, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2015
* USD 270,216.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of Montana that will provide research training for 6-8 students per
year, for 9 weeks during the summers of 2012-2014. This REU program, hosted by
the University of Bangalore in India, is supported by the NSF's Offices of
International Science and Engineering (OISE), Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Directorates for Biological Sciences
(BIO) and Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE). The REU program
focuses on topics in biology, chemistry, systems ecology, economics, and social
sciences related to the impacts of climate change and changes in socio-economic
structures on the development of sustainable Indigenous communities. This highly
interdisciplinary REU program is designed to develop research expertise as well
as intercultural scientific communication skills. Approximately eight U.S.
faculty mentors representing a variety of disciplines within the natural and
social sciences will collaborate with counterparts in India to provide students
with meaningful research experiences across a variety of subject areas. Student
participants will be engaged full-time in lab and/or field research during the
course of the internship. Students will also participate in seminars, workshops,
and related training that includes responsible conduct in research; laboratory
safety; professional communication skills; career opportunities in the sciences;
and graduate school application process. Students are selected based on academic
record, research performance, and individual potential for conducting
outstanding research in the natural or social sciences. The application process
requires students to submit academic transcripts, letters of recommendation, and
a statement of interest and intent. Longitudinal tracking will be implemented to
determine continued interest in the students' respective fields of study, their
career paths, and lasting influences of the REU experience. Program success is
assessed by various means, including use of a common REU assessment tool. More
information is available by visiting http://www.umt.edu/narl, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Michael Ceballos at rmichael.ceballos@umt.edu).