* 1157006
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Research in Nuclear and Particle Physics at TUNL and Duke University
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Ayana Arce, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2015
* USD 379,406.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program in Physics at the Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory (TUNL)
and Duke University. TUNL is a research consortium consisting of three major
universities in the North Carolina Triangle Area, Duke University, North
Carolina State University and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
The program will provide opportunities for a total of 12 students to participate
in research on a broad range of topics in nuclear and particle physics. Eight
students will conduct research at TUNL, and the other four will spend part of
their summer at CERN working with the Duke high-energy physics group. This REU
summer program provides undergraduate students with an active research
experience through the completion of a self-contained 10-week project. Each
student is assigned a faculty mentor and is integrated into a research group
consisting of faculty, postdocs, graduate students and other undergraduate
students. In addition, the students have opportunities to learn about the
graduate programs at the consortium institutions. Through active research,
seminars, lab tours, and discussion groups, the students are exposed to various
aspects of nuclear and particle physics research and their connections to other
science areas. Lecture and seminar topics are chosen to emphasize the nuclear
and particle physics research activities at TUNL and CERN, respectively. Both
student groups will have opportunities to work with state-of-the-art
technologies used in these lines of research.