* 1157561
* Structural Studies of a Plant Nitrate Transporter and Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Ning Zheng, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 06/30/2015
* USD 538,777.00

INTELLECUTAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen is an essential building block of amino
acids and nucleic acids and is crucial for every single form of life on earth.
Plants play a key role in converting nitrogen from its inorganic form to an
organic form and assimilate more than 90% of the nitrogen through nitrate
absorption. In order to efficiently take up nitrate in soils, plants are capable
of transporting nitrate across cellular membranes, as well as sensing
environmental nitrate concentration changes. A clue to how plants sense soil
nitrate changes was revealed by the finding of an unexpected nitrate receptor
function in the Arabidopsis nitrate transporter, CHL1. As a member of the Major
Facilitator Superfamily, CHL1 is a dual-affinity transporter, displaying a
biphasic kinetic property in response to low and high concentrations of nitrate.
Phosphorylation of a specific threonine residue switches the transporter between
the two affinity modes. Remarkably, independent of its transporter function,
CHL1 can also sense and respond to variable nitrate concentrations and control
gene expression in a biphasic manner. The same phosphorylation site of CHL1 also
regulates its sensor activity. How does CHL1 sense nitrate concentration? What
is the molecular mechanism underlying the functions of CHL1 as both a nitrate
transporter and sensor? How does phosphorylation regulate CHL1 activities? This
project will start to address these questions by revealing the atomic structures
of CHL1 in different functional states. Membrane protein X-ray crystallography
will be used as the primary approach to achieve the following specific aims: (1)
structure determination of CHL1 in the presence of high nitrate concentration;
and (2) structure determination of CHL1 in the presence of low nitrate
concentration. The results will help unravel the overall molecular architecture
of CHL1, the potential nitrate-binding sites that are important for its
transporter and receptor functions, and the structural determinants and
mechanisms underlying its dual-affinity nitrate transporter and sensor
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will impact science and education in two major areas: (1) Advancing basic
research in plant biology in the US with agricultural and environmental
implications and (2) Nucleating a regional membrane protein structural biology
community. Food, energy, and environment are the three major challenges the
world is facing in the 21st century. Solutions to these challenges require a
thorough understanding of plant biology at the very fundamental level. This
project will promote plant biology research by applying cutting-edge structural
biology approaches to plant sciences. It represents an initiative in advancing
plant structural biology, with an emphasis on addressing emerging key questions
in plant biology and propagating plant sciences in the larger community. The
project will also foster further development of regional community of membrane
protein structural biologists by offering training in recombinant membrane
protein production, crystallization, and structure determination. Our efforts
range from hands-on training of undergraduate and graduate students,
technicians, and PIs outside the lab, to regular presentations at graduate
program meetings, departmental retreats, special interests clubs, and joint
university courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by
the Cellular Processes Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Chemistry
Division.