* 1157539
* CAREER: Fluid Dynamics of Colloidal Crystal Film Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 08/08/2011,04/30/2015
* Jonathan Posner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou
* 04/30/2015
* USD 376,681.00

CBET-0747917&lt;br/&gt;Posner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal crystal films (CCF)
are being developed as photonic crystals for integrated optical circuits, as
super hydrophobic surfaces, and as solid-state sieving matrices for biochemical
separations. Colloidal crystal films are comprised of 20 or more layers of face
center cubic packed nanospheres (20-500 nm). These films are typically deposited
by a fluid self-assembly process of a non-dilute colloidal suspension of
nanoscale spheres. Current CCFs are plagued with unwanted defects in the range
of 20-1000 sphere diameters that limit device applications. Solvent evaporation
and electrophoretic deposition methods are largely developed by trial and error
and suffer from a lack of fundamental understanding of the governing physics.
The ability to control colloidal crystal film structure and reduce film defects
is limited by the complex role of the fluid transport on the deposition process.
These flows include the coupling of free surfaces and electric fields with high
volume fraction suspensions and locally varying viscosity, density, surface
tension, conductivity, and permittivity. They are time-dependent, three-
dimensional and exhibit a wide range of time and length scales that make them
difficult to model and observe. This research investigates the transport physics
of colloidal crystal film deposition where high volume fraction colloidal
suspensions flow with free surfaces and electric fields. A high-speed, spinning
disk confocal microscope will be developed to measure the three velocity
components and crystal structure in real-time and real-space. This research will
enable depositions of defect-free colloidal crystal films and structures for a
host of emerging technologies. The high speed confocal system will impact a wide
range of disciplines including microfluidics, rheology, colloidal science, and
real-time cellular imaging. Fundamental understanding of colloidal
crystallization can be applied to molecular crystallization such as protein
crystallography. This program integrates research with mentoring, education and
outreach impacting students from middle school through graduate school. The
study includes the development of a middle school outreach program ?got flow??
for underrepresented middle school students in the Phoenix metropolitan area.
The ?got flow?? program has three phases: outreach modules directly inspiring
1000 8th graders to study math, science, or engineering; RET to provide research
experience and state mandated professional training for middle school teachers;
and educational transfer modules (ETM) that convey the modules to individual
middle schools. The PI will expand undergraduate research opportunities for
Hispanic and Native Americans who have relatively high enrollment at ASU, but
low representation in engineering nationwide.