* 1157027
* REU Site: Solar and Heliospheric Physics at University of Alabama in Huntsville and Marshall Space Flight Center
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Amy Winebarger, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2015
* USD 353,355.00

The Principal Investigators (PIs) will host a solar and heliospheric physics
"Research Experiences for Undergraduates" (REU) program on the campus of the
University of Alabama at Huntsville. The primary goal of this REU program will
be to engage and educate undergraduate students in order to improve retention of
these students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields. The PIs will accomplish this by exposing undergraduates (particularly
freshman or sophomores) to state-of-the-art applications and tools used by
scientists and engineers working in solar and heliospheric physics today.
Student research projects will involve combining observations from spacecraft
and ground-based observatories with theoretical modeling and large-scale
numerical simulations, to answer fundamental questions about the Sun (and other
stars by extension) and its interaction the Earth and other planets in the solar
system, as well as the interstellar medium beyond. The University of Alabama
team will collaborate with the nearby NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in
Huntsville to involve REU students in scientific data analysis, theoretical
numerical modeling, and computer simulations, as well as modern instrument
design and testing. This mixture of faculty and research scientists with diverse
skills and interests is one of the largest groups of solar and heliospheric
physicists in the country, and the only such group in the southeastern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will emphasize the recruitment of
minority students, students from non-research universities, and specifically
freshman and sophomore students. The PIs have already identified non-research
universities, as well as Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
for their student recruitment. The PIs note that student participation in
research has been demonstrated to be a highly successful method for retaining
STEM majors at universities. The PIs also explain that a better understanding of
the Sun and heliosphere is fundamentally important to society because of the
impacts space weather can have on human civilization and modern technologies.