* 1157650
* I-Corps:  Naked eyes-based standoff detection of explosives using novel signal-amplifying nanocomposite and hand-held UV light
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,08/31/2012
* Yu Lei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 08/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Terrorist threats and millions of unexploded land mines buried around the world
necessitate the development of equipment for explosives detection that is rapid,
cost-effective, reliable and user-friendly. The most often used nitro-based
explosives (NG, TNT, DNT, RDX, Tetryl, etc.) possesses an, albeit small, vapor
pressure and most explosive devices do not shield the explosive hermetically,
particularly when considering improvised devices and landmines. Thus, sensing
platforms that rely on detecting ultra-traces of explosives vapors are a
promising approach toward their detection. Their development has progressed over
the past decade. However, sensitivity, simplicity, large-scale application, and
cost-effectiveness of such explosives sensing platforms are still problematic.
This proposal aims to develop a rapid and cost-effective detection system for
identifying the (buried) explosives in large-scale, with unprecedented
simplicity, good sensitivity, and low cost. A number of novel features across
nanotechnologies, chemistry and sensing technologies are introduced to the
proposed system to make it faster and cheaper toward large-scale (buried)
explosives detection. Besides stand-alone application of the developed
technology, our technology can also be used as a possible add-on device to an
existing short range sensor platform (e.g. a metal detector) for explosives
detection, thus further broadening its application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project offers a multidisciplinary training ground for graduate
students. The work will advance the development of detection technique for
(buried) explosives in general and, if successful, will have an enormous impact
on demining activities and protection of civilian as well as homeland security
and anti-terrorism activities. In addition, the multidisciplinary nature of the
research activity lends itself for dissemination in technical as well as non-
technical journals and as a subject of outreach activities. The results
generated from this proposal will be used as the teaching materials for
undergraduate independent study course as well as the demonstration projects for
the School of Engineering's Da Vinci project (a project geared toward the
integration of basic engineering concepts into the post-elementary school
classroom), UConn's E2K program to enhance K-12 education, and the activities in
Homeschoolers Day. Furthermore, if successful, this special NSF I-Corps project
will bring together the technological, entrepreneurial, and business know-how
and thus translate NSF-supported fundamental research into technology with near-
term benefits for US economy and society.