* 1157800
* Interpreting Hedgehog Signaling Gradients With Cis-Regulatory DNA: A Quantitative In Vivo/Computational Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Scott Barolo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 860,235.00

Intellectual Merit: The Hedgehog pathway is an ancient cell-cell signaling
pathway by which cells communicate their position and developmental state to one
another. Hedgehog signaling acts though the Gli family of transcription factors,
which bind to regulatory DNA sequences called enhancers to activate or repress
the expression of specific target genes. In order to understand the cell's
responses to Hedgehog signaling, it is important to identify direct Gli target
genes in the genome, and to understand how their expression is controlled by
signaling. By integrating quantitative measurements of gene expression in the
fruit fly Drosophila with computational modeling of transcriptional responses,
this project will identify important mechanisms of transcriptional control by
Hedgehog signaling, and will have immediate applications for strategies to
identify new pathway targets. Furthermore, these principles may apply to other
major signaling pathways, such as the Notch, Wnt, and nuclear receptor pathways,
which, like Hedgehog, are found in animals from insects to humans. The
interdisciplinary objectives of the project are to: (1) Functionally define the
properties of Gli binding sites that control transcriptional responses to
Hedgehog signaling; and (2) Directly integrate computational and experimental
approaches to identify key regulatory mechanisms under the control of Hedgehog
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The project will positively
impact science education, scientific training/mentorship, and diversity in the
sciences, in several respects. First, the experiments and computational work
will form the basis for training postdoctoral and graduate trainees, including
those from underrepresented minority communities. Second, the project includes
objectives that will be accomplished by undergraduate researchers and high-
school volunteers, including those from underrepresented groups, and
incorporates scientific and professional training for these early-stage
students. Third, results from the project will be directly incorporated into new
teaching tools in an innovative developmental biology course, aimed at early-
stage graduate students and advanced undergraduates.