* 1157719
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sources of Power and the Development of Sociopolitical Complexity in Malagana, Southwestern Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2012,06/30/2013
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2013
* USD 19,305.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert D. Drennan, Hernando Giraldo will carry out
a program of intensive surface collection and test excavations at the Malagana
site in the Cauca River valley of southwestern Colombia. The earliest written
documentation of Cauca valley societies, dating to the sixteenth century,
describes wealthy and powerful chiefs leading small regional polities engaged in
intensive conflict with each other. These historical sources have inspired much
generalization about the role of conflict and warfare in early complex
societies. There is, however, very little direct archaeological documentation of
the developmental trajectories of Cauca valley societies or the bases of chiefly
power in them. Thus one knows little about the social forces that produced the
situation described in the accounts of early Spanish Conquistadores. Tombs
excavated at the Malagana site have often contained extremely elaborate
offerings of gold, ceramics, and other materials, and these are often taken as
evidence of considerable wealth accumulation by the community's elites. In an
unusually conspicuous suggestion of conflict, the site is surrounded by a ditch
and embankment which may have served defensive
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will
contribute to understanding of the formation and maintenance of social
inequalities and the nature of social power. The level of social complexity
exhibited at Malagana is duplicated in many regions of the developing world
today and through examination of an archaeological case where such processes can
be followed across centuries significant insights can be
gained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Giraldo will systematically collect artifacts
available on the surface of the densely occupied residential zone associated
with the Malagana cemetery and ditch feature. Analysis of these artifacts will
enable him to assess differences in the nature and costliness of possessions in
different households and in the nature and intensity of both ritual and
productive activities carried out in different places. His mapping of the
residential zone will delineate its relationship to the possible defensive wall
and help to determine whether that is in fact its function. Such information
will make possible an assessment of the importance of several potential sources
of social power that have been suggested for Cauca valley societies, including
wealth accumulation based on agricultural surpluses, control over specialized
craft production, participation in long-distance networks of exchange of
prestige goods, leadership in warfare, and manipulation of belief systems. The
Malagana site provides an extraordinary opportunity to increase understanding of
the ways in which early leaders gained and used social and political power, and
of how these strategies were modified through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will also have broader impacts. It will strengthen existing
collaborative ties between U.S. researchers and those in several Colombian
institutions. Its findings will be disseminated in national and international
conferences and peer-review journal articles; the raw data will be available to
scholars and the public online in the University of Pittsburgh's Comparative
Archaeology Database. The field work will provide training to U.S. and Colombian
students in archaeological field methods and in processing and analyzing
cultural materials in the laboratory. The project will contribute to the local
community's ongoing efforts to create an archaeological museum, combat the
illicit excavation of archaeological sites, and enhance public understanding of
the cultural and scientific value of archaeological remains.