* 1157506
* Inhibition of Protein-Protein Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Ernesto Freire, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,319,998.00

Protein-protein interactions are essential to all cellular processes. Often,
protein-protein interactions initiate signaling events that control metabolic
pathways. Development of the ability to modulate these processes will result in
major scientific breakthroughs in biology. Ideally, small molecule modulators
will be preferred; however, the scientific knowledge and the appropriate
strategies for designing them are still lacking. The major goal of this project
is to develop the technologies required to identify and modify the behavior of
initiation points for protein signaling. These points define the specific sites
to be targeted by small molecules. By identifying sites that are uniquely
associated with signaling and not binding, the technology will allow the
development of design strategies for energy efficient modulators; i.e. molecules
that will perform their function without the need for disrupting protein-protein
binding, and therefore expending unnecessary energy. During the next five years,
the experimental aspects of the research will focus on the inhibition of an
allosteric activation triggered by a protein-protein interaction. This type of
protein-protein interaction defines an initial event in cell penetration of a
virus and will be used to implement and optimize the technology prior to
implementation in other systems.

The broader impacts resulting from this research include different fronts. At
the practical level, it provides new strategies for designing small molecules
that can modulate biological signaling. These intellectual advances may lead to
important applications in areas such as synthetic biology, information transfer
in biological systems and regulatory networks. It must be noted that the
technologies required for engineering inhibitors or activators of signaling
triggered by protein-protein interactions are not yet available. The broader
impact is, however, not limited to the potential applications of the scientific
discoveries. Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from this project
by the incorporation of these subjects in the courses taught by the PI. Also
this project will allow the participation of undergraduate students in a state-
of-the-art research project. The PI presents about 20 seminars per year at
universities, colleges, research laboratories as well as national and
international meetings. As part of the outreach program, the PI's laboratory
donated a fully functional Isothermal Titration Calorimetry to Brynn Mawr
College in Pennsylvania and trained faculty and students. These activities will
continue and will be expanded during the next five years of funding.