* 1157346
* Collaborative Research: Paleoanthropological investigation of the Ledi-Geraru hominin site (Afar, Ethiopia)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2012,12/31/2012
* David Braun, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Carolyn Ehardt
* 12/31/2012
* USD 34,055.00

The northern Awash region of Ethiopia is famous for its abundant fossil remains
of the early hominin Australopithecus afarensis (e.g., "Lucy"), as well as
evidence for the origins of our own genus, Homo, and the world's earliest stone
tools. Due to a regional unconformity, however, appropriately aged sedimentary
deposits that bridge the critical interval between A. afarensis and Homo
unfortunately are missing from most of the northern Awash. This research project
builds upon recent paleoanthropological work in the Afar Ledi-Geraru (ALG)
region of the northern Awash that has identified paleontologically-rich
sediments that fill this time gap, providing a rare window into understanding
the origins and the evolutionary and paleoenvironmental contexts of early Homo,
and of lithic technology, a hallmark of the human lineage. This field project
also contributes to our understanding of the interval between 2.5 and 3.0
million years ago, one of the most fascinating periods in human evolutionary
history, and one which encompasses both the first and last appearance dates of
several other hominin species as well as significant changes in mammalian fauna
and flora throughout Africa.

The unique preservation of the ALG sequence enables a multidisciplinary team of
paleoanthropologists, paleontologists, archaeologists, and geologists to 1)
determine the paleoenvironmental context directly relevant to the morphological
change and last appearance of A. afarensis, and the subsequent appearance of
early Homo and stone tools in the northern Awash region; 2) extend spatial
analyses of A. afarensis habitats from adjacent paleoanthropological sites into
the ALG region to better understand the lateral variation in paleoenvironments;
3) collect evidence from fauna, hominin-modified fauna, and artifacts that
existed in the ALG region during the earliest development of lithic technology;
and 4) utilize transect excavations where potential hominin-modified bones were
recovered, to document further evidence of possible early carnivory among
hominins.

This project includes training in relevant field and lab techniques for a
diverse group of graduate students, including women, Ethiopians, and other
Africans, students typically under-represented in this field. Data from this
project also will be incorporated into teaching materials developed for K-12
teachers via internet download from the Arizona State University Outreach
website.