* 1157001
* REU Site: Technologies for Renewable Energy Generation and Management
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Jonathan Kimball, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 05/31/2016
* USD 341,232.00

The objective of this three year REU Site program at Missouri University of
Science and Technology is to engage ten undergraduate students for nine weeks
each summer in advancing technologies that generate useful energy from renewable
energy resources, and to train engineers to pursue further research into
renewable energy. This REU site will focus on solar, hydrokinetic, and biomass
technologies, which all generate power from renewable resources that are
abundant in Missouri, as well as much of the nation. The rising price of fossil
fuels and the growing concern over climate change have fostered a myriad of
research and development activities in alternative resources. This REU will
leverage existing programs, such as the REU activities sponsored by the NSF-
funded Future Renewable Electric Energy Delivery and Management (FREEDM) Systems
Engineering Research Center (ERC) and other NSF-funded projects; research
projects sponsored by the Office of Naval Research, Department of Energy, and
other agencies; and projects within the Missouri S&amp;T Student Design and
Experiential Learning Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each participant will be
paired with a graduate student who will assist the participant in gaining the
key skills necessary for success. Throughout the summer, students will meet as a
group with all of the faculty mentors to discuss research progress, skill
development, university resources available, and future plans. Guest speakers
will facilitate workshops on professional development topics, such as technical
communication and intellectual property. Students will also participate in
various field trips to engage them in the topics they are researching. The
various field trips include: 1) a canoe trip on the local National Scenic
Waterways, 2) a visit to the headquarters of AmerenUE, one of the Midwest's
biggest energy companies, 3) a visit to Anheuser-Busch, the world's biggest
brewery and home of the largest waste biomass energy process in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy usage is fundamental to progress in
industry, increase in standard of living, and economic growth. The students who
participate in this REU Site will gain the skills and knowledge to pursue a
research-oriented career in renewable energy. As energy prices continue to grow,
these new engineers will help facilitate a shift away from non-renewable fossil
fuels to cleaner, more sustainable sources. The recruitment strategy will expand
the participation of women and minorities in energy research.