* 1157090
* REU Site:   Biological impacts of climate change: testing hypotheses with collections and long-term data
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Laurel Fox, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2016
* USD 230,118.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites award has been made to the
University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) to provide research training for
eight students for eight weeks during the summers of 2013-2015. Climate change,
the overriding environmental issue of our time, causes drastic changes in the
distributions and abundances of many species and potentially threatens peoples'
ways of life. This REU will train students to use critical tools to understand
mechanisms underlying biological responses to climate change, including: 1)
physiological/ecological limits of species; 2) changes in species' interactions;
and 3) hypothesis testing that enables one to discriminate between climate
change and other natural or anthropogenic factors affecting species diversity
and geographical distributions. Students will work on a diversity of organisms,
systems, and specific questions guided by mentors from UCSC's Dept. of Ecology
and Evolutionary Biology and the Dept. of Environmental Studies, and several
regional organizations. The common threads among projects include 1) testing
hypotheses; 2) assembling long-term data sets from museums and faculty research;
3) measuring key physiological/behavioral traits or ecological interactions; 4)
predicting changes in species' distributions and/or ecosystems based on future
climate scenarios; and 5) conducting field work to ground-truth their
predictions. This REU will select and train 24 undergraduates, including many
minority students, based on their academic records and research potential. All
students will be mentored to help them improve communication skills, discover
resources for their education and careers, and recognize and value their own
contributions to science. The REU program includes talks, discussions and
workshops on methods and concepts key to their projects, and relevant field
trips. These students will also join with an existing UCSC undergraduate
research program targeting minority students in STEM disciplines for workshops
on scientific ethics and communication. Students will be tracked to determine
their continued interest in science, career paths, and lasting influences of
their REU experience. The program will be assessed by various means, including
an REU common assessment tool. More information is available by visiting
http://reu.eeb.ucsc.edu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Barry Sinervo at
lizardrps@gmail.com) or the co-PI (Dr. Laurel Fox at fox@ucsc.edu).