* 1157589
* Catalyzing New International Collaborations: A Proposal to Study the Interaction Between Liquid Crystal Polymers and Nanoparticles(rods) Between Chile and the USA
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Luz Martinez-Miranda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 07/31/2014
* USD 40,000.00

This award supports a new international collaboration between Prof. Eduardo
Soto-Bustamante at the University of Chile and the Principal Investigator at the
University of Maryland, College Park. The project is focused on studying the
interactions of nanoparticles or nanorods with polymer liquid crystals.
Specifically it will address the question on whether the ordering of the liquid
crystals depends on how the liquid crystal polymer is formed and whether it can
be independent of the nanoparticle arrangement. Possible applications of the
products are in various technologies, including photovoltaics electro-optics,
and in medicine.&lt;br/&gt; The project aims to combine the strengths of the
participating researchers. The principal investigator and her group are
experienced in studying the interaction of liquid crystals and nanoparticles,
measurements of their electrical and magnetic properties, and structural
characterization of these composites. Prof. Eduardo Soto-Bustamante, from the
University of Chile, is a chemist who specializes in the synthesis of
ferroelectric liquid crystals and polymeric liquid crystals, and is interested
in including nanoparticles into polymeric liquid crystals to investigate their
applications. &lt;br/&gt; This project will expose the participating students to
part of the larger international community involved in liquid crystal research.
The students will learn how to communicate between different disciplines,
including materials science, physics, and chemistry. The collaboration will
expand the reach of the PI?s international collaborations, and will increase the
diversity in her group.