* 1157235
* Symposium EE: Self-Organization and Nanoscale Pattern Formation; for the MRS Fall meeting in Boston
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2012,12/31/2012
* Pascal Bellon, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Eric Taleff
* 12/31/2012
* USD 8,000.00

Symposium EE, "Self-Organization and Nanoscale Pattern Formation", will be held
at the 2011 MRS Fall meeting in Boston. It will bring together a large community
of researchers who utilize self-organization and self-assembly to synthesize and
functionalize nanostructured materials. The symposium will cover a broad
spectrum of materials, from polymeric and supra-molecular systems, to
semiconductors, oxides, and metals, and a broad spectrum of applications,
ranging from photonics and plasmonics, to gas sensors, catalytic materials, and
materials subjected to irradiation or plastic deformation. The underlying
principles responsible for self-organization are often similar in these
situations, so the symposium will provide opportunities for researchers from one
particular area to learn and potentially transfer recent knowledge gained in
other areas. The requested support will be used to facilitate the participation
of graduate students, female researchers, and researchers from underrepresented
minorities. The high cost of attending the symposium can prevent some graduate
students to attend, present their research results and inhibit exposure to the
state-of-the-art research and acquiring direct feedback on their research from
senior researchers. Offering a partial support to offset registration fees and
traveling costs provides an effective means to ensure a broad participation from
graduate students. The field of self-organization and self-assembly for the
synthesis and investigation of nanostructures is extremely active and diverse,
and attendance at this symposium is expected to have beneficial impacts on the
careers of these researchers.