* 1157424
* Anaerobic Gene Regulation in Bacillus Subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Michiko Nakano, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 04/30/2017
* USD 512,007.00

This project aims at understanding of the transcriptional regulation in Bacillus
subtilis that is responsive to oxygen limitation. The ResD-ResE two-component
signal transduction system and the NO-sensitive NsrR repressor play key roles in
controlling transcription of genes involved in anaerobiosis. B. subtilis NsrR
contains a [4Fe-4S] cluster and represses transcription of ResD-controlled
nasDEF (nitrite reductase genes) and hmp (flavohemoglobin gene). Interaction of
NO with the [4Fe-4S] cluster alleviates binding of NsrR to the nasD and hmp
promoters, leading to derepression (class I regulation). NsrR also plays a role
in more global transcription by interacting with A+T-rich DNA in an NO-
insensitive manner at least in vitro (class II regulation). Class II genes are
upregulated by an nsrR mutation when pyruvate is present, and this upregulation
is ResD-dependent. This research will investigate a critical link between ResD
and NsrR, two major transcriptional regulators that play pivotal roles in
anaerobiosis of B. subtilis. As binding of NsrR to class II genes shows relaxed
sequence specificity and a target bias that likely involves DNA topology, the in
vivo interaction of NsrR with the promoter regions of class II genes will be
determined. Sensitivity of DNA interaction to NO will be compared between class
I and class II promoters in parallel with evaluation of NO effects on
transcription of corresponding genes. Transcription of class II NsrR-controlled
genes is often regulated by other transcription factors, such as ResD and AbrB,
that also target A+T rich DNA. This research will characterize how multiple
transcription factors affect NsrR binding at specific target genes. Studies of a
novel regulatory mechanism of NsrR and accompanying NsrR-dependent global
regulation will advance our understanding of transcriptional control in response
to oxygen limitation and how multiple transcriptional regulators control
expression of selected genes in response to a variety of environmental
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;A postdoctoral fellow,
thesis/non-thesis MS students, undergraduate interns, and a high school teacher
will participate in the research. The project will train them in the scientific
method, to acquire knowledge through experimentation, and to gain further
experience in a research environment while training in modern techniques
involving genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, and physiology. The
postdoctoral fellow will incorporate his/her training as a researcher and as an
educator by directly mentoring the MS students and undergraduate interns. The
high school teacher will use the research experience to revitalize his/her
teaching in the classroom. Multi-tiered mentoring will be implemented and the
P.I. will work to establish productive interactions among participants. A summer
internship for undergraduates will be jointly organized with CMOP through
funding from NSF. The summer internship program offers many activities including
a weekly meeting, presentation of research, seminars, and water sampling tours
in the Columbia Estuary.