* 1157525
* Impacts of Geoengineering Using Stratospheric Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Alan Robock, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2016
* USD 568,933.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Geoengineering" is the idea of taking purposeful
action to mitigate the effects of inadvertent global greenhouse warming. This
project uses climate models to simulate the effects of "Solar Radiation
Management" (SRM) schemes in which sulfate (SO2) is injected into the
stratosphere to produce reflecting aerosols, or marine clouds are brightened
through artificial enhancements in the number concentration of cloud
condensation nuclei in regions of persistent marine stratus clouds. In both
cases the goal is to cool the earth by reflecting sunlight back into space to
counteract the global warming produced by anthropogenic greenhouse gases. The
goal of the project is to understand both the potential effectiveness of and the
unintended consequences of SRM schemes. Previous work, including the PI's work
under the previous NSF award, suggests that SRM through stratospheric aerosol
generation could result in reductions in summertime precipitation, particularly
in regions dependent on summer monsoon rainfall for food production. The work
conducted under this award addresses four questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) How
would stratospheric geoengineering affect the planet's hydrological cycle,
including the rainfall of the African and Asian summer
monsoons?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) How would stratospheric geoengineering affect
the planet's ocean and long-term climate? Long-term changes of climate forced by
stratospheric geoengineering would be controlled to a large extent by the
responses of ocean temperature and circulation. How will the frequencies of El
Niño and La Niña change during geoengineering? Will a cooling signal propagate
deep into the ocean, as has been observed and modeled after volcanic eruptions,
and how will this affect the long-term climate response to
geoengineering?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Are there strategies of sulfur injection
into the stratosphere with particular latitudinal and seasonal patterns that can
produce desirable climate changes while avoiding undesirable ones? For example,
could spring and summer high-latitude injections maximize the cooling effect at
high latitudes, while avoiding lower latitude precipitation impacts and wasteful
winter injection when there is little sunlight?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4) How
would the changes in climate that result from stratospheric geoengineering
affect food production? For example, if there is a reduction of summer
precipitation over India and China, accompanied by cooling and less insolation,
what would be the net effect on crop production?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
questions are addressed using in-house climate model experiments using models
capable of representing the emission and subsequent transport and chemical
processes through which aerosols form, grow, circulate and interact chemically
and radiatively until they are removed from the atmosphere. In addition to the
in-house modeling effort, the research includes analysis of model output from
the Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project (GeoMIP), which the researcher
organized under a previous NSF award. GeoMIP consists of a set of geoengineering
experiments conducted at over a dozen modeling centers worldwide. The
experiments differ in the amount and timing of assumed greenhouse gas increase
and counteracting SRM effort. The GeoMIP activity will serve to determine
whether the reductions in monsoon precipitation found in previous studies are a
robust behavior that can be reproduced across a variety of climate models with
different formulations of physics, dynamics, and atmospheric chemistry. The
potential reduction in food production due to reduced monsoon rainfall will be
addressed through crop modeling simulations using the Decision Support System
for Agrotechnology Transfer (DSSAT) model, which will be driven by output from
climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project stem
from the need for studies such as this one to inform policy makers and the
public regarding the potential costs and benefits of geoengineering schemes.