* 1157677
* Computational Studies of Membrane Proteins Based on NMR Observables
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Wonpil Im, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 06/30/2016
* USD 562,801.00

Membrane proteins play important roles in many vital cellular processes, such as
transmembrane (TM) signaling, transport of ions and small molecules, energy
transduction, and cell-cell recognition. This project seeks to acquire novel
insights into membrane proteins, dynamics and interactions with lipids, which
are important determinants of their functions. Despite impressive successes of
X-ray crystallography in structure determination of membrane proteins with
multiple TM helices, it is still challenging to obtain the structural
information of membrane proteins with one or a few TM helices. These membrane
proteins are abundant and often involved in important TM-induced signaling and
regulation through formation of hetero-/homo-oligomers. Although difficulties
exist in obtaining inter-helix distance information by measuring long-range NOEs
for these membrane proteins, their structures are determinable by measuring
various orientational NMR observables, such as chemical shift anisotropy (CSA)
and dipolar coupling (DC) in solid-state NMR (ssNMR), and residual dipolar
coupling (RDC) in solution NMR experiments. However, the present NMR structure
determination methods for membrane proteins are not able to extract important
dynamics and interaction information that possibly are embedded in time- and
ensemble-averaged NMR observables. This project will fill the knowledge gap by
utilizing the orientational NMR restraint potentials to use the available
experimental observables with additional benefits from the realistic molecular
dynamics simulation of membrane systems. The ssNMR ensemble dynamics technique
recently developed in the investigator's research group will make it possible to
extract the intrinsic dynamics and/or distinct configurations of different
domains. Comparisons of the free energy calculation results along key TM helix
motions with NMR observable-based structure refinement and ensemble dynamics
results will offer cross-validation of membrane proteins, structures and
dynamics from different approaches. This research with selected complex membrane
protein models will enhance our understanding of structure, dynamics, and
function of membrane proteins with one or a few TM helices and their
oligomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also seeks to foster synergistic
scientific research and education by providing reliable and general
computational methods to students and researchers in the membrane protein NMR
field and other disciplines through the CHARMM-GUI website (www.charmm-gui.org),
which has been developed in the investigator's research group. In addition to
graduate student training, undergraduate students will be involved in the
proposed research to promote their interests in computational biophysics. In
addition, this project will raise the scientific literacy of the public through
the publication of research results and workshop participation. Finally, this
project will help further development of our summer program called "Summer
Research Program for HIgh School Students (SURPHISS) in Molecular Modeling and
Simulations" by supporting graduate and undergraduate students interested in the
education of high school students.