* 1157876
* Identification and Characterization of Functional Constraints Operating on the Gene Organization of the Drosophila Genome
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,10/31/2016
* Jose Ranz, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 10/31/2016
* USD 799,999.00

This project will advance understanding of the relationship between the
organization of genes on chromosomes and the probability of occurrence of
macromutations that alter chromosomes. The organization of genes on chromosomes
can be important for proper gene function, which sometimes requires the
interplay of genetic factors far apart on the chromosome. Methods that enable
the manipulation of fruit flies chromosomes will be used to test the
consequences of induced rearrangements on the function of genes putatively under
the influence of these long-range effects. This project aims at answering why
particular regions of chromosomes have been conserved among distantly related
species while others often exhibit an unusual association with
macromutations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: From the training
standpoint, this project will help train one postdoc, six undergraduates, and
six high-school students in the analysis of the function of genomes and
evolutionary biology. Members of underrepresented groups will be preferentially
benefited by the research activities to be developed. Participants will also
have the opportunity to hone their presentation skills. In addition, specific
activities in this project will be adapted and integrated into the teaching
activities of the PI. All data and materials generated will be made publicly
available to the scientific community and deposited in appropriate repositories.