* 1157627
* A Window into the Early Steps in Plastid Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2016
* USD 418,478.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work addresses the question of the way
in which the photosynthetic organelle, the chloroplast, evolved. The organism
used in these studies is the thecate protist Paulinella chromatophora, which
contains what visually resembles a cyanobacterium within its cytoplasm, although
this internal "cyanobacterium" is really an organelle called a chromatophore.
Even though the chromatophore does not look like a chloroplast, it performs many
of the same functions as chloroplasts, capturing sunlight to drive
photosynthesis, which provides the protist host cell with energy and carbon
backbones for growth. The chromatophore contains its own genome (DNA), like a
chloroplast, but the size of this genome is 5-10 times more than what is found
in most chloroplasts, but much less than what is found in cyanobacteria. These
findings suggest that the chromatophore is an organelle derived from an
endosymbiotic cyanobacterium that is in the process of evolving into a
chloroplast, and as such it can reveal important information about mechanisms
critical for the early events in chloroplast evolution. We recently discovered
that a number of proteins important for the function of the chromatophore are
synthesized outside of the chromatophore and in the cytoplasm of the host
protist cell, and must be transported into the organelle where they function
(e.g. PsaE, a protein that functions in photosynthesis). The major specific
thrust of our studies is to identify those proteins and to develop an
understanding of how they move from the cytoplasm of the host protist into the
nascent chloroplast, where they assemble into large functional complexes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;In a broad sense, this work is
critical to our understanding of both the processes by which cellular organelles
evolved and the ways in which two organisms can come together and integrate
their functions into a highly efficient single organism. The result of this work
and the concepts that grow out of those results will have broad intellectual
impact in that they will: (1) shed light on early events associated with the
transport of proteins into developing organelles; (2) suggest which proteins are
most suited (based on their biophysical properties) to enter developing
chloroplasts through systems that already exist in the host organism; (3) allow
for the identification of proteins that may require more extensive tailoring
before they can assume the right conformation to enter organelles (they may have
to enter the chloroplast through a more specialized system that develops over
evolutionary time); (4) provide a broader understanding of the development of
regulatory events that have integrated the synthesis of proteins in the
cytoplasm of the cell with those synthesized in the chloroplast; (5) suggest new
ways in which proteins can be engineered to get them into specific subcellular
compartments, which may be important for aspects of synthetic biology and the
tailoring cells to make specific products such as biofuels; (6) train graduate
students to perform experiments that test evolutionary concepts using molecular
and biochemical tools and techniques; (7) be incorporated into an undergraduate
course that is being taught at Stanford University that focuses on the
functionality, evolution and regulation of photosynthetic processes ("From
Photosynthesis to Biofuels").