* 1157639
* U.S.-Netherlands Planning Visit:  Binding and Recognition of Complex Glycolipids by Mycobacterial Proteins
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2013
* Jessica Seeliger, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 13,616.00

Through this planning visit, researcher Jessica Seeliger of SUNY at Stony Brook
will initiate a cooperative project with partners in the Netherlands at the
University of Groningen. Her counterpart, Adriaan Minnaard, and his group have
established expertise in total synthesis of mycobacterial lipids and their
analogues, which complements Seeliger's studies of enzymatic mechanistic and
substrate activity. Together, their intent is to investigate the protein
machinery and catalytic mechanisms behind lipid biosynthesis and transport in
mycobacteria. Their focus on chemical determinants of molecular recognition
should improve our knowledge of how hydrophobic substrates are recognized for
transport from the cytosol, where they are made, to the outer membrane where
they reside. Results from the planned long-term collaboration are expected to
improve our fundamental understanding of lipid biogenesis in mycobacteria. If
successful, the researchers expect to gain new information about chemical probes
that would be useful not only to the mycobacterial research community, but also
to others studying lipids in other bacteria. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
catalytic research visit fulfills the program objective of advancing basic
biological knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Europe to
share research resources and plan beneficial projects in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence. The experience gained through examination of
biosynthetic pathways and transport of unusual lipids, particularly in
Actinobacteria, may have broader impact by contributing to our ability to
identify immunological receptors for bacterial antigens. Furthermore, one
participating U.S. graduate student will gain a valuable early career
introduction to international collaborative teamwork.