* 1157795
* Eyespot Placement and Assembly in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2017
* Carol Dieckmann, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2017
* USD 649,090.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;This research uses the model organism Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii to understand how complex molecular structures are assembled at
specific locations within a cell. Chlamydomonas is a single-celled,
photosynthetic alga found in freshwater habitats throughout the world.
Chlamydomonas cells optimize photosynthesis by swimming toward or away from
light using two flagella (the mother flagellum and the daughter flagellum) at
the anterior end of the cell. Light intensity and direction are sensed by the
eyespot, a complex structure that is always found at the outer edge of the cell,
half way between the anterior and posterior ends of the cell, on the same side
of the cell as the daughter flagellum. The eyespot contains photoreceptor
proteins that are similar to the rhodopsins in mammalian eyes, and a variety of
other proteins that are located in the cell membrane layers or lipid granules
that are unique to the eyespot. This research will test the hypothesis that the
photoreceptor proteins are required for the assembly and/or placement of the
eyespot, and will identify and characterize other proteins involved in eyespot
formation. A molecular model of eyespot assembly resulting from this research
will be applicable to studies of a wide variety of other sub-cellular structures
in other biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER
IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;Chlamydomonas has long been a model organism for the study of
photosynthesis and flagellar assembly, so the conditions for growth, genetic
manipulation, and molecular characterization of this photosynthetic alga are
well established. Studying the Chlamydomonas eyespot is, therefore, an excellent
model system for training the diverse group of young scientists pursuing degrees
at the University of Arizona. A number of undergraduate and graduate students
have completed their senior, honor, or Ph. D. theses studying eyespot assembly,
and University of Arizona students continue to pursue eyespot-related research.
Additionally, established relationships with two small college professors and
their students will continue. Because the grass-green Chlamydomonas cell with
its bright orange eyespot and long flagella is easily viewed through the light
microscope, visiting the laboratory has also been popular with grade school
students. In response, the researchers have developed Chlamydomonas-based
biology lessons that will be presented to K-12 students in their classrooms.
Chlamydomonas is only one of a very large number of photosynthetic
microorganisms that respond to light. Student interest in Chlamydomonas is
increasing as these microorganisms become the focus of efforts to produce food
and fuel using energy from the sun.