* 1157643
* US-Tanzania Planning Visit: Building a Research Collaboration on the Dynamics of Mangrove Ecosystem Services and Poverty Traps
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Emi Uchida, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2014
* USD 76,509.00

This award supports a planning visit for PI Emi Uchida from the University of
Rhode Island to initiate interdisciplinary research and an education partnership
between the U.S. and Tanzania on the dynamic linkages between mangrove ecosystem
services and poverty traps. The planning trip will bring together experts and
university students from the U.S. and Tanzania to identify research gaps and
innovative educational opportunities where potential for collaboration is the
greatest. The planning trip will feature a series of interdisciplinary
discussions led by experts in mangrove ecology, ecohydrology, development and
environmental economics, and sociology and experts from local nongovernmental
organizations with experience in coastal management in Tanzania. The planning
trip and the collaborative preliminary data collection by the U.S. and Tanzanian
graduate students will provide the participants with opportunities to develop a
strong network for advancing international collaborative research that
transcends disciplines in natural and social sciences. The research proposals
will address sustainability issues of a critical importance to coastal Sub-
Saharan Africa and other regions where mangrove forests provide critical
benefits to the poor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the visit is to develop
collaborative research and education proposals to be submitted to NSF programs.