* 1157075
* REU Site: TRUST-REU SITE: Cybersecurity and Trustworthy Systems Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Sosale Sastry, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The Team for Research in Ubiquitous Secure Technology (TRUST) REU Site
integrates cyber security, privacy, and trustworthy systems with science and
technology education to be intellectually, socially, and politically relevant
and attractive to a diverse set of participants?in particular underrepresented
minorities and women. The program project is a collaborative effort led by the
TRUST Science &amp; Technology Center that has six components: (1) an eight-week
summer immersion research residency; (2) a series of symposia and advising
workshops targeted at recruiting undergraduate Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) students interested in security and privacy; (3) a novel
and innovative curriculum with learning activities coupled with social
interaction and fun aspects of computer science and cyber security for two-year
and four-year students; (4) cyber-enabled learning environments to connect
participants and researchers; (5) industry seminars and field trips to highlight
research trends and career opportunities in cyber security; and (6) post-session
research conference participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keeping information and
computer systems secure is one of the country?s most formidable challenges.
Daily headlines chronicle the fraud, viruses, privacy abuses, network outages,
and security vulnerabilities across the spectrum of critical systems that
support the nation?s financial, energy, healthcare, and transportation
infrastructure. As such, technological research must consider security in a
hierarchy of approaches that range from secure embedded systems to complex
interdependent systems. However, creating secure, private, and trustworthy
systems cannot be accomplished solely through technological means. To create
secure, private, and trustworthy technology and systems requires an
understanding of the relationship between the component parts and how one domain
interacts with the other. Thus, there is an acute need for human resources who
possess a deep understanding of the technical and non-technical foundations of
STEM and trustworthy systems. In order to address this, the TRUST REU Site will
blend cyberinfrastructure-enhanced discovery and learning opportunities with
interdisciplinary research using the active-learning Peer-Led Team Learning
approach to incorporate STEM, cyber security, and trustworthy systems science
and technology concepts to create a research and education environment that will
train the next generation of computer scientists and engineers who will develop
new trustworthy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond the main goal of increasing
the number of women and underrepresented minorities attaining baccalaureate
degrees in STEM and continuing on to graduate education and technical careers,
this program will have a broader impact on the cyber security and trustworthy
systems community by becoming a model for collaborative secondary education
partnerships that incorporate community college and undergraduate programs
within a STEM educational framework. The program will emphasize four stages of
the education pipeline (Recruitment, Transfer, Retention, and Advancement) and
aim to capture students early enough in the pipeline that they will consider
pursuing a major or career in STEM in general and cyber security in particular.
The TRUST REU Site will also demonstrate how collaborative partnerships with
operational strategies that support effective and engaging learning experience
can inject resources designed to stimulate interest in STEM and cyber security
among female and URM community college and four-year baccalaureate students and
serve as a model for cyber security and trustworthy systems research and
education projects at similar institutions in the future.