* 1157113
* 2012 Single Molecule Approaches to Biology Gordon Research Conference in Mt Snow, Vermont, July 15-20, 2012
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Julio Fernandez, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michele McGuirl
* 03/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The 2012 Single Molecule Approaches to Biology
Gordon Research Conference will be held at the Mt Snow Resort in Vermont, July
15-20, 2012. The program will feature novel single molecule applications to
study the ribosome, the proteasome, and cell binding reactions, amongst other
fundamental biological systems. Single molecule techniques are rapidly occupying
a central role in biological research at all levels. The development of robust
techniques that use fluorescence and force probes to track the conformation of
molecules one at a time, both in vitro as well as in live cells, provides
previously unobtainable data on fundamental biochemical processes that are
essential for all forms of life. The conference aims to provide an
interdisciplinary forum for biologists, physicists, chemists and engineers who
have developed single molecule methodologies that can be readily applied to
solve important biological problems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The meeting will
include topics on single molecule biology, single molecule techniques, theory of
single molecules and single molecule simulations. In addition to the oral
presentations, there will be poster sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;Single molecule approaches are changing the way we study
biology, complementing the recent advances in genomics and proteomics. Indeed,
this emerging paradigm holds the promise of yielding an unprecedented
understanding of life down to its smallest constituents. The 2012 Single
Molecule Approaches to Biology GRC will provide a combination of world-class
speakers and poster sessions that will advance teaching, learning and training
in single-molecule approaches to biology. The demographics of past meetings show
a broad appeal of this conference to the younger generation and organizers
efforts to appeal to a younger audience. At the 2010 meeting, 45% of
participants were graduate students and postdoctoral fellows and 72% were
younger than 40. The percentage of female speakers for the 2012 meeting has
increased, up to 16% from 10% and efforts to secure additional female speakers
are being made.