* 1157867
* Archiving the Terrence Kaufman Collection
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Patience Epps, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 04/30/2018
* USD 302,627.00

The Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America (AILLA) at the
University of Texas at Austin will catalog, digitize, and archive the Terrence
Kaufman Collection. Dr. Kaufman is one of the world's foremost Mesoamericanists.
His career spans more than fifty years. His research includes most of the
language families in a region of great linguistic, cultural, historical, and
archaeological importance. Kaufman's vast language documentation work has made
important contributions to linguistics as well as to other disciplines. The core
of his contribution is the historical reconstruction of proto-languages - the
ancestors of modern languages - including Mayan, Mixe-Zoquean, and Uto-Aztecan.
This research sheds light on interactions among peoples and the transmission of
ideas as well as artifacts. Kaufman and his collaborators have made major
contributions to the understanding of the pre-history of Mesoamerican
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collection includes over 100,000 pages of
manuscript; 900 CDs of original recordings; 100 boxes of file slips; and 200
digital texts and databases. These materials will be digitized, converted to
standard formats, and preserved in AILLA. The collection and the catalog will be
available through English and Spanish web-based interfaces. Grammars,
dictionaries, and collections of texts can be repurposed for language teaching
at all levels. Revitalization efforts are underway for dozens of the languages
documented in this collection; these materials will be a treasure trove for such
efforts. Kaufman has always promoted the participation of speakers in all
aspects of language documentation. He devised practical orthographies for most
of the languages of Mesoamerica that make transcriptions and other data easier
for non-specialists to use. Many native-speaker graduates of his projects are
now teachers, researchers, or directors of institutes who can make immediate use
of the resources that will be made available through this project.