* 1157495
* Motivations and Movement: Modeling Migration to Buffer Zones of Three Costa Rican National Parks
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2012,08/31/2016
* David Hoffman, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2016
* USD 244,686.00

Dr. David M. Hoffman (Mississippi State University) will investigate the
relationship between environmental protected areas (PAs) and the growth of human
population in the buffer zones surrounding them. It has been theorized that the
integration of conservation and development creates positive economic and
resource conditions which have the unintended consequence of population growth
due to in-migration. However, research into the relationship between PAs and
buffer zone population growth remains sparse and inconclusive, and existing
models are largely untested. In addition, most research has not engaged directly
with migrants themselves to determine whether models accurately describe their
decision-making. An understanding of this relationship is of critical importance
to improving human livelihoods while also conserving biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses these critical gaps by developing a migrant-
based model to describe and analyze motivations and movement towards three Costa
Rican national parks: Arenal, Carara, and Barra Honda. Dr. Hoffman's research
team will use cultural consensus modeling techniques in conjunction with
qualitative research methodologies to discover whether migrants who settle in PA
buffer zones share a common rationale for migration based on either conditions
in the buffer zone or conditions in the communities from which they come. In
addition Dr. Hoffman will collaborate with researchers at the University of
Costa Rica to compare migrants' perceptions of economic and environmental
conditions to those measured by the Costa Rican state, as well as analyze the
2011 census for evidence of migration to park buffer
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will test the
validity of current hypotheses via the unique lenses of migrant perceptions and
the use of cultural consensus modeling. It also will develop a methodology for
understanding and modeling the relationship between PAs and migration that will
be applicable beyond the Costa Rican case. The results will contribute to
current debates about the effectiveness and impacts of combining conservation
and development, as well as inform conservation practitioners. The research is
co-funded by the NSF Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR) and the NSF Cultural Anthropology Program.