* 1157129
* Collaboration with Hong Kong: Minimizing Energy Consumption Through Task Scheduling
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Marek Chrobak, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2015
* USD 12,739.00

This CNIC award supports planning-visit travel to Hong Kong. Three trips will be
used to develop a new research collaboration with Tak-Wah Lam at the University
of Hong Kong and Mordecai Golin at the Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology. The target of the research is the general problem of energy
consumption in information technology. The three collaborators bring
complementary strengths to the problem. The initial approach is to analyze
strategies and algorithms for minimizing energy consumption in task management,
comparing power-down scheduling with speed-scaling scheduling using dynamic
programming and then exploring the possibility of alternative models. A graduate
student from UC-Riverside will participate in the project and will travel to
Hong Kong with the PI. It is anticipated that the initial collaboration will
lead to a full-scale research proposal to CISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
planning visit aims to establish an international research collaboration that
can contribute new insights and algorithmic techniques required to address
challenges in energy management. From a theoretical point of view it will expand
the understanding of feasible solutions of power-down and speed-scaling
scheduling problems, leading to more efficient algorithms. Existing algorithms
for these scheduling approaches are currently too slow or too complex for
practical applications. The proposed research aims to design faster, simpler,
and more general algorithms. As one of the reviewers noted, more efficient
approaches in information technology, which is consuming increasing amounts of
energy, can help to control global energy consumption. Thus, the results of this
research can have an impact on supporting sustainable computing and a
sustainable modern society. Another benefit of the project is the involvement of
a graduate student in the international collaboration.