* 1157788
* Protein Dynamics in Electron Transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Su Lin, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/28/2018
* USD 987,220.00

This project integrates molecular dynamic simulation and experimental
measurement to develop a dynamic model for photosynthetic electron transfer in
reaction centers of the purple nonsulfur bacterium, Rhodobacter sphaeroides.
Current simulations on this system have suggested that the involvement of slow,
collective protein modes in mediating these reactions is key, and as a result,
the amount of reorganization energy available during a reaction is profoundly
dependant on the time scale of the reaction, particularly as one moves from
picoseconds to nanoseconds. Here, a theoretical group and an experimental group
have joined forces to explore how proteins dynamics is involved to balance two
competing electron transfer reactions that are critical to solar energy
conversion in photosynthesis. The first is a productive electron transfer
reaction that takes place on the 200 ps timescale from a bacteriopheophytin
intermediate to a quinone. The second is the competing unproductive
recombination reaction in which the electron returns back to the original
electron donor on the 10-20 ns time scale. Simulations and measurements will be
performed as a function of the driving force and temperature for these two
reactions and compared directly, the goal being to understand how Nature has
optimized protein structure and dynamics to promote productive photosynthetic
function. A series of surface charge mutants and different pH's will be
investigated, testing the concept that that the charge distribution at the
protein/water interface controls the shape of the initial and final state
potential surfaces, as suggested by simulation. In addition, internal mutations,
thought to alter the displacement between potential surfaces, will also be
investigated. The ultimate objective is to provide the capability to
quantitatively predict biochemical reaction dynamics and associated function
from protein structure in this complex biological system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a quantitative, structure-based model
of the relationship between structure, dynamics and function in the
photosynthetic reaction center would be broadly valuable. The reaction center in
this respect represents something of a "lab on a molecule" with high resolution
structural data and the inherent optical probes for monitoring electron transfer
in considerable detail. The project will support the development of a complete,
participatory learning experience for the students in the Mesa High School
Biotechnology Academy, based on genetic manipulation and spectroscopic probing
of photosynthetic bacteria. This will involve both teacher training in the ASU
laboratories during one summer and then PIs working directly with the teachers
and students in the academy to perform the activity during the subsequent years.
The PIs are very heavily involved in undergraduate mentoring having had 25
undergraduates in the lab during the last 5 years.