* 1157509
* Catalyzing New International Collaborations: Integrating Multiscale Modeling With Protein-Surface Experiments
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* W. James Pfaendtner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2013
* USD 17,262.00

This proposal is catalyzing a new collaborative research project between the
research group of Jim Pfaendtner (PI) at University of Washington and the
Molecular Spectroscopy Group at the Max Planck Institute in Mainz, Germany (key
collaborators Prof. Dr. Mischa Bonn and Dr. Tobias Weidner). In the summer of
2012 the researchers will have a two-week planning visit to discuss in detail a
new computational methodology for coupling computer simulations with protein-
surface experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interactions between an adsorbed
protein or enzyme and a surface are critical to controlling the orientation and
stability of this interface. To name only a few examples, protein-surface
interactions govern biomaterial function, sensors and biofuel cells. In spite of
this great importance, we currently do not have the ability to determine the
molecular-scale structural details of these systems. It is believed that the
proposed molecular dynamics (MD) based simulation approaches of protein/surface
interactions can tightly couple with the techniques used by the experimental
group at MPI Mainz. Combining these approaches holds great potential, but a
short planning visit is required in order to identify specific model systems and
funding opportunities.