* 1157377
* EAGER: Developing a Programming Environment for Heterogenous Multiprocessors
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Laxmi Bhuyan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,288.00

Intellectual Merit: This EAGER project addresses distribution issues for systems
executing on heterogeneous computing architectures, that is, architectures that
have been configured with graphics processing units (GPUs) and field-
programmable gate array (FPGAs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous
architectures may offer considerable increase in throughput when compared to
simple multi-processor architectures. But, to achieve maximum gain and resource
utilization in heterogeneous architectures, an application?s workload needs to
be distributed among accelerators and CPUs according to the computational
capabilities of those components. The optimal distribution of tasks and data
among processing units is an important concern for such platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic partitioning can better utilize all computational
units during execution. However, even though this type of partitioning is
addressed in a few published studies, full utilization gains have not been
reported. This team will attempt to develop ?near ideal? partitioning schemes
which require: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;? devising monitoring mechanisms for each
type of accelerator, &lt;br/&gt;? quantifying tasks and data as computational
blocks, and &lt;br/&gt;? estimating performance throughout execution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These load balancing schemes will be application and
device independent and fully automated without the need for prior training runs
before the actual run. The goal is to integrate these schemes with programming
models to seamlessly expose near optimal utilization of heterogeneous
multiprocessor architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The software
and hardware platforms developed in this research will be publicly released as
open source so that others may experiment with them. The research will be
conducted with cooperation of Intel researchers enabling possible future
transfer of technology to industry. Funding of this project will provide support
for recruiting underrepresented minority and female students for the project. In
addition, the research content will be integrated to graduate courses to provide
training to students for designing and programming future heterogeneous systems.