* 1157829
* Catalytic Reactivity at the Metal-Solution Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Robert Davis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1157829&lt;br/&gt;Davis, Robert
J.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supported metal
catalysts composed of metal nanoparticles on alumina and silica supports have
been optimized for the upgrading of fossil fuels as well as the production of
petrochemicals. The recent transition of some chemical processes to utilize
biorenewable feedstocks requires new catalysts to be active in liquid water, a
reaction medium that is not commonly found in the fossil fuel based industries.
Water is a very low cost, highly-polar, environmentally benign solvent that has
great potential as a reaction medium for catalytic transformations of biomass.
Indeed, many molecules derived from biomass are highly-oxygenated and quite
polar compared to hydrocarbons and are likely to decompose rather than vaporize,
thus eliminating the traditional conversion options. The oxide supports are not
stable in the aqueous reaction medium. Therefore, new catalysts for aqueous-
phase catalytic processing of carbohydrate-derived feedstocks must be a priority
interest in the chemical community. The fundamental catalysis chemistry in these
aqueous systems must be understood to make best use of the renewable feedstocks
under consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Robert J. Davis of the
University of Virginia has begun these investigations, most recently observing
the mechanisms of glycerol reactivity at catalyst surfaces. This new project
explores the nature of the catalytic active site and probes the reactivity of
adsorbed intermediates on two metal catalyst systems that are highly relevant to
the catalytic transformation of biorenewable molecules in liquid water. The
oxidation of polyols to diacids on Au catalysts and the hydrogenolysis of
polyols to diols on bimetallic Pt-Re catalysts will be probed by in-situ
attenuated total reflectance FTIR spectroscopy of model nanoparticle and thin
film catalysts and compared to the performance of supported metal catalysts in
high pressure batch and flow reactors. Preliminary research has revealed unique
reactivity of both Au and Pt-Re catalyst systems in liquid water but the
fundamental mechanistic principles by which these systems function are still
unknown. This study will elucidate the key features of the metal-water interface
which may then be generalized to other reactions of interest in aqueous systems.
Davis intends to combine concepts of acid/base chemistry together with catalysis
by metals to explain the catalytic reactions that occur in liquid water and to
elucidate design principles that can be utilized for the synthesis of next
generation catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and Outreach
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A new outreach effort will involve participation
of the principal investigator in a recently-formed organization created at the
University of Virginia called NExT (for Nano and Emerging Technologies) and a
new non-profit organization called NextTech, which broadens the impact of NExT
to other universities and forms junior chapters at high schools across the
country. NExT and NextTech engage local K-12 students throughout the year and
include mentoring science fair projects,guest seminars/demos, and co-sponsored
events. The PI will interact with a local high school that has recently added a
new program called the Math Engineering and Science Academy, that combines
teaching in math and science to involve real world problem solving,
collaboration and inquiry-based learning.