* 1157461
* Collaborative Proposal - Constraints on the Evolution of Hotspot-Ridge Interactions: The Northern Galapagos Region
* GEO,OCE
* 07/31/2011,07/31/2013
* Christopher Sinton, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 07/31/2013
* USD 60,052.00

The Galapagos Archipelago and surrounding seafloor are unique in their
construction and the center of much scientific investigation of processes of
seafloor crustal construction. This research complements already on-going work
in the Galapagos seeking to understand the nature and role of lineaments (Wolf-
Darwin Lineament and Genovesa Ridge) on the seafloor and their ties to Galapagos
volcanism and Pacific plate tectonics. Goals are to: (1) determine the age of
volcanic rocks along the two lineaments using 40Ar/39Ar dating to understand the
timing of eruptions in the area and (2) use trace elements compositions and
ratios to determine mantle sources and melting regimes. These data, along with a
compilation of other data from the literature and from recent cruises by German
collaborators will be used to generate a set of seafloor tectonic maps showing
the location and composition of volcanism in the Galapagos region over the past
10 million years. These maps will be used to produce a tectonic reconstruction
of Galapagos hotspot-ridge interactions. Broader impacts of the work include
international collaboration with German scientists and strong integration of
research and education in terms of involving undergraduates in research
activities which include having them participate in an oceanographic cruise,
participate fully in research planning and implementation, and training in state
of the art geochemical techniques. The Program notes that the project involves
PIs from two undergraduate institutions.