* 1157628
* Collaborative Research: US-Germany: Achieving breakthroughs in the mechanics of high temperature ceramic coatings with novel thermal-gradient mechanical fatigue studies
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,11/30/2012
* Anette Karlsson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 11/30/2012
* USD 34,266.00

This award catalyzes a synergistic international collaboration with long-term
goals to enable breakthroughs in the understanding of degradation and failure
mechanisms in high temperature ceramic coatings, under operational environments.
Researchers from the University of Central Florida, University of Delaware in
the US and DLR Aerospace Center in Germany will collaborate to perform
fundamental experiments and simulations with novel geometries and high
resolution techniques to quantify the in situ evolution of strain in these
coatings under thermal gradient-mechanical fatigue (TGMF) conditions. The
catalyzing activities will be jointly conducted by the team, supported with
synchrotron studies providing opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students to enrich their research and education with international collaborative
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit and uniqueness of the
research lies in i) the in situ capture of degradation mechanisms within ceramic
coatings under operational and real environments; and ii) the combination of
powerful and complementary experimental and simulation techniques for high
resolution results. The research will benefit from the individual expertise and
advances in instrumentation achieved by the US and German collaborators, to
integrate high-resolution measurements (UCF) and simulation (UD) with TGMF test
capabilities (DLR, Germany). The complex thermo-mechanical environment, often
eluded in studies of high temperature coatings, will be established through this
work leading to breakthroughs in achieving realistic mechanics models for these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has far reaching societal benefits
in creating a new class of high temperature ceramic coatings for next generation
energy and propulsion needs. The educational broader impact of the international
collaborative research is achieved through i) an exchange of knowledge of high
resolution techniques in experimentation and simulation ii) opportunities for
students at the graduate and undergraduate levels to experience collaborative
research in highly advanced facilities focused on each expertise, iii) a global
engineering and research perspective with planned activities, providing students
with the capabilities for future international collaborative success. The
international experience will be extended to students at individual institutions
through presentations led by the participants.