* 1157765
* The Dynamics of Replication Processivity Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Marcia Levitus, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2017
* USD 481,368.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: DNA replication is the process
by which all living organisms make copies of their DNA, and it is the foundation
of biological inheritance. The synthesis of the new DNA strands is catalyzed by
enzymes called DNA polymerases, which use the mother DNA strand as a template to
synthesize a new copy. From bacteria to humans, efficient DNA replication
requires proteins known as processivity factors to ensure that the polymerase
moves rapidly along DNA without dissociating from it. In particular, sliding
clamps are oligomeric ring-shaped proteins that encircle DNA, providing an
anchor for the DNA polymerase. To load clamps onto DNA, an open clamp loader-
clamp complex must form. It is generally assumed that clamps exist as closed
rings in solution and that clamp loaders must therefore actively open their
interfaces. Very few studies, however, have addressed this problem directly. The
dynamics of clamp opening will be investigated with the goal of understanding
the mechanisms by which clamp loaders are able to load sliding clamps onto DNA.
The fairly static view of clamp loading that has emerged from structural data is
intrinsically inadequate to understand the mechanistic details of how these
proteins achieve their function. This limitation will be tackled directly by our
experimental design, which is based on the measurement and analysis of the
spontaneous fluctuations of a small number of molecules. Initially, the solution
oligomerization equilibrium dynamics of the processivity clamps of E. coli (a
dimer) and S. cerevisiae (a trimer) will be characterized. These proteins are
among the most studied sliding clamps, and yet their association affinities and
rate constants have not been fully characterized. Then, the conformational
dynamics of sliding clamps in solution, bound to the clamp loaders, and bound to
DNA will be characterized. Single-molecule fluorescence techniques are
particularly well-suited to investigate the structural dynamics of biopolymers,
and will be used in this project to characterize the conformational fluctuations
in processivity clamps. The successful completion of these studies will provide
vital mechanistic insights into how processivity factors work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Graduate students can enrich their
educational experience by learning about and participating in all aspects of the
synergistic and joint efforts of the Levitus (ASU) and Bloom (UF) labs. ASU
students will spend a fraction of each summer at UF to immerse themselves into
the molecular biology aspects of the project, while a student from UF will spend
time at ASU to learn about single-molecule and other spectroscopic techniques.
Students from underrepresented groups will be recruited through a series of
existing programs at ASU and UF. A series of activities aimed at increasing the
retention and chances of success of minority students and early-career faculty,
including mentoring female junior faculty and minority graduate students, will
be continued, as well as participation in student research conferences for
underrepresented undergraduate students within the STEM disciplines.