* 1157885
* Compliance Police or Business Partner? Institutional Contradictions and Contested Legitimacy in Human Resources
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2013
* Stephen Barley, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 02/28/2013
* USD 140,000.00

This is a study of the effects of competing institutional demands on the roles
and practices of a profession. The research team will examine Human Resource
(HR) departments and practitioners' efforts to cope with the tensions between
contributing to their company's competitive advantage and ensuring its
compliance with various legal mandates. Periodic surveys of HR managers find
that HR has made little progress toward fulfilling a hoped-for strategic role in
firms. This research team theorizes that this lack of progress may result from a
fundamental conflict between competing institutional demands. They will explore
how this conflict shapes actual HR practices and the roles that HR professionals
play in organizations as well as the effects that such shaping may have.
Empirically, the project relies on ethnographic observation, interviews, and an
internal census of HR professionals in contrasting field settings: one high
performer and one low performer in terms of workplace desirability. Selection of
the companies to study also takes into account their industry's EEOC filing rate
(claims filed per 1,000 employees), based on a unique data base created for this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the results should
be applicable to numerous professions affected by tensions between their aims to
enhance competitiveness and efforts to ensure compliance with regulation: for
example, accountants as well as CEOs dealing with Sarbanes-Oxley or automotive
design engineers making tradeoffs between legislated safety targets and fuel
efficiency. Furthermore, the project will create a unique database of EEOC
filing rates by industry. These data will be updated annually and made available
to all interested researchers. Finally, to the extent that the project uncovers
the internal processes organizations use to address discrimination and unfair
treatment complaints, its findings will offer an informed point of view on how
agencies such as the EEOC can more effectively ensure internal compliance and,
thus, reduce the burden associated with claims processing and enforcement.