* 1157868
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course: Frontiers & Techniques in Plant Science
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 04/30/2015
* USD 301,414.00

Intellectual Merit. For thirty years, the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory summer
course on Frontiers and Techniques in Plant Science has played a critical role
in disseminating new approaches and techniques to a wide plant science
community. The course is continuing this tradition with a focus on new genomic,
analytical, computational and other high throughput and interdisciplinary
approaches to understanding plant biology. The intention is to (1) teach state-
of-the-art techniques to scientists already involved in plant research so that
they can apply these technologies to their own future research and (2) introduce
scientists familiar with microbial, animal or plant systems to cutting-edge
research carried out by top plant biologists. The goal of the course is to
immerse students in a handful of key topics in plant biology--evolution; form
and function; genetic mechanisms; interactions with the biotic and abiotic
environment; and engineering plants for food, pharmaceuticals, and fuel--
employing a format that includes a vigorous lecture series, a hands-on
laboratory, and informal discussions. The curriculum emphasizes recent results
both from widely studied plants, such as Arabidopsis, maize and tomato, and
emerging model systems that have significant economic importance or scientific
novelty. The combined lecture plus lab format provides the students with a
theoretical and practical introduction to current methods used in basic and
applied plant biology. The instructors and a stellar group of invited speakers,
acknowledged leaders in their fields, present up-to-the-moment research on a
wide range of topics in plant research. The students are diverse, ranging from
early-stage graduate students to tenure-track professors, with backgrounds in
areas including mammalian biology, engineering, and physics. The informal,
highly interactive course format allows students to learn from each other as
well as from the invited speakers. In sum, the course provides an intensive
three-week immersion into cross-disciplinary and cutting-edge approaches in
plant biology, helping prepare the next generation of plant biologists to work
at the interface of biological, computational and physical sciences.

Broader Impacts. The broader impact of the course is the training of researchers
in the most up-to-date computational and experimental resources and tools
available for plant biology research. Students are chosen to include those who
will most broadly disseminate information acquired in the course. Many of the
students are likely to have educational and supervisory responsibilities in the
near future; others are already professors or post-doctoral fellows who will
immediately pass on what they have learned in the course. Many of the students
who take the course go on to lead their own laboratories, with the course
providing a foundation of knowledge and an important network of scientific
contacts for these new lab heads. In fact, two of the current course instructors
are course alumni. In recent years, female and male students were equally
represented and several Hispanic students took part in the course. To further
this trend, the course is advertised widely and specifically contacts
institutional programs that facilitate recruiting and retention of
underrepresented groups into the life sciences professoriate (e.g. NSF-supported
AGEP programs and life sciences REU sites). The students come from a variety of
backgrounds and are exposed to a wide range of bench and computational
approaches during the course, increasing the chances that they will go on to
carry out the interdisciplinary research that is vital for meeting today's
global challenges.