* 1157895
* Collaborative Research: Salt-stress regulation of spatiotemporal gene expression patterns in the Arabidopsis root
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Jose Dinneny, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2016
* USD 506,261.00

Intellectual Merit: The ability of plants to perceive and acclimate to changes
in the environment is paramount for their survival. Not only is this true for
plants growing in nature, but also for plants growing in the field. The root
system represents the primary site of perception and response for many stressful
environmental conditions such as high salinity, the most widespread soil
contaminant negatively affecting agriculture. Absorption of sodium ions by the
root system causes nutrient deficiencies and inhibits the growth of the shoot.
Arabidopsis thaliana has evolved several stress-resistance mechanisms and serves
as a model system for understanding how the regulation of genes enables
acclimation to salinity. The goal of this research program is to determine the
regulatory mechanisms that control spatial and temporal aspects of the stress
response. Gene activity is regulated through short DNA-sequences in the promoter
region, known as cis-regulatory elements. These elements act like a code that
determines how a particular gene is expressed by recruiting transcription factor
proteins, which ultimately determine gene activity. This project aims to crack
the cis-element code for salt stress response through the use of novel cell-type
specific gene expression data sets and synthetic biology approaches. A network
of cis-elements and transcription factors will be generated to elucidate the
complex molecular interactions controlling spatiotemporal aspects of the
response. This work will contribute to an understanding of gene regulatory
networks in plants and provide tools for engineering salt-tolerant
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Understanding how plants regulate
gene activity under stressful conditions is necessary for the development of
crops better able to grow on marginal agricultural land. In particular, an
understanding of the regulatory code used to turn genes on and off in specific
tissues and at specific times during the stress response is critical to generate
plants that perform well under both ideal and suboptimal conditions. This
research program will also provide a platform for training students and
scientists on the use of genomic and synthetic biology approaches to address
important questions in plant biology. A mentoring program will be established to
provide enrichment activities for underprivileged youth at the Boys and Girls
Club of the Peninsula. The planned program will involve hands on activities
aimed at introducing students to basic concepts in plant biology and
biotechnology. The goals will be to instill an appreciation for the role plants
play in their lives, how different cultures have contributed to the history of
plant breeding and finally how biotechnology is changing the pace of future
agricultural development.