* 1157410
* Linkages Between Amazon Mangrove Coastlines and Fluvial Sediment Exchange: How Climatic Variations Could Impact Mangrove Health
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Andrea Ogston, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 07/31/2014
* USD 78,267.00

Mangrove forests are extremely valuable marine environments that protect human
habitation against waves and currents, are themselves home to many juvenile
marine organisms, and are major repositories for carbon. The mangrove coastlines
south and north of the Amazon River mouth have had little impact from humans in
terms of pollution or clear cutting, but reduction in sediment supply could
expose mangrove forests to intense erosion from oceanographic forces. A doubling
of eustatic (global) sea-level rise due to climate change could provide
substantially more space to trap fluvial sediment discharge, perhaps doubling
entrapment and further reducing the sediment supply to the ocean and coastal
mangrove environments. To investigate this linkage between sea-level rise and
mangrove health, a collaborative research network between US and Brazilian
scientists will be established to supply the set of specialized skills necessary
for this study. The US group brings expertise in sediment transport processes
and the impacts of climate variations on river delta and coastal environments;
off-shore research, and land-ocean interactions and global change. The Brazilian
collaborators bring expertise in remote sensing, experience with mangrove
coastlines, and coastal and estuarine circulation and sedimentological processes
in the deltaic regions associated with the Amazon River. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will entail a short course/technical workshop at Universidade Federal do Pará
(UFPA); a preliminary field expedition to the Amazon tidal river and mangrove
coastlines surrounding the river mouth; and the development of a communication
network for sharing of scientific results and discussion. The short course and
field expedition will involve a group of about 6 Brazilian and 6 U.S. students
at the graduate and advanced undergraduate levels. The students will be exposed
to the scientific underpinnings of fluvial and coastal sedimentation and the
relevant environments through field excursions to the Amazon river mouth and
coastal mangrove forests. This project and anticipated follow-on activities will
lay the groundwork and create the international collaborations necessary to
address the question of the linkages between sedimentological and geochemical
processes operating on mangrove coastlines and fluvial sediment and carbon
exchange to the coastal ocean.