* 1157466
* Dissection of cis-regulatory Regions in Plants Using Recombination, Allelic Expression, and Site-directed Mutagenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Jennifer Hawkins, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2017
* USD 755,895.00

Intellectual Merit. Central to the understanding of organismal development are
the underlying genetic mechanisms that drive variation in gene expression. It is
generally agreed that sequence variation in the regulatory regions of genes
plays a major role in expression divergence and organismal diversity, yet little
is know regarding the structure and function of these complex promoter regions.
This project takes a step toward resolving the genesis of this expression
variation by dissecting the functional modules of regulatory regions into their
controlling units. Evidence from a wide range of eukaryotic organisms indicates
that, within individual species, variation in allelic expression is a common
phenomenon and occurs at a significantly high frequency in various tissues and
during different developmental stages. Using two resource-rich model plant taxa,
Arabidopsis thaliana and Zea mays (maize), variation in allelic expression,
combined with naturally occurring meiotic recombination, will be used to map the
regulatory components of these expression differences for several genes in
various plant tissues. The data are expected to reveal the regulatory components
of allelic expression variation in two distinct plant lineages and contribute
significantly to a more complete understanding of the structure and function of
plant promoters. Additionally, other regulatory components of gene expression
that do not contribute to allelic expression differences, but do function as
cis-regulatory controls, are expected to be discovered using in situ site-
directed mutagenesis in upstream regions of the same genes in Arabidopsis. These
data, combined with those from the allelic expression portion of the project,
will provide a detailed characterization of plant promoter structure and
function in the Arabidopsis and maize regions of interest. The completion of
this project will contribute to a broader understanding of promoter evolution in
plants, specifically with respect to the role of module swapping via meitoic
recombination, and will also provide a promising methodology for elucidating
mechanisms for the cis-regulatory control of plant gene expression. This project
promises not only intellectual advancement in the fields of molecular and
evolutionary genetics, but also the development of a number of possible
practical industrial technologies designed to enhance and advance agricultural
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This research lends itself to
multiple activities involving outreach, the inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups, and scientific training of students at all levels. In
the state of West Virginia, a small fraction of high school students attend
college (~16%), and 20% of those incoming undergraduates are first-generation
college students. These projects will provide multiple educational opportunities
for these underrepresented students via scientific training in laboratory
practices that lead to landmark discoveries, and ultimately to the
implementation of innovative real world agricultural applications that benefit
society as a whole. Other underrepresented groups will be provided opportunities
at WVU via the McNair Scholarship, designed to provide support for students from
disadvantaged backgrounds, and the NSF Research Education for Undergraduates
(REU) program. Also, a number of educational outreach opportunities exist at WVU
via the program for Women in Science and Engineering (WiSE), and the Summer
Undergraduate Research Experience (SURE) program. Students will be provided the
opportunity to disseminate the results of their work among the broader
scientific community at annual international meetings. In addition, this
research is designed as part of the WVU Computational Biology Initiative, an
interdepartmental effort among the Departments of Biology, Mathematics and
Statistics to create undergraduate and graduate programs in the emerging field
of bioinformatics. All scripts and data generated will be used to develop new
courses under the Initiative.