* 1158206
* Low Frequency Waves in the Ionosphere During High Frequency (HF) Heating and Effects on the Ground and in the Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2013,07/31/2016
* A Surjalal Sharma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth S. Lieberman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop theory, modeling and simulations of
low frequency waves during ionospheric heating. A key focus will be the
midlatitude ionosphere, and in particular, the upcoming heating experiments
using the Arecibo facility, with coordinated measurements at its conjugate
region in Argentina. The heating of the ionospheric plasma by modulated high
frequency waves leads to physical processes with a wide range of scales.
Ionospheric modification experiments have shown the generation of low frequency
waves in the presence of the natural current systems, the electrojets, and
recent results show the wave generation even in their absence. &lt;br/&gt; Three
simulation codes will be used: the first for simulations of low frequency waves
and associated processes in the high-latitude region, with a nearly vertical
magnetic field. The second code is designed for a general orientation of the
magnetic field and will be used for studies of the mid-latitude region. The
third code will have a general magnetic field geometry and will simulate the
mid-latitude region and its coupling to the high- and low-latitudes, including
the effects on the conjugate region. The simulations will also explore the
generation of low frequency waves during heating of the low-latitude
ionosphere.&lt;br/&gt; Meso-scale phenomena are critical during ionospheric
heating and will be the focus of this research. These efforts will enable the
development of a comprehensive ionospheric heating model by elucidating the
leading processes that bridge the phenomena at micro- and macro-scales. The
heating experiments allow the use of the ionosphere as a natural laboratory for
exploring fundamental processes, in particular a variety of plasma
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt; This work will lead to a better understanding of
ionospheric processes which are relevant to telecommunications and satellite
technologies, as well as space weather. A graduate student will be trained in
the plasma physics of the ionosphere and large-scale numerical simulations.
Undergraduate and high school students, including several from under-represented
minority groups, will participate in the project and gain direct experience and
encouragement to pursue science and technology.