* 1158514
* Turbulent Convection in a Fluid Heated from Below
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Guenter Ahlers, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2017
* USD 640,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent convection plays a major role in
numerous geophysical, astrophysical, and industrial processes, and yet its
understanding remains incomplete. The proposed work will primarily extend its
investigation to fluids with Prandtl numbers Pr [(kinematic viscosity)/(thermal
diffusivity)] in the range from 0.17 to 1.0 which remains relatively unexplored
and which is accessible in gases and gas mixtures. This range includes the
Prandtl number of 0.7 relevant to Earth's atmosphere. Investigations will be
extended to samples of large aspect ratio (diameter/height) up to 20 and to
exceptionally large Rayleigh numbers Ra (Ra is a dimensionless measure of the
applied temperature difference) up to 10^15. The effect of rotation about a
vertical axis, which introduces the Coriolis force and modifies the behavior of
the system, will be studied (rotation is relevant for instance to the formation
of hurricanes in Earth's atmosphere). These experiments require the construction
of complex apparatus and the automatic computer control of numerous intricate
processes. Thus they are an exceptionally good training ground for our young
coworkers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;****Non-technical
Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent convection in a fluid heated from below is of
utmost importance in many natural phenomena and in industry. It occurs in
Earth's mantle where it contributes to the motion of continental plates and
influences vulcanism. In the outer core of the Earth it determines the magnetic
field in which we live. It is the important heat-transport mechanism in the
outer layer of the Sun and thus impacts the temperature of our environment. It
plays a significant role in many industrial processes, where its enhancement or
inhibition may have significant economic consequences. These applications range
from miniature heat-transport devices in computer applications to the giant
cooling systems of power plants. And yet much remains unknown to the scientist
and engineer about these processes. The proposed work will extend our
understanding of turbulent convection to fluids with properties similar to the
Earth's atmosphere; this property range has remained relatively unexplored in
the laboratory. The work will also be extended to samples that are rotated about
their vertical axis. The rotation will exert a force on the fluid known as the
Coriolis force and thus will change the behavior of the system in a manner
related to how Earth's rotation modifies the nature of hurricanes and ocean
currents. These experiments require the construction of complex apparatus and
the automatic computer-control of numerous intricate processes. Thus they are an
exceptionally good training ground for our young coworkers, many of whom will
evolve into the leaders of the next generation of scientists and engineers.