* 1158151
* Assembling Centrioles: Molecular Biogenesis of an Organelle
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Gregory Rogers, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 08/31/2016
* USD 670,600.00

Intellectual Merit: A central problem in cell biology is to understand how cells
build their organelles. To address this problem, this project focuses on using
centrioles as a model organelle. Centrioles are tiny organelles that assemble
into a centrosome, which produces protein polymers called mircotubules.
Microtubules are then used to build numerous protein-based machines within cells
that play essential roles in cell motility, sensing the environment, and cell
division. Centrioles are also attractive for organellogenesis studies because of
their relative simplicity, being composed of only less than 15 different
proteins and lacking an enveloping membrane. The goal of this project is to
identify basic mechanisms of centriole assembly. Keys to unraveling this process
lie in deciphering the roles kinases play as essential regulators of centriole
assembly and in identifying their substrates. The master-regulator Polo-like-
kinase-4 (Plk4)is such an enzyme, as its kinase activity is required for
initiating centriole formation. At present, it is unclear how Plk4 drives
centriole assembly, as its substrates at centrioles are only now beginning to
emerge. This research involves a multidisciplinary procedure designed to
directly identify Plk4 kinase targets specifically required for centriole
assembly. This strategy combines high-throughput functional genomic screening,
chemical genetics, and focused proteomic screening to identify and characterize
key subunits that initiate centriole assembly when phosphorylated by Plk4. Thus,
this project is designed to identify the earliest molecular steps in the
centriole assembly process. A long-term goal of this research is to uncover
fundamental insights into the mechanisms that cells use to build all
organelles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS: This project contains several
components designed to promote general education and provide new scientific
training. During the course of this research, training will be provided to Ph.D.
graduate and undergraduate students who have not yet had the opportunity to
learn the scientific process and develop laboratory skills in molecular biology.
It is highly encouraged that each of these individual attend national
conferences to present his/her findings. Moreover, these participants will
attend weekly meetings during which one member of the lab selects a scientific
paper for lab members to read and discuss together. This exposes everyone to
each others' diverse scientific interests, provides valuable practice in
presenting and discussing science, and, for the undergraduates particularly,
exposes them to critical discussions of the scientific literature that can give
them a view of scientific inquiry that is not often presented in their regular
classes. Graduate students will gain experience mentoring undergraduate research
students in independent research projects and, for those students who intend to
pursue teaching as a primary career, are encouraged to gain experience in
teaching undergraduates. Undergraduate researchers will be recruited from the
University of Arizona Minority Access to Research Careers (MARC) program,
designed to recruit local student researchers from underrepresented groups, as
well as the NSF-sponsored Undergraduate Biology Research Program (UBRP). All
protocols and reagents developed in this project will be accessible to the
scientific community. Results from this work will published in scientific
journals. Results that are of especially broad interest will also be
disseminated in lay terms, at the time of publication, through the University of
Arizona News Service (UANews.org). Furthermore, this project will contribute to
both the research and education missions of American universities.