* 1158201
* SAVI:  Yeast Chromosome (Sc2.0) Synthesis and Analysis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2014
* Jef Boeke, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 09/30/2014
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this SAVI is to create a "Virtual Institute" that will support
the synthesis of an entire eukaryotic genome. Writing a complete eukaryotic
genome remains daunting and beyond the proven DNA synthesis capabilities of any
individual lab. In analogy to the Human Genome Project, these first efforts will
require the coordinated activities of many individual centers. This proposal
will put in place the research coordination infrastructure to enable the
complete synthesis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome within 5 years at
sites spanning the USA, Asia, and Europe, at institutions ranging from four-year
liberal arts colleges to major research institutions, thereby capturing the
imagination of undergraduate students, fellows, staff and faculty members
worldwide.

The specific objectives of this SAVI initiative are to solidify current
collaborations between researchers at Johns Hopkins University, Loyola
University of Maryland, and international partners in China, India and Europe.
The strategic outsourcing of the synthesis of individual chromosomes guarantees
that the entire yeast genome is completed within a five-year period with
leveraged funds and resources from the US and international participating
partners and funding agencies.

Broader Impacts - The broader impacts of this SAVI project are the first-ever
ability to ask and answer deep questions about fundamental properties of
chromosomes, genome organization, gene content, the function of RNA splicing,
the distinction between prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and numerous other aspects
of genomes and evolution. The "synthetic yeast" will play an important role in
practical applications, ranging from a test-bed for focused biological problems
to a chassis for future synthetic biology projects. Notably, yeast is the
preeminent organism used for industrial fermentations, with a wide variety of
practical uses, including ethanol production from agricultural products and by-
products. As the only effort of its kind outside industry, this project provides
a unique and very important service in keeping the knowledge in the Synthetic
Biology field public through open source availability of all reagents and
protocols without intellectual property restrictions. This SAVI effort is unique
also in training researchers in genome-scale synthetic Biology. An innovative
"Build A Genome" course was developed and implemented at Johns Hopkins
University, which has since been offered at Loyola Univ. of Maryland, and two
universities in China. The SAVI imitative will also offer opportunities for
multi-disciplinary training of students, postdocs, and researchers, and will
encourage international exchange.

This award is designated as a Science Across Virtual Institutes (SAVI) award and
is being co-funded by NSF's Directorate for Biological Sciences, Directorate for
Engineering, and Office of International Science and Engineering.