* 1158638
* Integrated opto-nanofluidic biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Xudong Fan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 365,400.00

Intellectual Merit: Optical label-free biosensors measure analytes in their
natural form without fluorescence labeling. Unfortunately, nearly all of them
suffer from the detection limit bottleneck of approximately 1 pg/mm2. In
contrast to detecting analytes attached to a single solid-liquid interface, the
nanoporous based biosensor enables 3-dimensional detection, as multiple solid-
liquid interfaces are present in the detection region. As a result, 0.01 pg/mm2
or better detection limit can potentially be achieved. However, one major issue
with the nanoporous sensor is the sample delivery. It takes extremely long time
for molecules to diffuse into (and out of) the porous detection region. The
problem exacerbates when one deals with complex media, as it is very difficult
to remove the unwanted interfering molecules from inside the pores, which causes
large non-specific binding and severely deteriorates sensing
performance.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed opto-nanofluidic sensor overcomes the
aforementioned problems while maintaining high sensitivity even in the presence
of complex media. It employs a nanostructured capillary placed in a Fabry-PÃ©rot
microcavity, which serves simultaneously as a flow-through nanofluidic channel,
sample concentrator, and optical label-free sensor. It has a number of
distinctive advantages. (1) It retains high sensitivity similar to that in
nanoporous biosensors while having much larger Q-factors, which leads to an
unprecedented detection limit on the order of fg/mm2; (2) It retains the high
analyte capture efficiency due to the large surface-to-volume ratio and
meanwhile its built-in flow-through nanofluidic channels enable quick and
controlled sample delivery; (3) Detection of analytes from complex media becomes
much easier. The interfering molecules can thoroughly be rinsed off, thus
minimizing the non-specific binding and enhancing the sensing performance; (4)
It is mechanically robust and can be mass-produced at a very low cost with the
fiber drawing method; (5) The hole size is highly uniform and can be adjusted to
accommodate different sizes of analytes and flow rates; (6) Due to its small
size and simplicity, it can be scaled up to an array format for multiplexed
detection on the nL scale; and (7) It can easily be connected to upstream sample
processing components and downstream sample analyzers for further analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project includes prominent education
components for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. The students
involved in the proposed project will acquire interdisciplinary knowledge and
skills in photonics, nano/microfabrication, chemistry, material sciences, and
biotechnology. Furthermore, the results and expertise developed through this
project will be directly incorporated into the PI?s teaching at both
undergraduate and graduate levels. Additionally, the PI will work closely with
local non-Ph.D. granting institutes to develop a summer program for their
students to conduct research in the PI?s lab. Finally, the collaboration with
industrial companies will be instrumental in opto-nanofluidic sensor design,
fabrication, integration, and applications, as well as in student training.