* 1158328
* Collaborative Research:   Mechanisms of Termination of Viral DNA Packaging
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Douglas Smith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2016
* USD 584,763.00

Intellectual Merit: For many large DNA viruses, the production of new viruses
requires use of a protein molecular motor, powered by chemical energy from ATP,
to force the replicated viral DNA into the preformed empty viral shell, which is
also made of protein. The viral DNA is replicated as a continuous long chain
that must be cut into complete, unit-length pieces to provide each new viral
particle with a complete DNA genome. The protein motor that packages the DNA
also cuts the DNA chain to the correct length. For the herpes viruses and many
bacterial viruses, the DNA is cut at specific sites to generate viral DNA having
correct ends. Packaging begins with a precise initial cut, which generates the
DNA end that is threaded into the shell by the motor. Once a complete viral DNA
has been packaged, the motor nuclease again precisely cuts the DNA to terminate
the DNA packaging cycle. This project aims to determine the mechanism by which
the terminal DNA cut is precisely made. The model virus to be used in these
studies is called "lambda," and it infects the bacterium E. coli. It was chosen
because it is one of the most favorable systems for investigating this
mechanism. Lambda has a special recognition site, adjacent to the proper cut
site, to stop the packaging motor, so that the terminating cut is precisely
made. The efficiency of termination increases with the length of the packaged
DNA. As the shell fills, the resistance to packaging more DNA increases, the
velocity of packaging slows, and more energy is required for the motor to
continue packaging. Models to explain how termination efficiency is controlled
by the extent of packaging emphasize (1) the extent of shell filling, (2) the
packaging energy required, or (3) that packaging velocity regulates termination.
In this project, each of these factors will be studied to determine which
controls the termination process. These studies will be facilitated by the use
of "optical tweezers," a powerful, biophysical technique in which single DNA
molecules and individual virus shells are attached to plastic microspheres and
manipulated with focused laser beams. Packaging of a single DNA molecule can be
measured by detecting the movement of the microspheres and the forces acting on
them. The rate of DNA movement, the energy required for packaging, and the
extent of packaging will be manipulated through genetic, biochemical, and
biophysical perturbations. The roles of a putative shell-stabilizing protein and
of various regions of the motor proteins will also be explored using genetic and
biochemical methods. The project will increase understanding of how viruses
move, cut and package DNA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Viral DNA
packaging motors not only play an important role in the assembly of many
viruses, but very likely also share structural features and mechanisms with many
other cellular, DNA-processing enzymes, including helicases, bacterial
chromosome segregation motors, and endonucleases. A strong interdisciplinary
educational environment, integrating concepts and methods from the biological
and physical sciences, will be ensured for participating graduate and
undergraduate students. The project is led by two experienced researchers with
complementary research backgrounds in biophysics and molecular biology, and
strong records of research mentoring of undergraduates and students from diverse
backgrounds. New undergraduate biophysics course materials will also be
developed in the course of the project. Educational materials for K-12 science
education will be developed in collaboration with the R.H. Fleet Science
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of Chemistry.