* 1158651
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Indigenous Responses to Colonialism at Achiutla, Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Jamie Forde, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2014
* USD 19,439.00

Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Joyce, Mr. Jamie Forde will conduct
archaeological excavations of households at the site of Achiutla, Oaxaca,
Mexico. These date to the Early Colonial period (A.D. 1521-1600). Achiutla is
located in the western highlands of the modern state of Oaxaca, in the region
known as the Mixteca Alta, which has been inhabited by speakers of the Mixtec
language since early pre-Hispanic times. Just prior to the Spanish conquest,
Achiutla was known to have been one of the most sacred sites in the region - it
was believed to have been the home of a solar oracle, and indigenous nobles from
throughout the Mixteca Alta and beyond made religious pilgrimage there. Shortly
after the conquest, Spanish missionaries took up residence at the site and
aggressively sought to eliminate pre-Hispanic religious practice. Historical
records suggest that conflict broke out at times between native residents of the
site and the clergy, yet we have little sense of how this abrupt shift in social
dynamics affected indigenous peoples' daily lives. The Achiutla Archaeological
Project (AAP) will shed light on this issue, examining how aspects of native
lifeways changed or were maintained amidst this rather dramatic upheaval.
Results are expected to contribute to broader social scientific understandings
of the effects of culture contact and colonialism, and long-term processes of
cultural change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although archaeological in nature the
research is relevant to the present day in which similar disparities exist
between adjacent political entities. Understanding such interactions provide
insight into the bonds which hold states together and the forces which undermine
unity. In many societies religion plays an important role in either establishing
social bonds or the reverse. At Achiutla religious interaction was a major
factor making the site a particularly appropriate study venue. Archaeological
data because of the long term perspective they can provide allows researchers to
track such interactions across periods which may span multiple
centuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeological investigations at Achiutla will
entail careful excavations of indigenous residential areas, examining aspects of
day-to-day life that are largely unaccounted for in historical records.
Attention will particularly focus on three main categories of daily activity: 1)
household craft production, 2) consumption of trade goods and foodstuffs, and 3)
domestic ritual practice. Depending on the type of activity under consideration,
native residents may have variously accepted, resisted, or otherwise adapted to
new demands imposed by the Spanish. Careful recovery of material data and
subsequent analyses will allow for detailed reconstruction of indigenous
lifeways and social change at colonial Achiutla. Such insights, based on
material evidence, will not only help fill in gaps in the historical record, but
also serve as a potential check against biases in such documents as well,
providing a more holistic and objective account of how the Spanish conquest was
experienced by natives of Mesoamerica. Data from Achiutla will also be compared
to other colonial contexts throughout Mesoamerica and beyond, to examine broader
patterns and variability in local responses to
colonialism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AAP is designed to have impacts beyond the
academic arena. Not only will the project assist in the graduate training of
Forde, but also local residents of the modern town of Achiutla will assist with
excavations, and be trained in archaeological research methods. The project will
collaborate closely with local authorities seeking to raise awareness of the
community's history and preserve its cultural patrimony. Community outreach will
be undertaken, as Forde will give public talks in Achiutla and give tours of the
site as the excavations progress. Results will not only be disseminated in
scholarly literature, but also in more accessible forms designed specifically
for residents of the local community, and via the internet for any and all
interested parties.