* 1158521
* Transcribed Microsatellites as Engines of Adaptive Change; Testing the "Tuning Knob" Hypothesis in Natural Populations of the Annual Sunflower, Helianthus annuus
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Mark Welch, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2016
* USD 390,344.00

Microsatellites are highly repetitive DNA sequences found throughout organismal
genomes. These sequences have very high mutation rates that change the physical
length of the microsatellite. After they were first discovered, it was assumed
that microsatellites would only be found in nonfunctional regions of genomes
because they would likely disrupt normal gene function. In fact, some of the
earliest microsatellites described are known to cause neurodegenerative
diseases, like Huntington's chorea. However, we now know that many thousands of
genes in many species include microsatellites. The prevalence of microsatellites
in genes implies that many may be functional. This project focuses on the role
microsatellites might play in altering how genes are expressed in sunflowers.
The researchers are testing the hypothesis that microsatellite mutations alter
gene expression levels in sunflowers, suggesting that this class of
microsatellite can facilitate evolutionary change. Given their mutation rates,
microsatellites may represent the most rapidly evolving gene regulatory elements
in genomes. If this hypothesis is true, then microsatellite lengths should
correlate with gene expression levels. Further, if selection is acting on this
source of variation, then allele frequencies in natural populations should
reflect these processes. Acceptance of these mechanisms would suggest that
populations acquire novel and heritable variation at rates much higher than
typically assumed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project supports
undergraduate student researchers. Senior researchers will expose biology
students to advanced computational methods, and computer science majors
interested in computational biology will be involved in the collection of data
and analysis. In addition, a major focus of student training is the development
of their grant writing and data analysis skills, and the presentation of
scientific research findings. Students will present their findings at scientific
meetings and coauthor research journal articles. Further, Mississippi State
University has one of the highest percentages of minorities among research
universities in the country, and strategies designed to include minorities in
this project are being pursued.