* 1158037
* Dimethylsulfoniopropionate Metabolism by Marine Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* William Whitman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 672,414.00

Intellectual Merit: Dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) accounts for up to 10% of
the carbon fixed by marine phytoplankton in surface waters of the ocean and is
the precursor to the potent anti-greenhouse gas dimethylsulfide (DMS), the
largest natural source of sulfur to the atmosphere. Two competing pathways for
DMSP metabolism operate in marine microbial communities. Most of the DMSP is
processed by marine bacteria through the "demethylation" pathway, which leads to
formation of methanethiol (MeSH) and other sulfur compounds. A smaller portion
is metabolized via the "cleavage" pathway to DMS, resulting in sulfur emissions
to the atmosphere. The point at which DMSP is directed to one of these pathways,
referred to as "the bacterial switch", represents one of the critical regulatory
points in the global sulfur cycle. Based upon recent discoveries of the genes
necessary for these pathways, this research will examine the physiological and
biochemical basis the bacterial switch in the model marine bacterium, Ruegeria
pomeroyi. Research will examine the enzymes of the pathways to further
understand how they function in cells. Other environmental and physiological
controls of DMSP metabolism will be characterized in whole cells. Four roles
will be specifically tested: DMSP as a carbon and sulfur source, as a compatible
solute, and as an antioxidant. In addition, many of the genes of the
demethylation pathway are widespread in terrestrial and other habitats where
DMSP is not abundant and have been hypothesized to function in methionine
metabolism. This potential role will also be tested. In conclusion, bacterial
DMSP metabolism plays a fundamental role in the global sulfur cycle. This
research seeks to understand why the bacteria metabolize DMSP.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of the
project include the training of two doctoral students and one postdoctoral
research associate in the departments of Microbiology and Marine Sciences at the
University of Georgia and providing research opportunities and mentoring for one
undergraduate student per year. Students will obtain interdisciplinary training
in microbial physiology, microbial ecology, enzymology and environmental
sciences. Outreach activities at local elementary and high schools will
emphasize prokaryotic diversity, decomposition and the carbon cycle,
photosynthetic bacteria, and the role of bacteria in forming the earth's
atmosphere. It will provide students opportunities for hands on work with modern
techniques of molecular microbial ecology. By improving our knowledge of the
microbial control of the evolution of DMS to the atmosphere, this research will
provide understanding how these processes will respond to the predicted climate
changes as well as potential opportunities for mitigation of global climate
change.