* 1158486
* Structure, Mechanism, and Regulation of Quinolinate Synthase, the First Committed Step in Bacterial NAD Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Squire Booker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2017
* USD 1,030,000.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is an
essential and ubiquitous metabolite known primarily for its role as a co-
substrate in a multitude of biological redox reactions. Recently, however, it
has received significant recognition for its role in several non-redox reactions
that impact cellular signaling and chromosome remodeling. In bacteria, NAD is
biosynthesized from dihydroxyacetone phosphate and L-aspartate in a reaction
catalyzed by the NadA/NadB enzyme system. NadA contains an oxygen-sensitive
[4Fe-4S] cluster, which is required for the protein's function; however, the
exact role that the iron-sulfur (Fe/S) cluster plays in catalysis is unclear.
Moreover, the activity of the protein is regulated by a dithiol/disulfide redox
switch, wherein the disulfide-form of the enzyme is approximately10-fold more
active than the dithiol form. This behavior is interesting, because the
concentrations of NAD and its associated metabolites are significantly greater
in bacteria growing under aerobic conditions than under anaerobic conditions.
The major goal of this project is to use X-ray crystallographic and
spectroscopic methods to elucidate in detail how the Fe/S cluster functions in
catalysis. A second area of emphasis is to elucidate the structural, chemical,
and electronic changes that accompany reversible disulfide-bond formation and
determine how these changes affect the protein's activity and cellular
concentrations of NAD and its related metabolites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact: &lt;br/&gt;This project will serve as a foundation for training graduate
and undergraduate students in rigorous and quantitative scientific methods. Penn
State is home to a wealth of expertise in metalloenzymology, especially as it
pertains to physical, kinetic, and computational methods for studying iron-
containing enzymes. The PI, in collaboration with other faculty here and at
other institutions, will co-organize a biannual ten day workshop to train
students in various physical methods for the characterization of
metalloproteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life Processes program
in the Chemistry Division.