* 1158527
* Regulation of the Actin Cytoskeleton by Prostaglandin Signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Tina Tootle, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2016
* USD 665,060.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Prostaglandins are emerging as key lipid signals
that regulate actin cytoskeletal remodeling. There are five well-characterized
types of prostaglandins, each initiating one or more signaling cascades, and
modulating actin dynamics in a cell-type specific manner. Actin is the most
abundant protein in cells and generates polarized filaments that are further
organized into a variety of structures to mediate basic biological functions
such as cell shape, adhesion, division, and migration. Such remodeling, or
rearrangement, of the actin cytoskeleton is mediated by the coordinated efforts
of greater than 100 known actin binding proteins, and is tightly regulated by
numerous signaling pathways. While it is clear that prostaglandins are signals
that regulate actin remodeling, how they do so is poorly understood. To
elucidate the molecular mechanisms utilized by prostaglandins to regulate actin
dynamics in vivo, Drosophila oogenesis was established as a new model for
studying prostaglandin signaling. Both pharmacologic and genetic perturbations
of prostaglandin signaling result in the loss of the actin structures necessary
for the contractile process by which the cytoplasmic contents of the support or
nurse cells are dumped into the oocyte. The project exploits Drosophila's short
generation time, the use of a non-essential adult tissue, the well-characterized
process of nurse cell dumping, available genetic mutations in genes encoding
cytoskeletal regulators, and the ability to perform pharmacologic and live-
imaging studies on cultured follicles (eggs). Using this follicle maturation
system, the mechanism by which signaling by two prostaglandins regulates actin
dynamics in a normal, physiological context - where cells must interact with and
respond to a number of other cell types - will be elucidated . Using high-
resolution confocal microscopy of fixed and living samples those aspects of
actin cytoskeletal dynamics that are regulated by prostaglandins will be
determined. The distinct, and likely opposing, roles of the two prostaglandins
during cytoskeletal remodeling will then be determined. Furthermore, a screen
will be performed to identify the actin binding proteins that mediate
prostaglandin-dependent actin remodeling. The proteins utilized to directly
mediate such remodeling are conserved from Drosophila to humans; therefore, the
mechanistic insights resulting from the proposed work will be widely applicable.
Thus, the Drosophila follicle maturation system is uniquely positioned to
provide critical insights into conserved mechanisms by which two specific
prostaglandins differentially regulate actin cytoskeletal
remodeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide research and educational opportunities for students, and will lead to
the development of novel tools and methodologies. Undergraduates from both the
University of Iowa and other institutions will contribute in this research.
Additionally, this project will provide Ph.D thesis projects for graduate
students. The research will be presented by both the undergraduate and graduate
students at the University's monthly Drosophila research meeting, which was
started by the PI. The project will also contribute to graduate education
through a Genetics course, where the PI teaches Drosophila genetic methods; a
Cell Migration course, where the PI teaches Drosophila methods, image
methods/analyses, and cell biology, and a Biochemistry course, where the PI
teaches lipid biology and analysis techniques. The research will also lead to
the development of new tools for imaging actin dynamics in vivo and quantitative
methods of 3D and 4D image analysis.