* 1158659
* CAREER: Real-Time Stochastic Optimization with Large Structured Strategy Sets and High-Volume Data Streams
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2011,08/31/2014
* Paat Rusmevichientong, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Edwin Romeijn
* 08/31/2014
* USD 275,425.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)research proposes to support the
development of a modeling and algorithmic framework for solving large-scale
real-time stochastic optimization problems. This research will focus on a
setting where distributions of the underlying uncertainty are not known. The
decision maker in this environment often faces a large number of alternatives
and must make a decision in real-time based on high-volume data streams. By
exploiting specific structures of each problem, this research will develop
methodologies that combine real-time decision-making with approximation
algorithms for solving complex stochastic optimization problems having large
strategy sets. The research will investigate applications of these algorithms to
problems in search-based advertising and supply chain management by working with
industry partners. In addition, the outcome of the research will be integrated
into an interactive teaching module or a case study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research encompasses many problems in the current information-driven
environment, including ad placement in search-based advertising services,
inventory management for online retailers, and the multi-armed bandit problem.
If successful, the research will result in a unifying framework for studying and
analyzing this class of problems, along with a suite of algorithms applicable to
these problems. The research will establish new techniques for extending the
performance guarantee of approximation algorithms to reflect long-run average
performance of the system, and provide new methodologies for improving the
convergence rates by leveraging special structures within each problem.
Extensive collaboration with companies in the industry and the integration of
these relationships to enrich the classroom experience for students will be an
important outcome of this project.