* 1158954
* Collaborative development of tools for optimal control of open quantum systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* K. Birgitta Whaley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 04/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The researchers from University of California-Berkeley will establish
collaborations with the group of Professor Christiane Koch in Kassel, Germany
for development of theoretical tools for control of quantum systems in realistic
environments. The long term goals are to identify the opportunities for quantum
control and its limitations under general conditions when a quantum system is
not isolated but interacts with its surroundings. This extension of the field of
quantum control to the general non-unitary dynamics experienced by quantum
systems in contact with an environment is essential for achieving the high
fidelity quantum operations that are required by the many new and developing
quantum technologies arising from fields including quantum information,
ultracold gases and nanoscale devices. The collaborations will combine the
expertise in algebraic and analytic methods of quantum control at Berkeley with
the numerical optimal control methods used in Kassel, to formulate new,
physically motivated and numerically tractable methodologies for determining the
extent of controllability of open quantum systems. The research group will work
to develop a set of numerical tools for optimization of quantum control on
realistic open quantum systems of interest to the quantum physics, chemical
physics and quantum device communities. Establishing these collaborations will
enabling students and postdocs to learn and implement state of the art high
level numerical optimal control theoretic methods in a broad range of quantum
dynamical studies. &lt;br/&gt;Exchange visits of Berkeley students and postdocs
to Kassel will have the broader impact of exposing US graduate students and
postdoc to the European research and education system, as well as giving them
the opportunity to collaborate with scientists in a European research group.