* 1158807
* I-Corps:  SwiftVax  - A Green Manufacturing Platform for Faster, Cheaper, and Scalable Vaccine Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Karen McDonald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The proposed manufacturing platform is a technology that enables the use of
nontransgenic tobacco plants as biofactories of vaccines, and takes advantage of
3 different biological systems working in synergy: (1) Agrobacterium tumefaciens
for effective transfer of DNA that codes for the vaccine of interest; (2) Plant
virus for increased vaccine yield; (3) Non-transgenic tobacco plants as hosts
for vaccine synthesis. Using tobacco as vaccine biofactories, instead of
traditional manufacturing processes, is potentially significant. Capital and
operating costs can be significantly reduced, up to 90%, while vaccine
development time is reduced from months to weeks. The proposed technology
represents an emerging trend within the biotechnology industry. FDA is now
willing to approve therapeutics manufactured in non-traditional production
systems that are "biobetter". Biobetter means faster, more efficient,
substantially cheaper, and greener; compared to traditional technologies. The
proposing team has deep experience in this field, and recent developments in
optimization approaches from the group, and others, have positioned this
technology on the brink of commercialization and significant societal impact.

Epidemics of recent emerging infectious diseases, such as the H1N1 pandemic,
demand cost-efficient and scalable production technologies that can rapidly
deliver effective therapeutics into the clinical setting. The mission of this
proof-of-concept is to bring the rapid, scalable, and cost-efficient vaccine
manufacturing capabilities of the technology platform outside of the research
lab and closer to the market. This technology can impact diverse markets such as
proteins for research use, as well as veterinary and human vaccines, and can
improve the quality and affordability of animal and human health globally.
Successful validation and commercialization of this manufacturing platform for
recombinant proteins as reagents and/or diagnostics would demonstrate the
production platform and open up new markets, which were not cost effective with
previous biomanufacturing practices.