* 1158968
* IRFP: Signal detection in noise in the grasshopper Chorthippus biguttulus
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2015
* Michael Reichert, Reichert                Michael        S
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2015
* USD 138,340.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Michael
S. Reichert to work with Dr. Michael Greenfield at the Research Institute on
Insect Biology in Tours, France.

Animal communication often takes place in noisy environments and noise imposes
constraints on the important tasks of signal transmission, detection and
localization. In addition, communication is often a multi-directional process:
signals can be transmitted to multiple receivers and signalers may engage in
reciprocal signaling interactions with one another. Despite this, few studies
have examined the effects of noise on multi-directional signaling interactions
in animals. This study examines the effects of noise on communication in a
species that engages in acoustic duets involved in mate recognition and
localization, the European grasshopper Chorthippus biguttulus. Both males and
females of this species produce and respond to acoustic signals during these
processes. By using the tools of signal detection theory and controlled
experiments examining the responses to signals in noise of individual males and
females, as well as duetting pairs, this study tests the prediction that noise
has stronger impacts on multi-directional signaling, and examines the
consequences of noise on natural communication interactions.

This study involves three specific projects. In the first, the signal detection
abilities of males and females are compared by exposing individuals of both
sexes to synthetic song models of the opposite sex in various levels of masking
noise and measuring individual response thresholds. In the second, signal
detection in noise is compared for unidirectional and duetting signal
interactions, with the prediction that duetting interactions will suffer from
greater levels of signal detection errors. In the third, assays of the response
of females to mating signals under varying levels of noise are used to determine
how signal attractiveness is affected by masking noise.

The benefits of this project include an increased understanding of the effects
of noise on acoustic signal detection and recognition. The processing of sound
in the brain of the study species is well-described. Therefore, this project
generates new insights on how simple nervous systems deal with the challenges of
signal perception in complex and noisy environments. This has broad implications
that could lead to a better understanding of hearing in noise that applies to
other systems, including humans. In addition to these benefits, this research
will provide the PI with important opportunities to develop collaborations with
major international research groups at the Research Institute on Insect Biology
(Prof. Michael Greenfield) and at Humboldt University in Berlin, Germany (Prof.
Bernhard Ronacher).