* 1158683
* Collaborative Proposal: CAMEO: Using interdecadal comparisons to understand trade-offs between abundance and condition in fishery ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 08/22/2011,07/31/2014
* Jason Stockwell, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2014
* USD 35,088.00

The investigators will conduct a model-based investigation of the dynamics of a
productive pelagic ecosystems in the Gulf of Maine. The middle trophic levels in
highly productive marine ecosystems are typically dominated by a few species of
pelagic fish, such as sardines and anchovies in upwelling environments or
herring and/or capelin in temperate and subpolar regions. These species act as
important conduits for energy to higher trophic levels, including larger fish,
seabirds, and cetaceans. When abundant, small pelagics can exert significant
pressure on their prey, typically large mesozooplankton. Small pelagic fish
exhibit complex dynamics and managing these species under an ecosystem approach
is challenging. This modeling study will track both the abundance and condition
of representative copepods (Calanus finmarchicus, Centropages typicus), herring,
and bluefin tuna. The investigators will use a rigorous comparison of conditions
from the 1980s and 1990s to develop the model. They will examine the sensitivity
of this ecosystem to changes in fishing pressure on the middle trophic levels
and to changes in the magnitude and timing of primary production. They will also
consider the impact of increased temperature on the ability of C. finmarchicus
to accumulate lipids and alter the condition of herring and
tuna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to improved knowledge of
ecosystems with productive food webs. It will also directly impact address
issues related to the management of the herring resource in the Gulf of Maine.
The investigators will examine the consequences of ignoring condition of
zooplankton and fish, as is the case with the current stock assessment. They
will also explore the dynamical properties of the model ecosystem and consider
under what conditions it is possible to have both abundant and well conditioned
herring.