* 1158447
* Molecular Design and Structural Basis of Peptide Inhibitors against Amyloid-beta Aggregation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jie Zheng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 307,281.00

1158447 &lt;br/&gt;Zheng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amyloids are highly ordered
protein aggregates associated with many neurodegenerative diseases including
Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. Accumulating evidences suggest that soluble
amyloid oligomers are major toxic specie responsible for neuronal dysfunction
and cell death. Thus, inhibiting initial amyloid oligomerization and aggregation
at the very early stage could be an effective (pre)clinical treatment for
preventing or delaying the onset of neurodegenerative diseases. But, the lacks
of high-resolution structures of amyloid oligomers, atomic details of amyloid-
inhibitor interactions, and cost-effective high-throughput screening methods
lead to the difficulty in the rational design of structural-based inhibitors and
in the fundamental understanding of amyloid inhibition
mechanism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The proposed work combines
bioinformatics models, molecular simulations, and biophysical experiments to
screen/design, characterize, and identify a series of small hexapeptides to
disrupt or prevent amyloid-â (Aâ) oligomerization, fibrillogenesis, and toxicity
associated with Alzheimer disease. With assistance of atomic structures of Aâ
oligomers determined by the PI's lab and validated by atomic force microscopy
(AFM), electron microscopy (EM), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data, the
synergistic three-step computational approaches of 3D-QSAR (3D-Quantitative
Structure-Activity Relationship), molecular docking, and molecular dynamics
simulation is developed to systematically and efficiently screen and design
hexapeptide inhibitors from the first principle. Computationally designed
inhibitors are then validated for their inhibition activity by biophysical
experiments. To reach its goal, three specific aims are: (1) to develop an
efficient and novel 3D-QSAR model to virtually screen and rationally design Aâ
inhibitors; (2) to computationally examine inhibitory activity of peptides that
disrupt or bind to Aâ oligomers; and (3) to experimentally test inhibitory
ability of computationally designed peptides to prevent Aâ aggregation and
toxicity. Through these aims, we strive to rationally design of effective
peptide inhibitors, to establish the predictive relationship among sequence,
structure, and inhibitory activity of inhibitors, and to better understand the
inhibition mechanisms between inhibitors and Aâ oligomers at the atomic level,
and eventually to provide a hexapeptide inhibitor database with well-
characterized structural and biological data. The proposed work can be
transformative in other biological systems involving protein folding, binding,
and protein function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad Impacts: The success of this
anti-amyloid project will bridge the gap between a fundamental understanding of
Aâ structure, aggregation, toxicity, and inhibition mechanism at molecular level
and a practical design principle of Aâ inhibitors, both critical for the
development of medical diagnostics and automated high-throughput devices against
Alzheimer's disease. The proposed approach can also be generally applicable to
designing peptide inhibitors against other amyloidogenic diseases such as
Parkinson's and diabetes type II, benefiting both scientific community and
entire society. The interdisciplinary nature of the project provides a unique
opportunity for all-level students, particularly those from underrepresented
groups, to learn the concepts and tools in general biology, structural biology,
bioinformatics, and drug design and to carry out a fundamental research project
important for public health. The results from this proposal will continuously
contribute to two new courses of "Molecular Modeling and Simulation of
Biological Systems" and "Biomaterials and Bionanotechnology". The knowledge will
also be disseminated through high-impact papers, conference presentations,
curriculum courses, summer internships, and other outreach activities. In
addition, amyloids also represent a general class of nanomaterials with well-
defined nanostructures, which can be used as templates to produce novel protein-
based self-assembled nano-/bio-materials with desirable functionalities.
Molecular understanding of the abnormal self-assembly of amyloid peptides into
such well-defined nanoarchitectures and the role of their interactions with
inhibitors is essential for the rational design of novel drugs for prevention or
treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.