* 1158726
* I-Corps:  Technological Assessment of Artificial Membrane-based Ion Channel Screening
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Jacob Schmidt, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Electrophysiological measurement of ion channels is difficult because the ion
channel needs to reside in a lipid bilayer membrane for determination of its
conductance. The PI's group has developed an artificial lipid bilayer membrane
formation technology that enables inexpensive cell-free measurement of ion
channels on inexpensive low-tech plastic consumable plates. The proposed
innovation is able to measure ion channels from any cell type or source
including primary cells and subcellular organelles. Ion channel measurements
have already been validated with measurements of conductance modulation of
physiologically relevant ion channels by known active pharmaceutical compounds.
The proposed work concerns development of a 48 well array plate for this
measurement compatible with solution exchange, which would allow rapid parallel
screening of ion channels against potential pharmaceutical interactions, and the
demonstration of the parallel processing and measurement of membrane arrays by
automated instrumentation. Prospective end users of the technology will be
queried regarding their willingness to try ion channel screening in a cell-free
system, what features would be necessary for that to happen, and attractiveness
of unique features of the proposed technology.

Ion channels play key roles in cardiac and neural activity and their disorders
have been implicated in epilepsy and cystic fibrosis and a number of other
diseases. Because of their central importance, ion channels are critical drug
targets - 15 of the top 100 selling drugs are ion channel modulators with a
combined market value of $15 billion. Automated Patch Clamp (APC) is the state
of the art technology for electrophysiological screening of ion channel activity
in cells for drug discovery and safety screening. However, it is well recognized
to suffer from low throughput, expensive consumables, and compatibility with
limited cell types, and these shortcomings limit the number and scope of drug
discovery studies. The proposed cellfree technology has the potential to address
all of these shortcomings, thus allowing drugs to be discovered and produced
more efficiently and for lower cost, enabling more and better drugs to be
produced. The ease of use and low cost of the proposed technology also has the
potential to positively affect scientific research and smaller scale laboratory
studies of ion channels.