* 1158234
* A Novel Post-transcriptional Regulatory Mechanism Mediated by Zhx2
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2017
* Brett Spear, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 639,761.00

Intellectual Merit: It has become increasingly clear that transcriptional and
post-transcriptional steps of gene expression are coupled, interdependent and
potentially co-regulated. Much of the evidence for regulating mRNA processing
through coupling with transcription is derived from artificial systems. While
these models demonstrate the capacity for regulating post-transcriptional steps
of gene expression through interactions with transcriptional machinery, there
are few natural examples of where this occurs in vivo. Recently, the Zinc
fingers and homeoboxes 2 (Zhx2) gene was cloned and shown to be responsible, in
part, for repressing the expression of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and other genes
in the liver after birth. Published studies have shown that the AFP promoter is
sufficient to confer Zhx2 regulation on a heterologous reporter gene. However,
preliminary results have shown that the transcription rate across the AFP gene
is the same in the presence or absence of Zhx2, even though AFP mRNA
accumulation is repressed. Moreover, this repression occurs because splicing of
multiple AFP introns is inhibited. Because Zhx2 functions in a promoter-
dependent manner but acts at a post-transcriptional level, this system provides
a unique opportunity to understand a biologically relevant and novel mechanism
that couples transcriptional to post-transcriptional gene regulation. Based on
preliminary studies, it is hypothesized that Zhx2 acts through the promoter of
its target genes to decrease the splicing efficiency of the nascent RNA and thus
reduce fully processed mRNA levels. To test this hypothesis and investigate
mechanistic details, mice that express a FLAG-tagged Zhx2 transgene, but low
levels of endogenous Zhx2, have been generated. Using these mice, this project
will determine whether Zhx2 is a direct or indirect regulator of AFP expression
and whether it associates with target promoters or along the whole gene by using
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Combining ChIP with DNA sequencing
will identify other Zhx2-regulated genes. The mechanism of AFP RNA splicing
repression will be investigated by comparing the pol II complex in the presence
or absence of Zhx2 by ChIP. Whether splicing repression occurs co-
transcriptionally will be determined by measuring splicing of nascent RNA.
Finally, this project will identify proteins that interact with Zhx2, which will
provide essential information about Zhx2 function. The components of FLAG-
Zhx2-containing protein complexes from adult mouse liver will be identified by
mass spectrophotometry. The long-term goal of the project is to understand
Zhx2-mediated regulation of AFP because it is a novel regulatory mechanism that
appears to couple transcription to post-transcriptional events in the liver.
Details of this mechanism will lead to a better understanding of gene regulation
at the step of RNA biogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: Graduate,
undergraduate, and, potentially, high school students will be involved in the
research, building on the laboratory's strong history of student training.
Results of the research will be shared with the broader scientific community
through national meeting presentations and publications. Scientifically, the
research has the potential to uncover novel insights into a poorly understood
mechanism of gene regulation.