* 1158262
* Viral Chromatin Methylation as a Host Defense Against Geminiviruses
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* David Bisaro, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 640,000.00

Intellectual Merit. This project concerns mechanisms by which plant hosts
recognize viral pathogens and initiate specific defenses. The research is
focused on a family of DNA-containing plant viruses known as geminiviruses. In
plants, RNA silencing is an important antiviral defense that results in specific
degradation of viral mRNA. In the case of DNA viruses, a related process (RNA-
directed methylation) leads to the methylation of viral DNA and associated
histone proteins that together constitute the viral chromosome. Methylation
typically leads to gene silencing, and recent work from this laboratory has
demonstrated that cellular pathways used to methylate endogenous cellular genes
and viral DNA are essentially identical. In this project, geminiviruses will be
employed as models to further study the RNA-directed methylation pathway.
Specifically, the roles of cellular RNA polymerases II, IV, and V in de novo
methylation of viral genomes will be examined using a combination of genetic and
biochemical approaches. The DNA sequence features that recruit these enzymes to
the viral chromosome, the methylation status of the sequences that they
recognize, and the nature of the non-coding RNAs that they generate will be
investigated. In addition, the geminivirus system will be used to identify and
characterize cellular proteins that recognize methylation marks on chromatin and
translate these into changes in gene expression. Methylation controls cellular
gene expression during normal development, and is important for organizing
inactive regions of cellular chromosomes and silencing potentially damaging
invasive DNAs. Thus studying geminivirus chromatin methylation promises to
increase our understanding of viral pathogenesis and of fundamental processes
that govern the activity of cellular chromatin.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. A
better understanding of host antiviral defenses will eventually lead to the
development of plants that are better able to withstand or resist virus attack.
This project will integrate research and education by contributing to the
training of visiting scientists, postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and
undergraduate students, some of whom are underrepresented minorities. In
addition, the PI participates in the NSF REU Program sponsored by the Department
of Molecular Genetics at Ohio State University, and in the OSU Summer Practical
Workshop in Plant Functional Genomics, which attracts international and domestic
students, postdocs, young faculty, and high school teachers and trains them in
basic techniques and principles of molecular biology and genomics. The PI has
also contributed materially by donating antibodies to a new, soon-to-be-launched
Plant Antibody Facility. As Director of the campus-wide interdisciplinary
graduate program in Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology (MCDB,
currently ~130 PhD students) for the past 16 years, the PI has a long history of
promoting graduate education. Efforts include an active role in recruiting
minority students through the Graduate School's SROP Program and the University
Office of Diversity and Inclusion. The PI also has an active interest in
enabling interactions between faculty and students and annually co-organizes the
MCDB Seminar Series, the Interdisciplinary Graduate Program Symposium, and the
First-Year Graduate Student Seminar, which includes training in research ethics.