* 1158375
* Development and Application of Methods for Investigating the Biological Roles and Structural Basis of Protein Kinetic Stability
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Wilfredo Colon, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1,206,693.00

Intellectual Merit Like a child strapped to a high-chair, some proteins are
trapped in their native structure, unable to access partially and globally
unfolded conformations. This may be a method used by "mother nature" to protect
certain proteins from premature degradation, which would compromise the well
being of the organism. Proteins that possess this property are described as
being kinetically stable because, unlike most proteins, their long "shelf-life"
and stability towards degradation is kinetically controlled by its very slow
unfolding rate. The structural basis and biological significance of protein
kinetic stability remains poorly understood. Therefore, the main goal of this
project is to gain novel insight into the role of kinetically stable proteins
(KSPs) in the survival and adaptation of prokaryotic thermophiles and
mesophiles, and to gain enhanced understanding about the structural basis of
kinetic stability. The central dogma is that bacteria possess KSPs with
functions that are essential to survive in their respective environments. Novel
electrophoresis methods developed in the laboratory of the Principle
Investigator will be further developed and applied to: 1) characterize the
proteome of KSPs in several thermophilic and mesophilic bacteria; 2) quantify
the kinetic stability of hyperstable proteins directly in the cellular lysate of
bacteria; and 3) construct an accessible online database of KSPs to explore the
structural and functional basis of kinetic stability. It is expected that the
results of this project will enhance the understanding of the biological
significance of kinetic stability, and will provide a convenient and accessible
assay to quantify the kinetic stability of proteins in their biological milieu.
Furthermore, it will yield a wealth of accessible data that will stimulate
studies to understand the biological roles of KSPs in the survival, adaptation,
and evolution of thermophilic and mesophilic organisms.

Broader Impact As a broader impact, this project will lead to the discovery of
KSPs with potential for biotechnology applications of benefit to society. In
terms of education, this project will involve postdoctoral, graduate, and
undergraduate researchers working together in a stimulating interdisciplinary
environment that integrates training and learning. The Principal Investigator is
developing a local program (RISE: Research Internship for Community College
Student Engagement) for local community college students that show interest in
STEM disciplines and have the academic potential and desire to transfer to a
four-year university. A RISE student will participate every summer in the
project and will receive mentoring and guidance throughout the process of
transfer to RPI and for undergraduate studies.

This project is jointly supported by the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and
Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, the
Physics of Living Systems in the Physics Division and the Chemistry of Life
Processes program in the Chemistry Division.