* 1158737
* I-Corps:  Commercialization Feasibility Research and Demonstration Preparation for Privacy-Preserving Location Based Services
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2013
* Nan Zhang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 03/31/2013
* USD 50,000.00

The successful completion of this project will lead to a clear go/no-go decision
regarding the viability of commercializing the privacy-preserving location based
services (LBS) techniques the PI developed in two NSF-sponsored research
projects. Should a favorable decision be made, this project will also produce a
transition plan for commercialization and a mobile application for demonstrating
the privacy-preserving Location-Based-Services (LBS) technology to potential
partners. LBS, are widely prevalent on the web but also raise privacy concerns,
as evidenced by the negative publicity surrounding jigh-profile inadvertent
collection of location data in mobile devices. The PI's privacy-preserving
techniques enable LBS without violating a user?s privacy. Specifically, the
techniques protect two types of privacy: (1) location privacy - i.e., the team
prevents an LBS server from learning a user's real location; (2) query privacy -
i.e., the team prevents the LBS server from learning what the user is searching
for (e.g., bar, museum). At the same time, the echniques maintain the quality of
LBS by providing the user with extremely accurate, if not precise, LBS query
answers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will has the potential to have
broader impacts on the nation?s high-tech industries. The ability to control
when (and whether) an employee's location can or cannot be disclosed to an LBS
server is needed by a wide variety of security-sensitive corporations,
governments, and security agencies. Similarly, empirically validated means to
protect the location privacy of ordinary users of mobile devices will benefit
the wireless user community at large, in addition to LBS providers and wireless
carriers. This project will also have broader impacts on the market of mobile
LBS. In particular, the team's offering of a privacy-preserving LBS application
is expected to raise wireless users' awareness of privacy issues surrounding
LBS, and to eventually convince most LBS providers to add privacy-preserving
features to their systems (e.g., by integrating and/or licensing the proposed
techniques). The broader impact of this project also extends to the research
community and academia. In particular, the market studies conducted in the
project will enhance scientific and technological understanding of the location
privacy problem.