* 1158372
* Cytoskeletal Regulation of Cell Wall Biosynthesis and Cell Morphogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* David Ehrhardt, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 04/30/2017
* USD 385,987.00

Intellectual Merit. &lt;br/&gt;Plants build cells in a diverse range of shapes
that are important both for specialized cell function and for creating the
structure of the plant itself. To create these shapes, plant cells must organize
the molecular structure and mechanical properties of the rigid walls that encase
them. A highly ordered network of protein polymers known as the cortical
microtubule cytoskeleton is employed to organize cell walls and to build
specific cell shapes. The cortical microtubule cytoskeleton has been shown to
(1) guide the trajectories of cellulose synthase complexes as they deposit
cellulose, the major structural component of the cell wall; (2) position the
delivery of these complexes to their sites of action at the cell membrane; and
(3) tether trafficking organelles containing cellulose synthase in the cortex of
the cell during conditions of stress. The molecular mechanisms by which the
microtubule cytoskeleton carries out these activities are not known, and the
precise biological functions of all these processes in cell growth and
morphogenesis are not well understood. To investigate these questions the
Ehrhardt lab designed a genetic screen for mutants that are defective in
trafficking of cellulose synthase and its organization at the cell cortex and
cell membrane. This screen revealed a class of mutants that are defective in CSC
guidance and have lost cortical tethering, the lost mutants. These mutants are
exciting tools to discover new molecules involved in cytoskeletal function, and
to get new insight into the network of interactions that organize the cell wall.
This project has three major experimental aims: (1) to investigate LOST function
by characterizing these mutants at the levels of subcellular protein and
organelle dynamics, cell and tissue growth, and cell wall structure; (2) to
identify these genes and determine where the protein products reside in the cell
and how they behave, and (3) to identify other proteins that interact with LOST
proteins to build a molecular interaction and/or regulatory network from the
microtubule cytoskeleton to the cell wall biosynthetic machinery. These studies
will provide new insight into several central questions in plant cell biology:
the function of the cortical cytoskeleton, the mechanisms of cell morphogenesis,
and the mechanisms for biosynthesis and organization of cellulose and the cell
wall - major targets of biofuel and biomaterials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. &lt;br/&gt;Integrating research and
education. The research activities in this project will contribute to the
training of a young post doctoral scientist and will give several high school
students first hand exposure to basic research. These students will participate
in the Carnegie Summer Internship Program, enhancing the student's experience
through weekly research talks by Carnegie faculty and researchers and by giving
them an opportunity to present their findings in a pubic forum. Materials from
this research will be used in Stanford's Advanced Imaging Course. This course
gives students hands on experience in building advanced instruments like laser
traps and TIRF microscopes. Training of under represented groups in science.
Summer research assistants will be recruited from local high schools with
substantial minority representation. Other outreach activities include
establishing collaborations with researchers in departments and institutions
that only train undergraduates. Communication of research. Research results will
be incorporated into the Ehrhardt lab website, deepgreen.stanford.edu. This site
is used for class instruction at several universities around the world. Images
and results from the lab have previously been incorporated into major textbooks.
&lt;br/&gt;Infrastructure development. The Ehrhardt lab has generated a database
of fluorescent protein markers for plant cells and the associated molecular
resources. Materials generated by this research will be added to this database
and distributed by the lab's website and by the Arabidopsis stock center.
&lt;br/&gt;Other societal benefits. Cellulose provides the basis for mechanical
support of terrestrial plant life and is the major sink for photosynthetic
output. The molecular mechanisms that govern cellulose biosynthesis and cell
wall organization have relevance for crop improvement, engineering of
biomaterials, and biofuel development.