* 1158697
* Collaborative Research: Balancing the Portfolio: Efficiency and Productivity of Federal Biomedical R&D Funding
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2012,09/30/2013
* Margaret Blume-Kohout, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 09/30/2013
* USD 385,447.00

This cross-disciplinary, cross-institution collaborative research project
combines economic analysis with state-of-the-art methods from statistical
machine learning, to assess the relative efficiency and efficacy of research and
development expenditures across the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH)
portfolio of extramural projects. The novel combination of econometrics, topic
modeling, and document classification permits analysis of massive collections of
grant abstracts and scientific publications, identification of latent research
topics present in NIH-funded research, assessment of possible spillover effects
across research topics, and evaluation of causal linkages between changes in NIH
funding by research topic and scientific advances. Two specific research
outcomes are considered: scientific publications, classified by topic; and
pharmaceutical innovation, measured by drugs entering into clinical development
to treat specific diseases. Planned research also includes refinement of
existing economic theory to produce normative evaluations of the allocation of
public research spending.

Broader Impacts: This research will inform key policy questions related to
federal funding of biomedical research. First, fiscal austerity requires careful
attention to the nation's research portfolio and investments. This project will
describe and evaluate the productivity of those investments, as a first step
towards policy recommendations for rebalancing the portfolio, to maximize
society's expected return on investment. Second, if NIH funding for basic
research spurs increased pharmaceutical innovation, NIH possesses an important
policy tool to promote pharmaceutical R&D in areas of high therapeutic
importance or significant health disparity.