* 1158555
* Collaborative Research: Structural and Molecular Mechanisms for Protein Repair in Photosynthetic Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Phillip Geissler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2015
* USD 223,739.00

Intellectual Merit

An essential gap of knowledge in our understanding of photosynthesis is how are
plants able to repair photosystem II (PSII), the multi-protein holocomplex which
captures light energy. The objective of this project is to determine the
mechanisms by which phosphorylation of PSII alters the thylakoid ultrastructure
and enables damaged PSII to be efficiently mobilized from densely packed stacked
grana membranes to unstacked thylakoid membranes where it can be repaired for
recycling. The central hypothesis is that PSII phosphorylation triggers a
reduction in the grana diameter and separation of adjacent grana membranes on
the stromal side thereby facilitating the movement of damaged PSII. Furthermore
it is hypothesized that protein phosphorylation increases PSII mobility by
triggering the dismantling of the massive holocomplex and by generating
electrostatic repulsion. The rationale of the proposed research is that, once
the mechanisms by which protein phosphorylation regulates PSII mobility are
known, a better fundamental understanding is available of how plants maintain
their photosynthetic machinery for optimal growth and development. The central
hypothesis is tested by pursuing two specific aims. Aim 1: Determine
phosphorylation-specific changes in the thylakoid ultrastructure by cryo-
electron microscopy. Aim 2: Determine the molecular mechanisms revealing how
phosphorylation mobilizes PSII in grana. The approach is to measure diffusion
data by fluorescence-recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) under various repair
conditions and then to compare these results to a FRAP model developed by Monte
Carlo-simulations. These approaches will lead to the following expected
outcomes. Outcome 1: It is expect that protein-phosphorylation induces a
reduction of the grana diameter and that the distance between adjacent grana
discs becomes larger. Both ultrastructural changes would facilitate migration of
damaged PSII to reach stroma lamellae. Outcome 2: It is expect that
phosphorylation accelerates lateral diffusion of damaged PSII by disassembly and
electrostatic repulsion. These results are expected to yield an in-depth
understanding on the mechanisms of the PSII degradation and also why protein
phosphorylation is required for mobilization of damaged grana-hosted PSII.

Broader Impact

This research has a broader impact for the understanding of the molecular
dynamics in many other biomembranes since the underlying mechanisms are likely
to be similar. The societal benefit of the project is that a better
understanding of how plants maintain their photosynthetic machinery will help to
increase the robustness and efficiency of crop plants for food and biofuel
prospects. The project provides training opportunities for two undergraduate
students in the exciting field of photosynthesis research. Efforts will be made
to fill these positions by undergraduates from groups under-represented in the
sciences. The project will take advantage of the strong intuitive character of
computer movies to generate a computer-based teaching platform. Special topics
courses will be developed as a new internet-based course entitled "Molecules in
Motion." This course will be accessible to graduate students of Washington State
University as well as to others throughout the world