* 1158059
* Regulation of FtsZ-ring Assembly in E. Coli Cytokinesis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Anuradha Janakiraman, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2017
* USD 599,420.00

Intellectual Merit Using the bacterium E. coli as a model system, this study
addresses the fundamental scientific problem of how cells divide. In a key step,
the essential protein FtsZ forms a cytoskeletal ring structure at midcell that
establishes the site of division and provides a structural framework for the
localization of a multi-protein "molecular machine" that promotes division in
bacteria. FtsZ is an ancient protein that is found in most bacteria, some
archaea, all chloroplasts, and in primitive mitochondria. A number of proteins
interact directly with FtsZ and regulate FtsZ polymer assembly/disassembly at
midcell ensuring the spatial and temporal integrity of bacterial cell division.
The molecular nature of the diverse protein-protein interactions that regulate
the assembly of FtsZ during early stages of division are not yet well
understood. Therefore, the identification of the full complement of FtsZ
regulatory proteins and their interactions with FtsZ will greatly aid in
developing a comprehensive understanding of FtsZ structure and assembly dynamics
in the cell. The present project focuses on two newly identified FtsZ-associated
proteins (Zap) in E. coli and their molecular interactions with FtsZ. The Zap
proteins are conserved in a number of related bacterial species. An analysis of
FtsZ-Zap interactions to atomic or near atomic precision in the genetically
tractable E. coli will enhance the understanding of the complex interplay
between FtsZ and its associated proteins in other bacterial species. More
broadly, this research is also expected to further our understanding of
fundamental aspects of bacterial cell biology. Broader Impacts As the only
research laboratory at City College of New York with an emphasis in prokaryotic
biology, a field with important implications in the understanding of fundamental
cellular processes required by all organisms, this project will form a basis for
innovative curriculum development in the classroom, as well as research training
for graduate and undergraduate students. Mentoring of City College students,
many of whom are minority and/or female, through successful research projects
contributes to nationwide efforts to encourage members of underrepresented
groups to choose and succeed in research careers. To specifically generate
excitement about microbial processes among younger students, members of the
research laboratory will continue to participate in several community outreach
initiatives in City College's upper Manhattan neighborhood. These efforts
include involvement in a local middle school science club and the summer College
Now program, a free CUNY initiative to support high school students' early
interest in science, improve their science preparation for college, and inspire
them to make college science study an attainable goal.