* 1158629
* IRFP: Evolution of Sensory Systems in the Invasive Ctenophore, Mnemiopsis leidyi
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Kevin Pang, Pang                    Kevin          S
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2014
* USD 164,900.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Kevin
Pang to work with Dr. Andreas Hejnol at the Sars International Centre for Marine
Molecular Biology in Bergen, Norway, as part of the International Research
Fellowship Program.

A major impact of invasive species on marine ecosystems is via predation on
zooplankton, reducing planktonic diversity and both consuming and directly
competing with fish larvae. The invasive and destructive ctenophore (comb
jelly), Mnemiopsis leidyi, has massively altered and decreased planktonic
biodiversity in all areas to where it has expanded. Our research focuses on two
key sensory systems that Mnemiopsis uses to interact with its environment and
are also responsible for the major impact of this predator on its environment.
We are investigating the role of the chemosensory system ("taste") in food
selection, as well as testing the hypothesis if the pressure sensory system is
responsible for the annual vertical distribution, which leads to population
blooms during the summer months. Since ctenophores are one of the earliest
branching animal groups, this study will deliver important insights into our
understanding of the evolution of animal sensory systems.

Since Mnemiopsis recently invaded Norwegian waters, it represents the perfect
site for understanding why Mnemiopsis is so successful, and our results may
provide a way to prevent or lessen its impact on the ecosystem. This research
site has the necessary resources and facilities to answer these questions, and
the host is a leader in the field of comparative embryology of marine
invertebrates. This project uses multidisciplinary science, along with state of
the art research facilities and approaches, and utilizes the synergy of
international collaborations to better understand how the evolution of
organismal function influences the impact of an invasive species on its
environment.

The project addresses basic questions regarding the biology of an invasive
species that has damaged the ecosystems and economy of several regions where it
has been introduced. Climate change and global warming will most likely lead to
a higher rate of reproduction and a shift of the distribution of Mnemiopsis to
northern European waters, as well as other oceans worldwide. By investigating
food selectivity and vertical distribution - two of the major characteristics of
Mnemiopsis biology that drives its ability to reproduce and damage ecosystems -
this research will lead to increased knowledge about this species and might open
strategies to minimize its detrimental affects worldwide. Marine resources are
major economic factors in nations with an extended coastal area; finding ways to
protect these is of major interest of the population.