* 1158038
* Confined Protein Hydration & Dynamics
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Joshua Wand, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 02/29/2016
* USD 1,000,000.00

Internal protein motion has long been thought to be dependent on the solvation
environment. Though the detailed interactions between solvent water and protein
have been extensively studied computationally, experimentally derived site-
resolved information on this critical interaction is severely lacking. This
research project seeks to help fill this void. The first objective is to
directly detect and localize long-lived waters of hydration of proteins. Reverse
micelles will be used to encapsulate individual protein molecules. Reverse
micelles are spontaneously organized assemblies of surfactant and water
molecules that form nanoscale sequestered water pools. Proteins can now be
readily incorporated into this water pool with high structural fidelity. High-
resolution NMR will then be employed to directly measure protein-water
interactions. Encapsulation of proteins greatly simplifies the interpretation of
the results. The second objective is to determine the effect of confinement and
the concomitant slowed water dynamics on the internal motion of the proteins.
The protein backbone and side chain dynamics under nano-confinement will be
characterized using NMR relaxation methods. Over the past decade, the necessary
technology and expertise have been developed to make encapsulation of proteins
for high resolution NMR characterization possible. These systems thus serve as a
mimic of the confined spaces of the cell and are exploited here to answer
several pressing questions including the degree and type of coupling between
solvent motion, which is slowed in the reverse micelle, and internal protein
motion.

The work will be carried out at the University of Pennsylvania with the
participation of postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students and high
school students from the region. This laboratory has a significant history of
involvement in cutting edge research by undergraduate and high school students.
In addition, the postdoctoral associate affiliated with this project is actively
engaged in the iPRAXIS program in Philadelphia designed to nurture the
participation of under-represented minorities in the sciences. Both he and the
PI are continuing this interaction during the current research effort. The
results of this work will be disseminated in high profile journals and presented
at international and national meetings providing significant exposure not only
for the scientific product itself but also for those who have generated it.
Indeed, postdoctoral associates, graduate students and undergraduates
participating in this research have traveled to major international meetings to
present their work. In addition, the PI has in the recent past organized
international meetings that resonate with the central themes of this research
program and will do so in the future. Finally, this work rests on an emerging
technology - NMR spectroscopy of encapsulated proteins in low viscosity fluids.
This research effort will more widely illustrate the utility and capabilities of
this approach and thereby continue to bring a new and innovative technology to
the biophysical community.