* 1158763
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Science of Science and Innovation Policy: Organizations and the Diffusion of Scientific Knowledge
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Scott Stern, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 07/31/2013
* USD 13,500.00

The contribution of scientific research to economic growth is hardly
controversial. Yet little is known about how scientific knowledge actually
translates -- or fails to translate -- into economic gains. Historical examples
of advances in science reveal that while some discoveries are commercialized
right away, others remain unexploited for years, even decades, until their
commercial potential is understood. Discerning why some discoveries get
commercialized and others do not is very difficult, however, because the
commercial value of the new knowledge cannot be ascertained unless
commercialization actually occurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Do
scientific discoveries have the same economic impact if they come from a
university or from a firm? What are the characteristics of these academic or
industrial organizations that would affect its impact in the marketplace? This
project takes on the challenge of these questions by introducing a novel
empirical strategy. It uses simultaneous discoveries to conduct the first "twin
study of new knowledge." This method allows the researcher to compare the
commercialization or non-commercialization of the same new knowledge emerging at
the same time in two distinct environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project,
which is divided into two parts, draws on interviews and archival data to study
the overall patterns of how new knowledge is harnessed for commercial value and
the mechanisms behind these patterns. It takes advantage of the applicant's
original, pre-existing dataset of automatically and systematically identified
simultaneous discoveries. Part I examines whether scientific findings are
"trapped inside the ivory tower" i.e. whether they are less likely to be
commercialized out of a university than out of a firm. Part II constructs a
detailed analysis of a small number of cases of simultaneous discoveries. This
allows for a more in-depth inquiry into how different types of organizational
arrangements influence the prospects for commercialization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research has immediate practical
implications for the Science of Science and Innovation Policy as it will uncover
the extent to which scientific knowledge that could be commercialized remains
unused on laboratory shelves. Specifically, it increases our understanding of
the role of different types of organizations in diffusing new knowledge. For
instance, scientific collaboration, in addition to fostering the circulation of
ideas, might increase the likelihood that new knowledge will be commercialized.
There are immediate implications as to the conditions under which collaborative
research ought to be supported. By encouraging organizational structures that
foster the commercialization of scientific knowledge, SciSIP might be able to
decrease the number of unused scientific discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research is also of direct interest for economists,
organization theorists, and sociologists of science given its insights into
knowledge spillovers, the management of technological innovation, and
competition in science. In addition, this research improves our understanding of
strategies that business practitioners can implement in order to commercialize
new scientific knowledge successfully. By investigating and breaking down
exactly how organizations use and diffuse new scientific knowledge, this
research enables a better management of knowledge commercialization,
accelerating the spread of science into the economy, and increasing the economic
impact of scientific research.