* 1158967
* IRFP: Sensory Biology of Coral Larvae: The Role of Opsins and Olfactory Receptors in Larval Behavior, Settlement and Metamorphosis
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Benjamin Mason, Mason                   Benjamin       M
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 176,650.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Benjamin
Mason to work with Drs. David Miller and Andrew Baird at James Cook University
in Townsville, QLD, Australia and Dr. Akihisa Terakita at Osaka City University
in Osaka, Japan. Coral reefs around the world are in a state of decline. The
addition of new individuals via recruitment (larval settlement, metamorphosis
and survival to maturity) is one factor that is considered critical to the
resilience and recovery of coral populations. Habitat selection during
settlement plays a critical role in determining whether a coral will survive.
Light and chemicals are the dominant cues guiding habitat selection, settlement
and metamorphosis, yet the sensory mechanisms responsible for their detection
are unknown. This research investigates the sensory mechanisms involved in the
detection of chemical and light cues by coral larvae. It utilizes new molecular
resources (coral genome and transcriptome databases) to investigate the cellular
localization, biochemistry and ecological function of candidate photoreceptor
(opsins) and chemoreceptor (olfactory and odorant receptor) genes in coral
planulae.

This research establishes molecular bases for the sensory mechanisms involved in
larval settlement and metamorphosis, processes critical to the resilience and
persistence of coral reefs, and has implications for coral aquaculture,
restoration and reef rehabilitation efforts which rely on these processes. Also,
due to the ancient phylogenetic origin of corals, this research provides new
insights into the evolution of sensory systems (visual, olfactory and taste) in
higher organisms, and it offers potential for the discovery of genes and
signaling pathways with novel functions and applications.

In addition to advancing our understanding of mechanisms involved in coral
settlement and metamorphosis, improving coral reef restoration and providing
insight into the evolution of sensory systems, this research will forge
international collaboration between the PI and researchers (Drs. David Miller
and Andrew Baird) at James Cook University in Townsville, QLD, Australia, (Dr.
Akihisa Terakita) at Osaka City University in Osaka, Japan and (Dr. Vladlen
Slepak) at the University of Miami, in Miami, FL, USA.