* 1158673
* The NIH Public Access Policy: Potential Impact on Physicians and Community Health Organizations
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* John Willinsky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 05/31/2015
* USD 381,878.00

In 2008, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) instituted a Public Access
Policy that requires recipients of NIH funding to make all resulting peer-
reviewed journal articles publicly accessible within a year of publication. This
amounts to an estimated 88,000 articles annually, with similar policies in other
countries leading to a significant increase in public access to biomedical
research. This study assesses whether physician and community health
organization access to published research can be expected to make a difference
in the services they provide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The
sample for the study involves two professional communities, physicians and
community health organization (CHO) staff. The approach taken is to enroll a
sample of 300 physicians in a yearlong Randomized Controlled Trial that measures
information-seeking behaviors in clinical and other settings. The experimental
group has access to the journal collection of Stanford University Library, as a
proxy of future public access and a point-of-care research summary service
(UpToDate). The control group has access to UpToDate, as well as the current
level of public access, principally to article abstracts and that proportion of
articles that are open access (20%). The second phase surveys 50 CHO staff on
their research use and information skills. Those who opt for training in using
PubMed are provided with yearlong access to Stanford's journal collection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants are then debriefed about their research use,
and a secondary analysis determines demographic, technical, and training factors
that affect information access and utilization. This study brings a high
standard of evidence to bear on assessing how professionals discover, access,
and utilize research in clinical and public health practice, as well as for
personal development. The study demonstrates the value of mixed methods research
by combining the results of both gold-standard precision (re: use of research in
practice over time) and detailed qualitative understanding (re: how research is
used). The findings should inform policy initiatives in areas of information
access and literacy, evidence-based medicine (EBM), and medical education, while
the inclusion of CHOs increases their relevance to the healthcare needs of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: The NIH Public
Access Policy is part of a broader international "opening" of science (e.g.,
open access, open source software, open data, open educational resources). This
has led to Congressional initiatives to extend the policy across government
agencies, as well as to pushback that would curtail any such initiatives. Thus,
the need to assess the value of such access to health care providers to see if
it has the potential to contribute to evidence-based care, a higher quality of
treatment, and reduced health-care costs through the use of the latest research.
At issue is whether public and professional access to federally funded research
has the potential to improve the practices of related bodies of professionals,
as this has a bearing on the spread of such policies, the design and delivery of
such information, the curriculum in medical education, information literacy
education in other professions, and expectations for the public use of online
information more broadly.