* 1158907
* DAT: Connecting Outcome Measures of Entrepreneurship, Technology and Science (COMETS)
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Lynne Zucker, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 03/31/2015
* USD 775,336.00

This project is completing the public COMETS database integrating data on
science and technology inputs and outputs in order to better understand
innovation and the success of high-technology firms. COMETS and related on-line
and on-site archives provide researchers the necessary tools to answer a wide
range of important scientific and policy questions in the science of science and
innovation policy (SciSIP). The project goes a long way toward eliminating the
data bottleneck which has impeded SciSIP progress. It does this by integrating
legacy databases on federal grants, universities, publications, dissertations,
patents, and new and established high-technology firms in a single database with
identifiers which link each appearance of an organization or scientist. The
project maximizes the availability of fully public data at COMETS by developing
and incorporating copyright-free and open-source alternatives to these data. Two
demonstration projects (a) show the conceptual power and policy relevance of an
integrated database combining public and licensed databases and (b) illustrate
uses of COMETS while stress-testing the computer-matched codes used to identify
each appearance of an organization or scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is based on conceptualizing and implementing
construction of a very large coherent integrated database covering the national
innovation system from government grants, laboratories, and policies through
basic discoveries and their application to new commercial technologies driving
the formation and transformation of high-technology industries. Reporting burden
is minimized by using public information already collected for reference,
reporting, marketing, and administrative purposes - unobtrusive measures that
require no additional effort although a mechanism is provided for organizations
and scientists to correct any errors in matching records within and across the
legacy databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project has broad
impact on SciSIP research and ultimately on economic growth and the standard of
living. First, the project provides the research community with a platform
technology which enables a quantum leap in the sophistication and reliability of
SciSIP research since knowledge creation can be observed at the organization and
individual scientist level. Second, since technological progress and rising
educational levels are the two main factors determining growth in the advanced
economies of the world, research enabled by this project can lead to improved
science and innovation policies which increase technological progress and
economic growth.