* 1158036
* Protein Activity and Oligomer Stability in Cell Membrane
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Yinan Wei, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 04/30/2017
* USD 451,043.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;The selective permeability of cell membranes,
which is essential for all life forms that we know, is conferred by membrane
proteins. Approximately 80% of membrane proteins with known structures exist as
oligomers when crystallized, indicating a large portion of proteins function as
oligomers in cell membranes. However, questions remain about how proteins
oligomerize in the cell membrane and how oligomerization determines protein
functions. A thorough understanding of these questions will have an immense
impact on many research areas including the biogenesis of cell membranes,
establishment of homeostasis, signal transduction, material transport across
cell membranes and regulation of protein functions in membranes. As a step
toward a fundamental understanding of the preference for oligomer fomation, this
project is designed to test the hypothesis that oligomer stabilities of membrane
proteins are optimized to support function and a significant increase of
stability will decrease activity. Escherichia coli protein AcrB will be used as
a model. The hypothesis will be tested through creation and characterization of
AcrB mutants with decreased or increased oligomer stability. An array of
biochemical and biophysical methods will be used, including site-directed and
random mutagenesis, protein extraction and purification, a protein activity
assay, disulfide trapping, gel electrophoresis, circular dichroism and
fluorescence spectroscopy. Outcomes from this research will reveal the influence
of quaternary structure stability on AcrB function. This study is expected to
generate some of the first data pertaining to the correlation between oligomer
stability of multi-domain and multi-span helical membrane proteins and their in
vivo activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;This work will
involve a wide range of student training from high school to graduate candidates
pursing Ph.D. degrees. Two graduate students will be trained to tackle
scientific questions in the research area of membrane protein structure,
function, folding, and interaction. In addition, two to three undergraduate and
high school students will participate in the proposed research, through which
they will gain hands-on experience in undertaking research in modern
biochemistry. Special focus will be given to the recruitment and education of
underrepresented and minority undergraduate students. The PI will provide an
opportunity for students to work in a multidisciplinary and multicultural
environment, preparing them for the increasingly international and global
working environment. The discoveries resulting from the proposed research will
be disseminated to scientific communities at large, through publications in
peer-reviewed journals and presentations at research conferences.