* 1158176
* Understanding Extended Active Sites in Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Mary Jo Ondrechen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* ranajeet ghose
* 04/30/2016
* USD 590,224.00

A fundamental problem in biochemistry is to understand how enzymes work. This
project seeks greater insight into how nature designs enzyme active sites,
particularly the residues that are not in direct contact with the reacting
substrate molecule(s). Structural and biochemical studies have now characterized
the active sites of hundreds of enzymes, and nearly all of these studies have
focused on the amino acids in direct contact with the reacting substrate; these
residues may be regarded as the first layer of the active site. Recent
theoretical predictions and experimental studies strongly suggest that residues
outside the first layer of the active site can also be very important for
catalysis. The goals of this project are to combine theory, computation, and
experiment to establish the prevalence of spatially extended active sites in
enzymes, to show that this phenomenon is predictable computationally, and to
elucidate the mechanisms by which spatially remote residues participate in
enzyme catalysis. One such mechanism, and a problem of intense current interest,
is the role of protein dynamics in the catalytic process. The examples studied
here have been chosen because they have different kinds of interesting dynamical
processes in play. In DNA polymerase III, motions in the polymerase subunit
modulate DNA binding and are likely responsible for checking the fidelity of
base-pair formation. For ornithine transcarbamylase, an induced fit
conformational change has been reported to occur with the binding of the first
reactant molecule. For glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase, a pH-dependent
molecular switch has been proposed for a coil-to-helix transition that activates
the catalytic site. Preliminary evidence suggests that residues outside the
first shell play central roles in each of these processes. For these three
enzymes, mutations will be made at positions in the second and third shells that
are predicted computationally to be important for catalysis, and these mutants
will be characterized kinetically and structurally. Molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations will be performed on the wild type and variants to determine whether
the mutations affect the dynamics of the protein, and whether this motion
contributes to catalysis, predictions that will be tested experimentally using
wide-angle x-ray solution (WAXS) scattering. The establishment of principles
governing remote residue participation in enzyme catalysis, and evidence that
such participation is predictable computationally, will be very useful for
enzyme engineering and mechanistic studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
computational methods developed for this project will be made freely available
to the scientific community via the web for use in research, including protein
engineering and enzyme mechanism studies, and in commercial applications. This
project will provide better understanding of nature's design of enzyme active
sites and of how enzymes affect catalysis. Such improved understanding can help
in the development of novel technologies, such as cleaner, "green" industrial
processes, sustainable methods for environmental remediation, and enzymatic
biofuel synthesis. The training of highly qualified scientists as described in
this project is vital to the regional high-tech economy and to U.S.
competitiveness in the global economy. Two doctoral students will be trained in
computational methods, in protein expression, mutation, purification, kinetics
and binding assays, crystal structure determination, and other x-ray scattering
methods. Parts of the project will be integrated into the Molecular Modeling
course, with active student participation in some of the computational and
modeling work. Research participation by undergraduate students will continue.
This project will continue current collaborations with faculty members at
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs), including a Hispanic-serving PUI.
Hands-on demonstrations of computational and other research tools will continue
at PUIs and to inner city K-12 students. Extensive participation by project team
members in Native American student, professional, and community groups will
continue.