* 1158603
* Catalyzing New International Collaborations: 3D Morphometric and Biomechanical Analyses of the Human Lower Limb
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Timothy Ryan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 06/30/2014
* USD 64,343.00

This award provides funding to initiate a new international collaboration
between researchers at Pennsylvania State University and three European
Universities - the University of Vienna, the University of Cambridge, and the
University of Bologna. The goal of the project is to develop new methods for
analyzing the three-dimensional (3D) structure and associated functions of human
limb bones. The project will bring together experts in analyses of skeletal form
and morphometrics from the Universities of Vienna and Bologna and experts in
skeletal biomechanics from Penn State and the University of Cambridge. The
primary goal is to develop new methods for integrative analyses of the bones of
the lower limb in humans. These methods will be developed within the context of
several specific questions relating to the morphology of the human lower limb
and will be addressed using existing 3D high-resolution computed tomography
(HRCT) data and new HRCT data collected at Penn State and Vienna. The award will
support planning visits, new data collection, and US graduate student training.
The data produced will be of significant importance to a broad range of
anthropological, paleontological, and archaeological
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The expectations of this study
are to develop a new understanding of the significance of variation in whole
diaphysis cortical bone structure and whole bone shape. In so doing, this
collaboration will illuminate the relative importance and usefulness of bone
functional adaptation in shaping the elements of the human lower limb. The
simultaneous analysis of bone shape and mechanical adaptation is expected to be
a powerful tool to produce a broader understanding of skeletal functional
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This study enhances the
infrastructure of research in physical anthropology by merging methodological
approaches in morphological analysis to gain an understanding of skeletal
variation and functional adaptation for use in paleontological and
bioarchaeological behavioral reconstructions. This project will catalyze
collaboration among researchers from the United States, Austria, Italy, and
England, each of whom has specific expertise in 2D and 3D morphometric and
biomechanical techniques. This project will enhance the educational experience
of several U.S. students at both the graduate and undergraduate levels including
one female minority graduate student at Penn State. Data, methods, and
theoretical concepts will also be incorporated into current undergraduate
courses taught by the PI at Penn State.