* 1158744
* I-Corps:  MySkinTone: A breakthrough technology and product for skin melanin evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Michael Silevitch, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

MySkinTone is a new instrument and product concept, based on light modulation,
for detecting and measuring the melanin or pigmentation level in human skin.
This NSF I-Corps proposal will focus on the nucleation of an entrepreneurial
team leading to a business plan to promote the MySkinTone idea, coupled with the
creation of a demonstration prototype. The technology inherent in the new
instrument is a direct extension of results obtained through prior NSF support.
Melanin is an important component in the skin since it provides protection
against harmful UV radiation and its density defines skin color. The initial
product concept has applications where the measurement of melanin level is
advantageous for the matching of skincare products to the client or where safely
setting light treatment products or tanning beds is required. The team's plan is
to initially target the cosmetic industry. MySkinTone will take the guesswork
out of selecting the best cosmetics for every customer based on an inexpensive
and accurate measurement taken on that customer's skin. Secondary markets such
as tanning salons would also benefit from such a device, since they can do a
better job adjusting the tanning session according to the customer's melanin
level (which correlates to a person's ability to tan or sunburn).

This effort will result in a better understanding of how to deploy intensity-
modulated light to detect melanin. This scheme will provide measurements of high
specificity and sensitivity since the signature is unique to melanin (multi-
photon step-wise excitation) and completely eliminates the background
interference, a shortcoming of existing melanin measurement products. Another
Broader Impact will include the use of the MySkinTone innovation to address the
need to screen the general population for skin cancer. Currently, there are over
3.5 million cases of skin cancer diagnosed annually in the United States,
including 120,000 new cases of melanoma (the most serious form of skin cancer);
the annual U.S. societal cost of skin cancer diagnosis and treatment is more
than $1.5 billion.