* 1158577
* Effects of the Cellular Environment of Protein Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Joan-Emma Shea, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2017
* USD 1,118,838.00

This project presents a multiscale computational approach to studying the
effects of the environment on protein folding and aggregation. In vivo, proteins
fold in a dense environment, rich in interfaces (ranging from membranes to
surfaces created by other biomolecules) and with a host of species present that
can act as crowding agents. Both crowding and surface effects can dramatically
alter protein folding mechanisms as well as affect aggregation pathways.
Surfaces play an equally important role in aggregation processes related to
biomaterial and biotechnological applications. The PI will use a combination of
state of the art fully atomic enhanced sampling molecular dynamics simulations,
coupled with novel coarse-grained models that will be developed in the context
of this project. The fully atomic simulations will focus on two model systems,
the Islet Amyloid Polypeptide and a novel construct of the Tau protein. The
folding and early aggregation of these peptides will be studied in the bulk, in
the presence of solid model surfaces of different degrees of hydrophobicity
(ranging from mica to graphene) and in the presence of the biologically
important glycosaminoglycan heparin. Novel coarse-grained models will be
developed to probe the effects of crowding and surfaces (including model
membrane surfaces) on folding and aggregation. Because coarse-grained models can
reach time and lengths scales that far exceed those accessible using fully
atomic simulations, they enable the study of the entire aggregation process from
monomer folding to full-fledged fibril formation. The proposed integrated
multiscale approach aims at elucidating some of the fundamental principles that
differentiate in vivo from in vitro folding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A deeper
understanding of the fundamental principles governing protein folding and
aggregation will have impacts in a number of disciplines ranging from
biotechnology and biomaterials. The research is inherently interdisciplinary,
and results from the simulations will be used to guide new experimental studies.
All computational models and algorithms developed in the context of this project
will be made freely available to the public. The PI is actively involved in the
mentoring of under-represented groups in science (both minority and women) and
in curricular developments. The PI is involved in chemistry outreach activities
to local Santa Barbara elementary school children, including weekly science
demonstrations to fifth grade students, as well as monthly "Science Night"
events. The PI will expand her outreach to the fifth grade students by
introducing new demonstration modules and by expanding the scope of the program
to include a significant number of students stemming from primarily Hispanic
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly supported by the
Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in
the Physics Division.