* 1158765
* Managing Community: The Organization and Management of Federal Research Funding Agencies
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2015
* Michael Piore, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 05/31/2015
* USD 249,976.00

This project investigates the organization and management of three Federal
agencies that support scientific research to identify the key differences among
the agencies and how they impact the type of research that is conducted, the
development of communities of interest, and research outcomes. Preliminary
research suggests there is significant variation in understanding, within both
the agency personnel managing the funding process and the scientific community
of researchers that receive funding, of what critical factors define each agency
and influence research outcomes. The project examines and compares funding
activities at the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA). It also includes an exploratory component
focused on the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and gathers some observations
about other Federal funding agencies that have supported NSF-, DARPA, and NIH-
funded researchers.

Intellectual Merit

A major contribution of this research is to advance understanding of the impact
on funding decisions of the role of the program manager (or project manager),
the degree of decision-making autonomy at this level of the organization, and
the way in which that autonomy is managed and directed. The project draws
heavily on the literature on "street-level" bureaucracy in the public sector and
on the decentralization of authority in large corporate organizations of the
private sector. In this, it departs from the emphasis in the recent literature
on the management of the public sector by recognizing the role of the norms of
different communities (e.g., the scientific community; the professional
community of program managers, the military community) and the way in which the
evolution of these norms can be guided and directed by various management
approaches. The research is based on interviews with current and recent funding
agency staff, and with researchers who have applied (successfully or
unsuccessfully) to the agencies for funding. It also draws on a confidential
database from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on all applications for
funding submitted within a fifteen year period, linked to data on patents,
licensing and scholarly publications related to federal funded research
projects.

Broader Impacts

The project is designed to help policy makers and administrators evaluate the
design of federal research programs, understand how they relate to each other in
the eyes of the researchers who they fund and whose behavior they seek to
influence, and better identify the levers for effectively managing research and
development. It will also provide a preliminary model for attempting to evaluate
the impact of scientific investments. Finally, it provides recommendations
regarding ways to improve managerial performance, an analytical template for
programs beyond those that are the direct focus of the study, and contribute to
the literature on public sector management more broadly.