* 1158790
* Modeling Relaxation Dynamics of Confined Fluids: From Capillary Transitions to Nanoscale Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2016
* USD 332,857.00

Intellectual Merit. This nano-related proposal requests support for development
and application of a unified theoretical approach to the thermodynamics and
dynamics for fluids confined in porous materials. This unified modeling
framework is expected to have major impact upon the materials science and
engineering of new porous materials and their use is many applications, ranging
from catalysis, adsorption and membrane separations, to low-k dielectrics in
microelectronics, to sensors and diagnostics in biotechnology. The theory being
developed, dynamic mean field theory (DMFT), is fully consistent with the
thermodynamics of confined fluids as described by classical density functional
theory (DFT). With DMFT one can take a model porous material in contact with a
bulk fluid and investigate the response of system to step changes in the bulk
state (chemical potential or pressure). The system evolves to a final state in
which the density distribution is also a solution of DFT for the system. The
theory can describe adsorption/desorption dynamics for complex pore network
structures, including the nucleation mechanisms for pore condensation and
evaporation, as well as the dynamics of cavitation or pore blocking. The theory
can also be applied to mixtures, to study phenomena such as the dynamics of
capillary condensation of mixtures or the dynamics of the displacement of one
species in a porous material by another. The research project has the potential
to be a transformative contribution to the modeling of fluids confined in porous
materials. There are three components to the project: i) DMFT for fluids in pore
networks. We will study the mechanism for pore condensation/evaporation as well
as cavitation for fluids in pore networks We will also study partial wetting and
partial drying systems with applications to condensation of water in carbon
materials and to mercury porosimetry; ii) DMFT for fluid mixtures. We will study
pore condensation of binary mixtures, including the effect of pore network
structures and nonideality in the mixtures. We will also consider dynamics of
displacement processes such as in enhanced coalbed recovery of methane; iii)
Further theoretical development and assessment of DMFT. The investigators will
test the accuracy of DMFT through comparison with non-equilibrium molecular
dynamics and Kawasaki dynamics simulations. The investigators will also
investigate the origin of symmetry breaking in the dynamics of nucleation
processes. They will study the explicit inclusion of fluctuations in DMFT and
will also consider the utility of higher order approximations.

Broader Impacts. While the research proposed here is fundamental in nature the
potential impact upon applications of porous materials is significant and
affects many technologies. There is an enormous worldwide effort on the
materials science and engineering of new porous materials and DMFT provides a
new approach to understanding the dynamical behavior of fluids confined in such
systems that is consistent with the thermodynamic treatment from DFT. The
research is transformative because it provides an approach to modeling confined
fluids properties that treats thermodynamics and relaxation dynamics in a
unified context. The research will help bridge two research communities in the
area of confined fluid properties, one focused on adsorption isotherm
measurements and thermodynamics and the other focused on transport phenomena. ..
The project includes significant education and outreach programs including
creating undergraduate research opportunities, including REU for students from
community and four year state colleges and enhancing the involvement of young
researchers in international conferences the PI is organizing. The project also
includes collaboration with industry (Quantachrome) and international
collaboration (University of Leipzig).