* 1158089
* Determining the Function of O-GlcNAc Protein Modification in Signal Transduction
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Neil Olszewski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Susanne von Bodman
* 04/30/2016
* USD 576,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Post-translational modification of cytosolic and nuclear
proteins with O-linked ÃŸ-D-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) affects numerous
processes in plants and animals. In plants, this modification is made by two
O-linked N-acetylglucosamine transferases (OGTs), which in Arabidopsis thaliana
are called SECRET AGENT (SEC) and SPINDLY (SPY). Knowledge about what processes
are regulated and how this regulation occurs is limited and several lines of
evidence suggest that, while O-GlcNAc function in plants and animals has
similarities, there will be significant differences. For example, animals have a
SEC-like OGT but lack the SPY-like OGT, which is unique to plants. Studies with
sec and spy mutants indicate that O-GlcNAc modification affects numerous
processes including response to hormones and light, embryo development, and
regulation of flowering time but mechanistic details about how this regulation
occurs are lacking. While the amount of O-GlcNAc modification to animal proteins
increases and decreases in response to changes in hormonal and growth
conditions, this has not been investigated in plants. Lack of information about
which plant proteins are O-GlcNAc modified is a major impediment to
understanding the role of this modification. The long-term goal of this project
is to determine which plant processes are regulated by O-GlcNAc modification and
elucidate the mechanisms of this regulation. Under the first aim of this
proposal, the mass spectrometry-based methods will be optimized and used to
identity O-GlcNAc modified proteins and the modification sites. The effects of
growth conditions on the amount and distribution of the modification across the
proteome will be determined. In addition, computational approaches will be used
to identify signaling networks that are affected by O-GlcNAc modification. The
final aim will test hypotheses about the networks where O-GlcNAc acts by
determining if the functioning of these networks is affected in sec or spy
mutants. Additional experiments will determine if SEC and/or SPY modifies
selected O-GlcNAc modified proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
research will generate opportunities for high school, undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows to gain significant research experience and
to develop their critical analysis, scientific problem solving and communication
skills. High school students will be recruited from the Mentor Connection
programs of local school districts. Undergraduates from a campus-wide Life
Science Summer Undergraduate Research Program and students matriculating at the
University of Minnesota will recruited to the lab. By mentoring high school
students and undergraduates, laboratory members will gain teaching experience.
To further engage undergraduates and the public, the principle investigator will
give research talks at undergraduate institutions and participate in panel
discussions and forums to educate the public about transgenic technology. He
will co-instruct a BioArt course that involves projects using biological
organisms to create art and also explores ethical considerations about working
with living organisms. In addition, this research will contribute to scientific
infrastructure by providing new methods for the identification of O-GlcNAc
modified proteins.