* 1158817
* IRFP: Exploring the Impacts of Human Land Use on Parasite Transmission Dynamics in a Dung Beetle-Fecal Helminth Model System
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Elizabeth Nichols, Nichols                 Elizabeth      S
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 156,686.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Elizabeth
Nichols to work with Prof. Kenneth Wilson at Lancaster University, Lancaster UK.

Biotic interactions between parasitic and free-living taxa are fundamental to a
range of ecosystem processes, including the mediation of parasitic disease
transmission between species in a community. Parasites with complex life-cycles
(e.g. helminthes (parasitic worms)) exert enormous fitness and economic costs on
humans and livestock across the global tropics. However how environmental change
affects the biotic interactions involved in parasite transmission remains poorly
understood. The proposed project seeks to develop a novel dung beetle - fecal
helminth model system to tease apart the mechanisms by which land-use change
influences parasitic disease transmission, by impacting interactions between
free-living species and parasitic helminths.

As many dung beetles species broadly use the feces of different mammal species,
beetle communities in tropical agricultural landscapes commonly interact with
fecal helminths (parasitic worms) of two distinct transmission strategies: the
fecal-oral helminths of wild and domestic herbivores, and the trophically
transmitted helminths of wild and domestic carnivores (when they eat the adult
beetles). Preliminary data indicates that dung beetle feces processing often
decreases the rate of successful transmission for fecal-oral helminths, yet
increases the transmission of trophic transmissions helminths, for which beetles
commonly act as intermediate hosts. These strikingly different outcomes suggest
that land-use changes that alter dung beetle community diversity may
simultaneously suppress and maintain or amplify disease transmission across
different mammal host species. In addition, the magnitude and direction of these
effects may be predicted by a small set of dung beetle species' traits. This
project combines field, experimental and modeling approaches to characterize the
mechanistic relationships between dung beetle community regulation of parasite
transmission, and the impacts of land-use change on transmission dynamics.

At a basic level, the research will (1) enhance our understanding of the
mechanisms underlying transmission dynamics and their response to land-use
change, and (2) contribute to the development of a novel model system that can
expands upon extant single-microparasite transmission models to assess how
multiple complex life-cycle parasite species respond changes in free-living
species diversity. The economic and health impacts of helminths (parasitic
worms) in tropical agricultural landscapes are tremendous. At an applied level,
this work will provide useful information on how environmental change in
agricultural areas influences those species interactions tightly linked to
ecosystem service outcomes, such as reduced disease transmission. In addition to
these benefits, this research will help develop new international collaboration
between the PI and research groups at Lancaster University, Lancaster UK, the
Federal University of Lavras, Lavras Brazil, the University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil, Barnard College, New York, USA, and the American Museum of
Natural History, New York, USA.