* 1158217
* Dynamics and Mechanism of DNA-Bending Proteins in Binding Site Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Anjum Ansari, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 1,136,815.00

Many cellular processes involve interactions between proteins and DNA in which
proteins recognize and bind to specific sites on the DNA with thousand- or
million-fold higher affinities than to random DNA sequences. How these proteins
search and find their specific sites in the midst of a large excess of
nonspecific sites remains a puzzle. Many site-specific proteins kink, bend or
twist DNA at that site, and exploit the sequence-dependent DNA deformability to
recognize their binding site (indirect readout), and undergo conformational
rearrangements to facilitate favorable interactions with the bent DNA (induced-
fit). A key question remains: does the protein bend the DNA (protein-induced
bending) or are partially bent conformations thermally accessible to DNA in the
absence of the protein, which the protein captures to form a tight complex
(conformational capture). To elucidate the interplay between these two
mechanisms requires measurements of the conformational distribution of DNA, with
and without bound protein, and kinetics measurements of conformational changes
in protein and DNA along the transition pathway from nonspecific to specific
complex. The bulk of kinetics measurements on protein-DNA complexes have come
from stopped-flow measurements that were unable to capture DNA-bending kinetics,
leaving unanswered even the most basic question: on what time scales does the
DNA bend in the complex. A novel aspect of this project is the application of
laser temperature-jump techniques to extend the time resolution for kinetics
measurements to submicroseconds, which covers the time scale relevant for the
recognition step. In combination with other approaches such as single-molecule
FRET and picoseconds-resolved fluorescence decay measurements, this study will
yield the elusive DNA bending step and the distribution of conformational states
accessible to DNA, to provide a comprehensive understanding of the relative
contributions of conformational capture versus protein-induced bending. The
study will focus on two classes of DNA-bending proteins: MutS, that recognizes
mismatches in DNA and initiates the repair machinery; and EcoRV, a restriction
enzyme that recognizes a specific target sequence on foreign DNA and cleaves it
with high specificity. The primary goals are: to investigate whether the cognate
(specific) DNA sequences have an intrinsic propensity to adopt bent
conformations in the absence of bound protein; to determine whether sequence-
dependent flexibility/deformability influences the rate at which DNA is bent in
the complex; and to elucidate the sequence of molecular rearrangements that lead
to binding site recognition. The long term goals are to extend these
measurements to proteins that recognize different kinds of DNA damages,
including chemically modified nucleotides, other damage repair systems, as well
as other DNA-bending proteins involved in gene regulation, for a unified
understanding of the role of intrinsic DNA mechanics and flexibility in the
recognition mechanism. The insights gained from this study will have an impact
on understanding the fundamental rules that govern indirect readout in protein-
DNA interactions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the
professional training of undergraduates, graduates, and postdoctoral students by
their involvement in research, using state-of-the-art biophysical approaches
designed to unveil elusive protein-DNA dynamics. Aspects of the research will be
integrated in classroom teaching at the interface of biology and physics.
Experiments will be designed for undergraduates, based on the single-molecule
fluorescence apparatus, which is an integral part of this project, to provide
hands-on exposure to important concepts in modern biology such as diffusion,
fluctuations, and correlation measurements that are typically not covered in
biology or physics curricula. A new introductory biophysics course, which will
integrate these and other topics, will be developed to augment a previously
developed upper-level molecular biophysics course.