* 1158984
* From Flood to Famine: The Rainfall Regime in East Africa, Its Interannual Variability, and Large-Scale Teleconnections
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Sharon Nicholson, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2016
* USD 601,553.00

This project examines the rainy seasons of East Africa, including their
interannual variability and connections to rainfall variability in other parts
of Africa. The region considered is roughly Tanzania, Uganda, and Kenya. Most of
the rainfall in this region comes in two seasons, the "long rains" occurring
between March and May, and the "short rains" during the October to December
season. Of the two, the short rains account for most of the interannual rainfall
variability and have much stronger connections to sea surface temperature. The
project addresses a set of four general topics. First, the research will examine
the causes of the general aridity of the region, which is unusual for an
equatorial region. Second, the role of the Turkana jet in determining the
regional precipitation climatology and the year-to-year variability of the rains
will be considered. The Turkana jet is a low-level jet that flows through a
narrow gap between the Ethiopian and East African highlands, and has not been
extensively studied. Third, the extent to which a local intertropical
convergence zone (ITCZ) is responsible for the seasonality and interannual
variability of rainfall will be determined. The seasonality and variability of
rainfall over much of Africa is commonly attributed to ITCZ movement, but this
paradigm is problematic over East Africa. Fourth, the research will provide an
examination of interannual variability of the rainy seasons, both for the short
and long rains, seeking to understand the relative roles of Indian (particularly
the Indian Ocean Dipole Mode), Pacific (El Nino), and Atlantic Ocean variability
in determining rainfall variability, and the reasons for dipole teleconnection
patterns between rainfall anomalies in East Africa and in other parts of Africa.
The work would also consider the possibility that the climate of the region has
changed in recent years. A novel aspect of the work is the use of a rain gauge
record extending back to 1874, along with semi-quantitative precipitation time
series for several regions of East Africa extending back to
1820.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal impact through its focus on the
behavior of droughts and floods in East Africa, which take a heavy toll on the
people of the region. The work could lead to statistical relationships between
rainfall and sea surface temperature which could be useful for forecasting
variations in the rainy seasons, including prolonged periods of flood and
drought. In addition, the project supports two graduate students, thereby
training the next generation of researchers in the field.