* 1158615
* An Examination of Science and Technology Teachers' Conceptual Learning through Concept-Based Engineering Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/02/2011,12/31/2018
* Rodney Custer, Black Hills State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,972,216.00

Technology educators from Black Hills State University (SD) and Purdue
University partner with science educators from the University of Massachusetts
at Boston and Stevens Institute of Technology to determine the viability of an
engineering concept-based approach to teacher professional development for
secondary school science teachers in life science and in physical science. The
project refines the conceptual base for engineering at the secondary level
learning (previously developed by the PIs) to increase the understanding of
engineering concepts by the science teachers. In a pilot test of two weeks of
professional development with ten teachers from each discipline, teachers become
familiar with engineering concepts and study the process of infusing engineering
concepts into science curricula so that they can develop modules in their
discipline to be taught during the following in the school year. The following
summer the teachers debrief the process and develop additional modules for their
discipline. The process is revised and repeated with 22 teachers from each
discipline. Teachers are explicitly provided strategies to help them meet the
needs of diverse learners. The outputs of this project include: 1) a preliminary
framework for secondary level engineering education to be published in both
research and practitioner journals; 2) a pilot tested and validated Engineering
Concept Assessment; 3) engineering-infused curriculum modules in life and
physical science; and 4) a professional development model to prepare science
teachers to infuse engineering in their teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project compares student learning when particular concepts in physics and
biology are taught through engineering design with learning the same concepts
taught an earlier group of students with present reform techniques used in the
discipline. The hypothesis is that when teachers and students engage with
engineering design activities their understanding of science concepts and
inquiry are also enhanced. The research component of the project employs an
iterative design with the design of activities followed by development and
implementation. An engineering concept assessment is developed and tested to
examine teacher learning and to determine how engineering concepts can be
infused into the science curricula for life and physical science. Other
quantitative and qualitative instruments are developed to assess the teachers?
understandings of the engineering concepts and their pedagogical implications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is increasing emphasis on integrative STEM
education. New national and international assessments are developing engineering
strands and emphasizing non-routine problem solving. The framework for the Next
Generation Science Standards includes engineering as one of four strands. Stand
alone engineering course are not likely to be widely used. This project develops
engineering infused science units and determines the professional development
needed to use them effectively. &lt;br/&gt;