* 1158497
* Transport and Distribution of Mitochondrial Copper
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Paul Cobine, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 08/31/2017
* USD 588,088.00

Copper is an essential element required for aerobic life. This project addresses
the fundamental eukaryotic cellular process of copper trafficking to
mitochondria. Copper is required in mitochondria as part of an enzyme complex
that is intrinsically linked to the production of energy for cells. However the
mechanism of transport of copper to mitochondria and the trafficking within the
organelle are not well understood. The identity of proteins and/or molecules
involved in the delivery and distribution of copper is crucial to understanding
the larger picture of regulation and coordinated assembly pathways. Baker's
yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is used as a simple system to perform genetic
and biochemical experiments to identify and understand the proteins and
molecules involved in the homeostasis of copper in mitochondria. This project
will define the mechanism of the copper transporter that facilitates movement
across the otherwise impermeable inner membrane of mitochondria, identify
alternative or complementary pathways of transport and characterize the molecule
that binds copper to make it biologically available to
mitochondria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The ease and safety
of yeast experiments allows novice researchers to begin to address complex
problems. Encompassed in this project is a teaching enhancement program for
Alabama high schools. High school students spend two weeks in the laboratory
learning experimental strategies that can be translated into their high school
classroom. After working in the laboratory for two weeks the student
demonstrates their proficiency by teaching their science teacher the
experimental design and strategy they have learned. The design is then
implemented into their high school science curriculum. This project also
provides training for graduate and undergraduate students at Auburn University
and will lead to a more complete understanding of an essential pathway for the
larger scientific community.