* 1158663
* CNIC: U.S.-Danish Planning Visit for Research on Smart Products and People on the Smart Grid
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2013
* Alice Agogino, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/2013
* USD 16,538.00

Through this planning visit, Prof. Alice Agogino of the University of
California-Berkeley will initiate cooperative research with Danish partners to
further our understanding of human-centered, community assessment of renewable
energy and sustainability, with an emphasis on smart products and Smart Grid
use. Her counterpart, Prof. Ulrik Jorgensen and colleagues at the Technical
University of Denmark, in Copenhagen, have established expertise in engineering
education and user involvement in design and innovation, thereby complementing
the U.C.-Berkeley team's strengths in energy and sustainable technologies.
Together their goal is to refine plans for a longer-term U.S.-Danish research
partnership aimed at integrating sustainable technologies (buildings, products,
and systems) with demand response and the Smart Grid. If successful, the
resulting collaboration should lead to a larger interdisciplinary research
effort focused on sustainable product innovation using embedded, distributed
sensor networks; data and sensor validation and fusion; and environmental
machine monitoring to promote energy conservation. Participating U.S. graduate
students will gain valuable early career exposure to an international
professional network that should yield opportunities for expanding their own
research as future faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Agogino and
Jorgensen also plan to integrate research on the role that curricula and
pedagogy play in improving our basic understanding of how to reduce
environmental impact through sustainable design. The US-Danish team will pursue
this by building on lessons learned from Demark's Smart Grid implementations to
collect case studies, sustainable design methods, and curricula for
dissemination. This will be done through an online portal called
"TheDesignExchange." Their objective is to facilitate the capture, analysis and
use of research results via a large, virtual public library of proven tools for
use by educators and practitioners. The cooperating research partners maintain
that giving consumers, governments and corporations access to the latest data,
models, and solutions has the potential broader impact of accelerating wider
adoption of sustainable solutions that enable communities to reduce unwanted
environmental impacts associated with human activities.