* 1158971
* IRFP:  AMPAR-TARP Plasticity in Dorsal Horn Central Sensitization
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Steve Sullivan, Sullivan                Steve          J
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 132,770.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Steve
Sullivan to work with Dr. Prof. Stuart G. Cull-Candy at University College
London, United Kingdom.

Though subjectively unpleasant, the perception of pain to aversive stimuli is
important for survival. However, pain can become maladaptive when it long
outlasts the potential for harm, a condition known as chronic pain. Typically,
noxious stimuli from the environment elicit electrical responses in peripheral
neurons which travel to the spinal cord where the information is relayed by the
release of the neurotransmitter glutamate across specialized regions called
synapses. Glutamate binds and activates receptors on spinal cord neurons, which
then send pain information to the brain. One mechanism of chronic pain is
thought to occur when certain painful stimuli elicit long-term modifications in
the distribution of glutamate receptors present in spinal cord neurons,
increasing their sensitivity to minimal input for an extensive period of time.
Recently, this model has appreciated an extra degree of complexity in the
discovery of auxiliary subunits, a class of proteins which interact with
glutamate receptors to change their fundamental electrical properties and
distribution in neurons. It has been shown that certain auxiliary subunits are
required for the induction of chronic pain, but little is known about the
specific role they play in determining the modifications of glutamate receptors
associated with this condition.

This research studies the role of auxiliary subunits in the alterations of a
particular class of glutamate receptors thought to underlie chronic pain,
namely, รก-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors.
This work entails rigorous analysis of the biophysical properties of different
AMPA receptor-auxiliary complexes to "finger print" and identify those involved
in chronic pain. These findings are translated to spinal cord models of chronic
pain, where different pharmacological agents are tested to target the suspect
AMPA-auxiliary subunit complexes, while retaining basic neural function, paving
the way for novel therapeutic strategies.

This work takes place at University College London, United Kingdom, one of the
top institutions in neuroscience research and is part of a collaborative effort
with many of the world's experts in electrophysiology, including Prof. Mark
Farrant, single channel expert Prof. David Colquhoun, and pain researcher Prof.
Anthony Dickenson. The host laboratory of Prof. Stuart G. Cull-Candy is a leader
in AMPA receptor auxiliary subunits. The experimental know-how and
collaborations acquired during this time course will broaden electrophysiology
and neuroscience research in the United States when Dr. Sullivan returns to
establish his own laboratory studying glutamate signaling.