* 1158582
* Water Vapor Isotopic Measurements on the Chajnantor Plateau, Chile and Implications for Subtropical Humidity Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2018
* Joseph Galewsky, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2018
* USD 400,698.00

This is a project to collect and analyze measurements of water vapor isotope
ratios and ozone concentrations at the site of the Atacama Large Millimeter
Array (ALMA) observatory on the Chajnantor Plateau in Chile (23S latitude,
elevation 5100m). The measurements will be used to study the processes which
determine the humidity of subtropical air masses, which are known to be more
moist than region of the tropical upper troposphere from which they descend into
the subtropics. The site is ideal for making these measurements because it is
one of the few places where air from the tropical upper tropopause can descend
all the way to the Earth's surface without substantial modification during
descent. It is also an extremely convenient site given the research
infrastructure already in place for ALMA.

The measurements address four questions: 1) What is the co-variability of water
vapor and isotopic composition on daily, intraseasonal, seasonal, and
interannual time scales? 2) How do upper tropospheric processes set the aridity
of the Southern Hemisphere relative humidity minimum? 3) To what extent is
subtropical humidity influenced by instrusions of stratospheric air? 4) What
processes moisten the subtropical RH minimum to specific humidities above those
encountered in the tropical upper troposphere? Ozone measurements are used to
address question 3, as high ozone levels can identify intrusions of
stratospheric air. The measurements will be complemented by a suite of
diagonstic activities to identify water vapor transport pathways that account
for the observed isotope ratios, specific humidity, and ozone concentration.

The work has broader impacts due to the importance of water vapor in the
atmosphere, both through its role in the hydrological cycle and through its
radiative effect as a greenhouse gas. The measurements and their analysis will
provide increased understanding of the pathways through which water vapor
circulates in the atmosphere, and the processes which determine atmospheric
relative humidity in dry regions, which may ultimately improve our ability to
forecast weather and anticipate climate change. In addition, the project will
educate and train a graduate student at a university with a substantial Hispanic
and Native American student population.