* 1158284
* Achieving Long Timescale Sampling in Biomolecular Simulations
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Wei Yang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2016
* USD 633,041.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific merit: Long timescale conformational
fluctuations can be responsible for unusual protein electrostatic effects and
remote modulation of enzymatic reactions. Due to the timescale limitation,
accurate understanding of these events via computer simulation has been very
challenging. The goal of this research is to develop and apply novel molecular
dynamics simulation methods to quantitatively describe complex biomolecular
phenomena that usually occur in much longer timescales than what conventional
techniques can achieve. In this project, specialized computer simulation
algorithms will be developed and employed to enhance the sampling power of
biomolecular simulations. Specifically, the main objectives will be accomplished
in two focused areas: (1) Quantitative prediction of protein electrostatic
effects and understanding their coupling with protein conformational
transitions; (2) Understanding how slow enzyme fluctuations prepare unique
catalytic environments to activate chemical reactions. These studies will
provide deeper understanding of the roles that protein conformational changes
play in key biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The
computer simulation methods under development will be distributed to general
scientific community. Some specific algorithms will very possibly become major
techniques in related research areas. The success of this research will motivate
more problem-oriented sampling design efforts in the field of biomolecular
simulation. Synergistic with the scientific project, a special graduate course
"Time-scale and Length-scale in Biology" will be further developed. National and
international meetings and workshops will continue to be organized by the author
to motivate and catalyze the education of younger-generation scientists on the
subject of quantitative computational biophysics. Efforts will continue in the
involvement of undergraduate students and high school students in this research,
using computer simulations to explore protein structures, dynamics, and
functions.