* 1158267
* Theoretical Studies of the Cytosol
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2015
* Toshiko Ichiye, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 05/31/2015
* USD 427,991.00

Toshiko Ichiye of Georgetown University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the CHE division to
develop a new force field for simulations of biological macromolecules in the
aqueous component of the cytosol. The Biophysics program in MCB is cofunding
this proposal. New parameters are being developed for water, ions, and co-
solutes found in the cytosol that are compatible for use with existing force
fields for biological macromolecules. The force field is based on the soft
sticky dipole-quadrupole-octupole (SSDQO) water model, which reproduces
properties of liquid water over a range of temperatures and pressures and yet is
computationally efficient. Initial solute targets are the ions Na+, K+, and Cl-
and the co-solutes trimethylamine-N-oxide and urea, followed by other ions as
well as osmolytes and metabolites typically found in the cell. The parameter
optimization is being guided by quantum mechanical calculations and validated
against experimental diffraction, thermodynamic, dielectric, and dynamic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developments in computer hardware are making possible
simulations of biological macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids in
cellular environments, which opens new horizons for understanding how they
function in both normal and diseased states in real living systems. However,
while much work has focused on developing the simulations of the biomolecules
themselves, little attention has been paid on how to simulate the environment
despite its importance for the structure and function of these molecules. Thus,
a robust new force field for the components found in the cytosol is being
developed to be compatible with existing force fields for the biomolecules. The
force field is being implemented into CHARMM, a widely-used computer program for
biological simulations, thus making it widely available to the scientific
community. In addition, it is being implemented into lesson plans for the
CHARMMing web-interface for CHARMM, thus promoting the education of new
scientists throughout the world.