* 1158443
* Cell-type Specific Strategies for Genome Maintenance
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Anne Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2016
* USD 708,841.00

Broken chromosomes are exceptionally dangerous to the cell, as a single break
can result in the simultaneous loss of hundreds of genes. For this reason, all
organisms can detect even a single double-strand break (DSB), initiating a
response that includes the induction of repair, the arrest of cell division,
changes in developmental fate, and in some cases programmed cell death (PCD).
These responses vary from organism to organism, and with cell type. The cell-
type specificity of damage response has not been well characterized in any
system, in spite of its importance. Recent advances make it feasible to
simultaneously measure changes in the transcription levels of every gene. Plants
exhibit a robust transcriptional response to DSBs, involving the induction or
suppression of thousands of genes. New technologies also allow purification of
nuclei from specific cell types. Combining "transcriptomic" and phenotypic
analysis will increase understanding of the role of transcriptional regulation
in the repair and tolerance of DSBs. The transcriptional response in a small and
specialized population of cells within the plant which undergo PCD in response
to breaks will be compared to that of surrounding cells that do not die in spite
of experiencing the same DNA-damaging treatment. This approach will allow
identification of genes required for break-induced programmed cell death,
providing insights into the mechanism of the process and markers for early and
late steps in the induction of PCD in plants. Several transcription factors are
also induced by chromosomal breaks. Using mutants defective in these regulatory
genes, the subroutines within the response and their biological significance
will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the natural source of chromosomal
breaks that makes this response selectively advantageous in plants is unknown.
Recent work indicates that both the desiccation experienced during seed storage
and damage induced by growth in acidic, metal-rich soils provoke the
transcriptional response described above, and this hypothesis will be
investigated further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: This project will
contribute to the understanding of cell cycle regulation and the mechanisms of
programmed cell death in plants. Novel assays for genomic stability in plants
and exploration of potential natural sources of DSBs in plants should result in
findings of relevance to agriculture. Undergraduates, a graduate student, and a
postdoctoral scholar will be employed and trained through this grant, and will
be recruited from a very diverse population.