* 1158839
* Novel Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations with Low-regularity Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2011,08/31/2015
* Hengguang Li, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 60,066.00

Elliptic partial differential equations (PDEs) with low-regularity data (i.e.,
singular solutions and low-regularity coefficients) frequently appear in
mathematical models from diverse scientific disciplines. These equations in
general present a multiscale character, which increases the complexity of the
problem and poses numerous challenges on the finite element approximation and on
the design of multigrid schemes. Despite continuous developments from the
computational community, some fundamental questions still remain open.
Addressing major issues in both theoretical analysis and practical
implementation, this proposal aims at a systematic investigation on various
aspects of the finite element method (FEM) and multigrid (MG) methods solving
elliptic PDEs with low-regularity data, with a wide range from the theoretical
estimates of PDEs to the development of state-of-the-art numerical algorithms.
In particular, the proposed research consists of two major components: 1) the
optimal FEMs for singular solutions, including (I) the establishment of a
unified framework for the analysis of a wide variety of singular solutions in
weighted Sobolev spaces and(II) the development and implementation of effective
grading algorithms to improve the accuracy of the numerical solution
approximating these singular solutions; 2) the MG theory for axisymmetric
problems, including the estimation of basic MG cycles for the axisymmetric
Laplace operator and the design of new smoothers for the axisymmetric Stokes
problem in weighted spaces. The proposed research will produce new a priori
results (e.g., the well-posedness and regularity) for various singular solutions
in weighted spaces, unitize the full potential of graded meshing techniques for
singular solutions, expand the scope of the MG theory on axisymmetric equations,
and foster innovative ideas on solving PDEs with broader applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has many applications in various
fileds of science and engineering. A class of singular solutions of elliptic
PDEs are from the non-smoothness of the computational domain and the non-
smoothness of the interface in transmission problems. The study on these
singularities shall produce effective numerical algorithms solving problems in
aerospace engineering (aircraft design), in mechanical engineering (crack
propagation), and in elastography of medical imagining (modeling different
levels of stiffness in human tissues). The research on singular solutions from
the singular coefficients shall provide new theoretical results and modern
finite element techniques to tackle Schroedinger equations with various singular
potentials in quantum mechanics. In addition, the MG analysis on axisymmetric
models shall lead to a more complete MG theory in singular spaces and in turn
bring new fast numerical solvers for these equations that are frequently used in
fluids and i n electromagnetic fields. These are the fields that have profound
impact on national security, development of new energy, and novel medical
research. Results from this project will be disseminated through collaboration
with other scholars, publication of peer-reviewed articles, and presentations at
professional meetings. With the development of a software package, the PI also
expects to design a project-oriented course on the finite element method for
senior undergraduate/graduate students in math and engineering, which will equip
the students with a better understanding on the algorithm and a valuable
programming experience.