* 1158849
* Novel Optimization Methods for Design, Synthesis, Supply Chain, and Uncertainty of Hybrid Biomass, Coal, and Natural Gas to Liquids, CBGTL, Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 375,000.00

Intellectual Merit of Proposed Activity: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grand challenge
in sustainable supply of energy is the introduction of hybrid energy processes
with feedstocks that include renewable raw materials and improve the life cycle
analysis. The primary objective of the research proposed here is to develop
novel theoretical, algorithmic and computational techniques for the discovery
and analysis of transformative hybrid energy processes based on biomass, coal,
and natural gas that produce gasoline, diesel, and kerosene at levels that can
address the United States transportation fuel demands. We propose to
investigate: (i) an optimization-based process synthesis framework for novel
hybrid&lt;br/&gt;energy CBGTL processes based on superstructure representation
of the most promising alternatives that will address (a) thermochemical
conversion, (b) biochemical conversion, (c) heat, power, and water integration,
and (d) global optimization of the resulting nonconvex MINLP models; (ii) a
systematic framework for the determination of the optimal energy supply chain
network in the United States for the hybrid energy CBGTL plants that will
address (a) the optimal geographic location and size of the CBGTL plants, (b)
the optimal layout and connectivity of the different available feedstock
resources (i.e., natural gas, different types of coal and biomass), and (c) the
optimal transportation infrastructure to deliver feeds and products to and from
the CBGTL plants; (iii) new approaches for quantifying the role of uncertainty
in (a) feedstock availability and prices, (b) yields, (c) transportation
topology and&lt;br/&gt;cost, (d) demand profiles, and (e) product prices, that
will be based on (i) a robust optimization, (ii) a conditional value at
risk,CVAR, framework, (iii) a two-stage stochastic programming, and (iv) a
combination of CVAR and robust optimization; and (iv) novel approaches for the
long range and strategic planning of CBGTL processes for both the deterministic
and under uncertainty cases. We expect that new and transformative theoretical,
algorithmic, and computational results, and novel methodologies will be
developed and applied to the (i) design and synthesis of individual novel hybrid
energy CBGTL processes; (ii) integration of heat, power, and water within the
process synthesis of CBGTL processes; (iii) optimal determination of the energy
supply chain network; and (iv) elucidation of the role and impact of uncertainty
on feedstock levels and prices, yields, transportation costs and topology, and
product prices for the CBGTL individual plants and their energy supply
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts Resulting from the Proposed
Activity: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach has the potential to
significantly advance and transform the traditional chemical processing and
production so as to attain a sustainable future. The development of novel hybrid
biomass, coal, and natural gas, CBGTL, energy processes, and their deployment in
the energy supply network, has the potential to contribute significantly to the
economic growth of the US.&lt;br/&gt;Integration of Research and Education: The
proposed effort will integrate participation of undergraduate
and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students and will include underrepresented minorities and
visiting students. At the undergraduate level, the&lt;br/&gt;PI has used and
will use as a senior design project, hybrid energy processes, while at the
graduate level, the PI intends&lt;br/&gt;to incorporate the findings in a
graduate course on Optimization in Process Systems Engineering. The students
will&lt;br/&gt;receive training in process design, simulation, synthesis,
optimization, energy, power and water integration, life
cycle&lt;br/&gt;analysis, and scientific
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broaden Representation of Underrepresented
Groups: The proposed research will broaden the participation of under-
represented groups since it will aim at attracting female and minority students
at the graduate level and the undergraduate junior independent and senior theses
students level. The PI has a proven record of promoting diversity in chemical
engineering. His trainees have had diverse socioeconomic, racial and ethnical
backgrounds, and have included (18) female students and postdoctoral fellows
many of whom are now distinguished researchers and Professors in the US or
abroad. Currently, the PI supervises 3 female graduate students and 1 female
high school student. The PI will continue recruiting efforts of under-
represented groups for this project via meeting during his seminar visits and
conferences, and attracting juniors and seniors for independent research
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissemination: The results of the proposed work will
be broadly disseminated to researchers in academia and industry through
presentations at domestic and international meetings, scholarly refereed journal
publications and through an already available dedicated web site
(http://helios.princeton.edu/hybrid-energy) which will describe the approaches,
implementations and results. We will also make freely available all case studies
and our implementations of the proposed work and create a web tool for easy
access. We also intend to prepare a CACHE Design case study to be widely
distributed worldwide. Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in
its preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact on Society: The proposed research
has potential to accelerate the discovery of transformative
hybrid&lt;br/&gt;energy processes that will lead into sustainable biofuels that
meet the transportation targets of the United States.