* 1158531
* Collaborative research: Short-circuiting in bacterial quorum sensing
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Jack Dockery, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 04/30/2016
* USD 52,776.00

Intellectual merit&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial cell-cell communication, also termed
quorum sensing (QS) is a wide-spread process that coordinates multicellular
behaviors such as virulence, biofilm formation, and nutrient acquisition in
response to cell density, population structure and environmental viscosity.
There has been an explosion in research directed at understanding the molecular
mechanisms of QS, but there is a paucity of information on the ecophysiological
implications and on the emergent properties of QS regulatory networks. The
current project addresses this need by combining genetics, physiology, and
systems biology in understanding QS in the model bacterium Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. This bacterium communicates via diffusible acyl-homoserine lactone
signals to control the expression of hundreds of genes. The particular focus is
on two central properties of the P. aeruginosa QS network, antiactivation and
co-regulation. Antiactivation, initially characterized in the plant pathogen
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, inhibits the activity of cognate QS receptors through
direct protein-protein interaction. Co-regulation permits the integration of
other environmental signals into the quorum response. A key feature here is the
starvation-dependent transcription of the main P. aeruginosa QS receptor, LasR.
Because several QS-controlled products are costly extracellular enzymes involved
in nutrient acquisition, co-regulation by starvation appears ecologically
worthwhile. The roles of antiactivation and lasR regulation in modulating the
quorum response and in preventing "short-circuiting" will be investigated.
Short-circuiting, or self-induction, is a major unanswered question in bacterial
QS: How is it that diffusible quorum-signals do not immediately bind to their
cognate receptors in the same cell in which they are produced and activate gene
expression independent of cell density? Based on recent modeling data, the PIs
hypothesize that antiactivation and lasR regulation help prevent short-
circuiting, and that the tight environmental control of lasR expression is key
in modulating quorum responses that are either short-circuited, triggered by
cell density, or triggered by starvation. The specific aims of the project,
which integrate experimentation and computational modeling, are therefore to (1)
directly observe short-circuiting of QS target gene expression in antiactivator-
deficient and lasR overexpressing cells, (2) investigate the growth-rate
dependence of QS gene induction and short-circuiting in wild-type cells, and (3)
develop a model of the las QS network that, in addition to antiactivation and
co-regulation, incorporates and evaluates key properties such as receptor-QS
signal interaction, receptor dimerization, autoregulation, and active efflux.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts&lt;br/&gt;Research. The research conducted
by the PIs over the last decade, funded in part by NSF, has established P.
aeruginosa QS as a global regulatory network, has provided insight into the
function of the central QS regulator LasR, has demonstrated that QS is a
cooperative behavior subject to social conflict, and has resulted in the first
computational model of P. aeruginosa QS. The current project will incorporate
and extend these findings to understand the basic design features of a QS
network, including antiactivation and the integration of environmental cues. The
work will broadly benefit and will find application in synthetic biology and
biotechnology for the design of novel genetic response circuits.
&lt;br/&gt;Education. The described project provides excellent educational
opportunities for students. The PIs have and will continue to train graduate and
undergraduate students. Dr. Schuster will also provide educational opportunities
for high-school students through the Apprenticeship for Science and Engineering,
an established summer internship program at Oregon State University. Many of the
proposed experiments are conceptually and technically straight-forward and are
particularly well suited for the engagement of high-school and undergraduate
students in the scientific process.