* 1158845
* Controlling Transient Behavior of Solid Oxide Fuel Cells Using an Invariant Property
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2011,12/31/2014
* Tuhin Das, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2014
* USD 197,254.00

The research objective of this award is to address the important yet conflicting
goals of improving load-following ability of SOFCs and simultaneously
maintaining safe transient operation under aggressive power fluctuations.
Deficient load-following is attributed to transport delays that render SOFCs
susceptible to hydrogen starvation during transients. Hydrogen starvation will
be addressed by limiting fuel utilization, a critical performance variable in
SOFCs, within an optimal range. Transient control through direct measurement of
fuel utilization is impractical due to elaborate and costly sensing requirement.
In contrast, the proposed approach will achieve this objective by using an
invariant property. Its invariance with respect to pressures, temperatures, and
internal and external reforming reactions, admits simple control implementation.
The research will reveal the underlying conditions for existence of this
property and develop a formal approach for deriving it in a model independent
manner. By integrating the property within robust control strategies for hybrid
SOFC systems containing an energy storage element, it will improve the load-
following ability of SOFCs while achieving the aforementioned transient
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will extend the
usability of SOFCs from uniform power applications to rapid response scenarios.
It will provide acceptable transient response with reduced sensing and limited
knowledge of the system dynamics, which consists of numerous interconnected
physical phenomena. The research will open the possibility of a generalized
transient control approach for SOFCs that is applicable across variations in
fuel types, reformer types, stack technologies, etc. It will lower the need for
model identification and tuning efforts that are crucial in traditional
approaches. The research will involve graduate and undergraduate students from
multiple engineering disciplines through graduate research, co-op opportunities,
etc. and will attempt to increase the involvement of women and minority
students. Research results will be disseminated through university and
department-wide outreach activities, and through publications and conference
participation.