* 1158625
* I-Corps:  Mobile Life Guard
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Ram Dantu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The increased use of in-vehicle entertainment and smart phones (texting,
talking, music, videos) increases the level of distraction of drivers and
introduce new challenges for safety on the road. But, it is believed that mobile
phones can also help improve road safety by sensing, sharing, and providing
feedback to fellow drivers. Three first order, safety factors contribute to
safety on the road: the driver, the vehicle, and the road. Mobile Life Guard,
patent pending, includes all these categories in a comprehensive product. The
proposed product involves the interaction between a mobile smartphone and its
sensors, and an OBD-II device to assess current driver behavior and vehicle
data. The Mobile Life Guard (MLG) system enables a suite of capabilities for
safe information transfer on driver, vehicle, environment and traffic conditions
in a vehicle-to-operator and vehicle-to-vehicle mode using minimum information
and capabilities available on smartphones; initially the team plans to use the
Android operating system in the phone and IBDII port in the vehicle. Currently
the team has developed several multi-dimensional safety scores quantifying
driving behavior and road conditions. The proposed product seeks to enable some
of these applications with softer timeliness requirements (e.g., 'slow traffic
ahead' or 'stranded vehicle ahead' warnings) through smartphones -- without the
need to deploy in-vehicle infrastructure. As consumers drive around, the phone
can sense and share the driving profile, vehicle functions, and infrastructure
conditions (e.g., road, weather) with nearby drivers. In particular, previous
research resulted on techniques on how the road conditions and hazards can be
communicated by the cell phone to the neighboring drivers (e.g., tell the driver
behind that slowing down now because of a speed bump). Based on the deployment
of various smartphone applications, while it is relatively easy to have users
download an application, it is difficult to sustain the interest in running the
application over a long period of time and share the data. A primary goal of the
proposed I-Corps project is to identify the subsets of the capabilities that
initially have the highest potential for market development and penetration.
Initial target customer groups are elderly and teenage drivers. I-Corps team
plans to receive feedback directly with: i) transportation industry partners,
ii) representatives from Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) and iii)
first-tier system suppliers that provide systems for vehicle manufacturers.

The introduction of new in-vehicle audio and visual technologies (open APIs),
access to vehicle information through OBDII and multiple sensors in smart phones
creates sea-level opportunities for improving the safety on the road. The team
plans to use a test bed of vehicles and mobile phones to effectively and
accurately measure driver behavior and identify possible improvements. In
summary, the intellectual merit components are: i) Real-time driver state
modeling using mobile phones and OBDII, ii) Real-time unambiguous notifications
and alerts to the neighboring vehicles iii) Real-time guidance to the driver for
optimal fuel consumption, energy-efficient localization, and speed tracking, iv)
Proactively predicting information about vehicle-condition, road-condition,
hazards and construction, and finally v) Performance analysis and new metrics
for driver-in-the-loop. To achieve the above objectives, the proposed product
calls for interdisciplinary work among computer science, mechanical engineering,
civil engineering, electrical engineering, neuroscience and communication
studies.