* 1158666
* New Frontier in Materials Science: Artificial Nanosolids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Igor Beloborodov, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 243,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical work on the physics of a new class of materials,
called artificial nanosolids, which are arrays of small particles, embedded in
an insulating matrix, with sizes ranging from a few to hundreds of nanometers.
Their properties depend on the competition of several energy scales: tunneling
energy, Coulomb energy, temperature, electron lifetime within a grain, and the
mean energy level spacing for a single particle. Small granules are often viewed
as artificial atoms. Accordingly, granular arrays can be treated as artificial
solids with programmable electronic properties. The ease of adjusting electronic
properties of artificial nanosolids is one of their most attractive assets for
fundamental studies of disordered solids and for targeted applications in
nanotechnology. An early determination and understanding of the properties of
artificial nanosolids will have far-reaching consequences in the emerging nano-
electronics industry as these new materials will be the main building blocks of
future quantum electronics and spintronic devices. Furthermore, new fundamental
quantum phenomena such as Coulomb blockade effects, which are predicted to occur
in these artificial nanosolids may hold prospects for their applications in
novel quantum memory devices and quantum computers.

The theoretical studies to be carried out will provide fundamental insight into
how the novel bulk behavior of artificial nanosolids may be predicted,
controlled and manipulated by varying the size, composition, and coupling
strength between nanometer-scale building blocks. The research project has three
parts devoted to superconducting, magnetic, and semiconducting nanosolids,
respectively. The research on superconducting nanosolids is important because of
the appearance of new quantum effects which arise from the confinement of
superconductivity within the grains, and possible applications in
superconducting devices. Magnetic nanosolids are important because this new
class of materials offers an exemplary model system for the investigation of
disordered magnets. The research on semiconducting nanosolids is relevant
because these materials are now accessible for next generation thermoelectric
devices. In addition, granularity is a rather general phenomenon and even the
homogeneous disordered systems in the vicinity of the critical points often
possess a self-induced granularity. Progress on these problems represent a new
paradigm and will have strong impact on condensed matter physics and materials
science.

This award supports the PI's educational activities through the training of a
graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow in advanced nanomaterials science.
The PI will develop a novel cross-disciplinary course on nanotechnology for
physics students. In addition, the research will help stimulate and further
develop strong university-national laboratory partnerships, as it will
strengthen the PI's ongoing collaborations with Argonne National Laboratory.

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This award supports theoretical research and education in condensed matter
physics. The theoretical work takes its inspiration from discovery of new
materials, called "artificial nanosolids", which are arrays of small particles,
embedded in an insulating material, with sizes ranging from a few to hundreds of
nanometers (a nanometer is approximately one millionth the size of the human
hair). The grains in artificial nanosolids interact with each other in various
ways and offer rich new horizons of novel macroscopic behavior emerging from
nanoscale structure and dynamics. Fundamental microscopic phenomena in these
materials can produce dramatically new and programmable bulk behavior when
mediated by their granular structure. The theoretical studies to be carried out
will provide fundamental insight into how the novel bulk behavior of artificial
nanosolids may be predicted, controlled and manipulated by varying the size,
composition, and coupling strength between nanometer-scale building blocks. The
research is interdisciplinary with a focus at the interface between physics,
materials science, and nanoscience.

This award supports the PI's educational activities through the training of a
graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow in advanced nanomaterials science.
The PI will develop a novel cross-disciplinary course on nanotechnology for
physics students. In addition, the research will help further develop strong
university-national laboratory partnerships, as it will strengthen the PI's
ongoing collaborations with Argonne National Laboratory.