* 1158241
* The Evolution of Two Genomes:   Sequence and Functional Divergence
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Douglas Crawford, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2017
* USD 723,701.00

This research intends to determine the importance of genetic variation in the
two separate genomes that occur in all animal cells: the nuclear and
mitochondrial genomes. These genomes work together to form the enzymes in one
metabolic pathway, the Oxidative Phosphorylation metabolic pathway. The
Oxidative Phosphorylation pathway makes the vast majority of ATP energy produced
in animals breathing oxygen. To investigate the importance of genetic variation
in this pathway, the research goals include 1) determining the sequencing
variation among all the genes in the oxidative phosphorylation pathway, (2)
quantifying the differences in RNA expression for these genes, and (3)
determining the functional and biochemical consequences of both protein
polymorphisms and gene expression. To understand the naturally occurring genetic
differences, this research uses evolutionary analyses of the two genomes among
populations of the salt marsh minnow, F. heteroclitus, that are distributed
along a steep thermal cline where southern populations are &gt;12Â°C warmer than
northern populations. This clinal variation in temperature is associated with
adaptive changes in enzyme kinetics and enzyme expression. This approach
integrates the physiological effects of temperature on protein variants,
nucleotide polymorphisms and quantitative variation in RNA expression, and
defines biologically important differences by defining changes that have evolved
by natural selection (i.e., are evolutionary adaptations). Combining the
discovery of nucleotide variation, quantitative variation in RNA expression, and
the functional consequences of this variation will enhance our understanding of
the evolution of two genomes and how constraints and conflict within and between
genomes affect evolutionary processes. By analyzing a complete metabolic
pathway, we will gain a broad understanding of how adaptive evolution affects
changes among many interacting genes to achieve adaptive physiological changes.
Thus, these data provide a unique perspective of how global warming may affect
the physiology and evolution of animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance undergraduate and graduate student
training and education in scientific research using DNA sequencing, biochemistry
and physiology. To enhance the participation of under-represented groups,
minority undergraduates will be recruited through our interactions with science
programs that are geared for minorities at the University of Miami.
Additionally, society and the science community will benefit from the empirical
data on the relationship between changing thermal environments and nucleotide
variation across many whole mitochondrial genomes. These data, which will be
publically available, will provide a rich database for the Fundulus research
community, physiologists working on mitochondrial function, and researchers
modeling haploid genome evolution.