* 1158469
* Protein Interactions in the Utilization of Iron by Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Mario Rivera, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2016
* USD 615,503.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Iron is a required nutrient involved in
fundamental cellular processes, from oxygen storage and transport to respiration
and DNA repair. Pathogenic bacteria are equipped with iron uptake mechanisms
that enable them to utilize host-iron sequestered by lactoferrin, transferrin or
bound to heme, and therefore overcome the low-iron concentrations encountered in
their host organisms. Much less is known about the fate of iron once it reaches
the bacterial cytosol. Ferritin molecules function as dynamic regulators of
cytosolic iron concentrations, but despite their importance in iron homeostasis,
little is known about the processes that deliver Fe2+ for storage or the signals
that prompt its release for safe integration in metabolism. There are two
ferritin-like molecules in P. aeruginosa: a bacterioferritin (BfrB), which
assembles from 24 identical subunits and binds 12 heme molecules, and a
bacterial ferritin (FtnA), which is also assembled from 24 identical subunits
but does not bind heme. It has recently been discovered that release of iron
from BfrB requires electrons to be mediated by a ferredoxin (Bfd) and a
ferredoxin reductase (FPR), whereas release of iron from FtnA requires that
electrons be mediated only by FPR. These findings provide a unique platform to
study how protein structure and protein-protein interactions contribute to the
regulation of cytosolic iron in pathogenic bacteria. In order to investigate
these protein-protein interactions a multidisciplinary approach will be
undertaken which includes biochemistry, NMR spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography
and computational biology. The specific goals are: 1) Investigate and
structurally determine the protein-protein interactions that regulate the
outflow of iron from the interior cavities of BfrB and FtnA. (2) Challenge a
hypothesis that Fe2+ exits the BfrB and FtnA interior cavities via the four-fold
pores formed in their structures at the intersection of
4-subunits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;The
multidisciplinary nature of the project will provide many opportunities for
students at all academic levels. The integration of efforts in the Rivera,
Vakser and Lovell laboratories (all located at the University of Kansas) via
monthly joint group meetings will expose the students to the intellectually
diverse atmosphere that is necessary to nurture multidisciplinary research. This
experience, coupled to the ethnically rich environment present in the three labs
(Asian, Caucasian, Hispanic; ~40/60 female/male) will prepare the graduate
students well for the multifaceted work environment they are likely to encounter
after graduation. Just as important, the collaborative spirit of this project
will illustrate to students the benefits of a broad-based approach for (1)
solving complex problems; (2) more effectively putting the results obtained in
one laboratory into its proper context; and thus (3) improving the prospect that
the research will impact the greater scientific community, and ultimately
benefit the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
supported by the Biomolecular Dynamics, Structure and Function Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life
Processes program in the Chemistry Division.