* 1158127
* Mechanism of Translation Termination
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Simpson Joseph, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* william eggleston
* 04/30/2016
* USD 600,000.00

Simpson Joseph&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: &lt;br/&gt;In protein synthesis, the information present in messenger RNA
(mRNA) sequences is translated into proteins in an essential process carried out
by ribosomes in all living organisms. The termination of translation, a crucial
step in protein synthesis, must occur with high fidelity, to prevent premature
release from the ribosome of incompletely synthesized proteins. Release factors
1 and 2 (RF1 and RF2) recognize the stop codons in the mRNA and trigger
hydrolysis of the bond linking the newly completed protein to the tRNA in the P
site. The long-term objective of this research is to study the mechanism of
translation termination to determine how high fidelity is achieved. Examination
of crystal structures of RF1 and RF2 bound to the ribosome has revealed amino
acids in the RFs that are crucial for stop codon recognition. The first aim of
the project is to probe how these key residues dynamically discriminate between
sense and stop codons. In the second aim, the project will examine the roles of
conformational changes that RF1 and RF2 undergo when they bind to the ribosome.
These conformational changes may serve as functional switches to activate
hydrolysis of peptidyl-tRNA linkages after stop codons are recognized. Currently
there is no information available about the conformational changes that occur in
RF1 and RF2 as they bind to the ribosome. In the third aim, the mechanism by
which release factor 3 (RF3) catalyzes the dissociation of RF1 and RF2 from the
ribosome will be elucidated. This research will investigate these outstanding
questions in translation termination using fluorescence-based, pre-steady state
kinetic analysis, site-directed mutagenesis of critical residues, and
biochemical assays.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This
project serves an important educational need by integrating research and
teaching. Several undergraduate minority students and graduate students will
obtain state-of-the-art research training in advanced biophysical methods. The
PI actively participates in outreach activities such as the STARS program and
the UCSD Next Step program. In addition, the PI has mentored students from the
local high schools to carry out science projects in the laboratory. A high
school student from Canyon Crest Academy will join the PI's laboratory this
summer. The undergraduates and high school student will carry out site-directed
mutagenesis of RF1 and RF2 and will also assist in the purification and
characterization of mutant proteins, to contribute to the work while gaining
important scientific skills. Several undergraduates have contributed
significantly in the past and co-authored research publications. The results of
this study will also be published in scientific journals and disseminated
broadly to enhance scientific understanding of protein synthesis, a central step
in gene expression.