* 1158750
* The Impact of Research and Development on Quality, Productivity, and Welfare
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Amil Petrin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2017
* USD 325,423.00

Innovations in product quality and production methods are a major source of long
run growth in output per capita. During this period of globalization it is very
important to understand how investment in research and development (R&amp;D)
leads to innovations. Many countries subsidize activities that are intended to
make firms more competitive in the world market. Empirical answers to questions
regarding R&amp;D require one to quantify how demand changes in response to the
introduction of new goods and how supply changes in response to innovations in
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently almost all research on these
questions use data that aggregate over prices and quantities so the measure of
output is plant-level revenue. Aggregating prices and quantities over products
at the plant confounds the effects of demand and supply, undermining the
conclusions that can be drawn from such data. More recent plant-level surveys
include firm-level data on both the revenues and quantities of each product
sold, in addition to data on inputs used in production and for product and
process-related R&amp;D. This research agenda will develop a methodology for
estimating demand, output production and the production of innovations using
these new and richer data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applying the methodology
will yield estimates that can be used to answer some of the long-standing
questions related to R&amp;D. A leading question in this literature is whether
firms are doing too little or too much R&amp;D from society's perspective, as
economic theory says that forces can work in both directions. Other important
questions include how R&amp;D "produces" innovations as a function of detailed
input measurements, how spillovers of R&amp;D knowledge impact growth, and
whether past approaches to answering these questions with more aggregated data
led to correct or mistaken inferences about the relationship between R&amp;D and
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In an attempt to encourage firms
to become more competitive in this age of globalization many countries,
including the United States, subsidize R&amp;D. By providing answers to the
above questions, this research will shed new light on the most effective way to
allocate these subsidies. The data also come from a period when European Union
tariffs were falling, making it possible to explore how stiffening competition
affects R&amp;D decisions, and how these decisions affect product and process
innovations and the competitiveness of domestic firms. The techniques will be
programmed in Stata and made publicly available so researchers in other
countries that collect similar data can directly apply the new methods.