* 1158107
* Biochemical and Biophysical Characterization of the Lambda Capsid
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2015
* Carlos Catalano, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/2015
* USD 1,058,742.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The assembly of an infectious virus within the cell
is a remarkably conserved process in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic viruses.
For instance, the assembly of most large DNA viruses includes a "packaging"
step, where the viral genome is physically inserted into the confines of a pre-
assembled capsid shell. Genome packaging is catalyzed by a terminase enzyme,
which utilizes the energy of ATP hydrolysis to fuel the reaction. This
ultimately yields a capsid that contains tightly packaged DNA, which can
generate over 20 atmospheres of internal pressure. The packaging process
triggers a major reorganization of the proteins assembled into the capsid shell,
which often results in expansion of the structure. This is a remarkable process
whereby the spherical procapsid shell thins, acquires a mature angular shape,
and roughly doubles the internal volume to accept the entire genome length.
Exactly when procapsid expansion occurs, what drives it, and what role it plays
is not fully understood in any system. In most cases, a "decoration" protein
adds to the surface of the expanded shell to stabilize the structure against the
tremendous internal forces generated by the packaged DNA. The physical and
chemical features that mediate decoration protein binding to the expanded shell
and how these interactions stabilize the structure remain poorly characterized.
Once the entire genome has been packaged, the terminase motor is ejected from
the nucleocapsid and is replaced by "finishing proteins" to yield the virus
particle. How this "hand-off" takes place without release of the tightly
packaged, highly pressurized DNA is poorly understood in all virus systems.
Bacteriophage lambda has been intensely studied using genetic, biochemical,
biophysical, and structural approaches and defined biochemical assays are
available to interrogate each step along the assembly pathway. This project
capitalizes on these defined systems to interrogate three critical steps in
viral genome packaging that are common and essential for the assembly of all
large double-stranded DNA viruses. Specifically, this project will define and
characterize the physical and chemical forces that (i) drive procapsid
expansion, (ii) mediate decoration protein assembly of the expanded capsid
shell, and (iii) facilitate handoff of the nucleocapsid from the motor to the
finishing proteins without release of the tightly packaged, highly pressurized
DNA. The project incorporates collaborative studies to provide a complementary
structural framework with which to understand the biochemical data. Procapsid
expansion, stabilization of the DNA-filled capsid by decoration proteins, and
hand-off of the pressurized nucleocapsid to finishing proteins is observed from
phages to the herpesviruses. This research will reveal fundamental new
information on virus assembly mechanisms. Understanding the physical and
chemical mechanisms by which a capsid can expand without fracturing will serve
as a paradigm for a large class of macromolecular transformations observed
throughout biology. This research will provide a detailed understanding of
essential steps in virus assembly and will be applicable to a variety of
biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;This work
will further afford technical advances that will allow adaptation of the lambda
system as a nanotechnology platform for a variety of bioengineering
applications. Importantly, the project will provide training opportunities for
students spanning from undergraduate summer research programs, to graduate Ph.D.
thesis studies and to post-graduate research experiences. This research project
will result in the training and mentoring of promising young scientists. The
recruitment and training of minority scientists is an important component of
this research program. Undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral students will
perform the studies described in this application which will provide training
for a new generation of scientists.