* 1158644
* GOALI:  Dynamically Tunable Low-Loss Active Metamaterials For Wireless Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Steven Anlage, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2015
* USD 501,219.00

Objective&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop fast
(~nanosecond) tunable-over-a-wide-band, low-loss, physically small,
metamaterial-based RF front-end elements compatible with Digital-RF transceiver
concept being developed in industry for a variety of commercial and military
applications. We will focus on novel metamaterials based on superconductor
elements to form extremely low insertion loss, physically and electrically
small, highly tunable structures for the next generation of RF electronics.
These metamaterials will allow us to increase performance while decreasing size
and signature of antennas operating over wide bands, multibands and allowing
dynamic real-time tuning. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The work will
include the Josephson effect into metamaterials for the first time, leading to
development of radical new applications of metamaterials and test several high-
risk theoretical predictions. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work investigates and promotes applications of metamaterials for the RF and
microwave industry. These developments will be of direct and measurable value to
society through the generation of high-tech jobs, improvement of wireless
communications, and a positive impact on quality of life. The PI has a history
of broadening the participation of underrepresented groups (currently 50% of the
research group are members of underrepresented groups), and is involved in
numerous outreach activities. These activities will create new partnerships,
collaborations, and facilities that will alter the landscape of the
superconducting metamaterials field. The results will be disseminated through
publications, talks and posters at international conferences, a research web
site, and continuation of the extensive outreach activities by the PI and
students.