* 1158008
* Roles of Chromatin Remodeling Factors Fun30 and Isw1 in Heterochromatin
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Xin Bi, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 04/30/2017
* USD 599,999.00

Intellectual Merit: Eukaryotic DNA is packaged into chromatin via the formation
of nucleosomes, structures in which about 147 base pairs of DNA are wrapped
around histone proteins. The genome can be divided into condensed chromatin
domains termed heterochromatin and decondensed domains referred to as
euchromatin. Heterochromatin plays key roles in genome integrity and in
regulation of gene expression, and it is composed of highly ordered nucleosomes
with characteristic histone modifications that are recognized by
heterochromatin-binding proteins. Heterochromatin is generally refractory to
gene expression. Despite extensive studies, exactly how the primary and higher
order structures of heterochromatin are formed and maintained is not resolved.
Chromatin remodeling factors have the ability to change the structure, dynamics
and positioning of nucleosomes in chromatin, and they are linked to
heterochromatin formation and maintenance in organisms ranging from yeast to
humans, but how they contribute to heterochromatin structure is unclear.
Heterochromatin in the highly tractable yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has long
served as a paradigm for heterochromatin studies. This system will be used to
examine the mechanisms of function of two chromatin-remodeling factors, Fun30
and Isw1, in the formation and maintenance of heterochromatin. The investigator
will test the model that Fun30 is important for formation of mature
heterochromatin during the de novo establishment of heterochromatin and
investigate the potential role of Fun30 in the restoration of heterochromatin
following its disruption by DNA replication. The investigator will also examine
how Fun30 is selectively recruited to heterochromatin and how its function is
regulated. Isw1, unlike Fun30, is not required for the formation of
heterochromatin structure, but plays a critical role in maintaining the
stability of heterochromatin. The investigator will test if Isw1 contributes to
the stability of heterochromatin by assisting the formation of a high order
heterochromatin structure, regulating the dynamics of heterochromatin, and/or
strengthening nucleosome structure. The investigator will also examine how the
functional domains of Isw1 contribute to heterochromatin. Results from this
project should provide new insights into the roles of Fun30 and Isw1 in the
formation, inheritance and maintenance of heterochromatin, and shed light on the
functions of chromatin remodelers in heterochromatin in higher organisms
including humans.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project is expected to enhance
the investigator's teaching and allow him to continue to provide undergraduate
and high school students with opportunities to participate in biological
research as well as to maintain his interactions with faculty and students at
undergraduate colleges. The project would enhance the investigator's role as the
instructor for the primary literature-based upper level course Eukaryotic Gene
Regulation. Both heterochromatin and chromatin remodelers are covered in this
course. New insights into the roles of chromatin remodelers in heterochromatin
gained from the research will be incorporated into class discussions. The
investigator has a strong record and extensive experience in mentoring
undergraduate students in research, including women and members of
underrepresented groups. In the past ten years, 22 undergraduate students
including 9 female and 2 underrepresented minority students have studied in the
investigator's lab. These students gained knowledge and research experiences and
became more fascinated with biological sciences. Moreover, a high school student
did a senior summer project in the investigator's lab, and as a result became
excited about experimental biology. The research will allow the investigator to
continue to provide such opportunities for undergraduate as well as graduate
students, and to allow students to gain research experience in molecular
biology, genetics and biochemistry and contribute to studies of the roles of
chromatin remodelers. The investigator will also continue to provide high school
students opportunities to do senior projects or summer internships. The
investigator will present results from the project at conferences or academic
institutions. They investigator will continue to interact with faculty and
students at undergraduate colleges by meeting with them and presenting seminars.
The investigator will also provide opportunities for faculty at undergraduate
colleges to spend their sabbaticals to do research in his lab.