* 1158500
* Integrating the Regulatory Components of Sphingolipid Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Julie Stone, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 12/31/2016
* USD 686,815.00

Sphingolipids contribute to protein trafficking and the organization and
physical properties of membranes as major structural components of the plasma
membrane, tonoplast, and endomembrane system. Sphingolipids also act as dynamic
regulators of basic cellular processes, including programmed cell death (PCD),
which is triggered by the accumulation of the bioactive sphingolipid metabolites
long-chain bases and ceramides. The project is designed to elucidate the
regulatory components and their interactions that finely mediate the
requirements for sufficient amounts of sphingolipids to support cell viability
and growth yet prevent the buildup of sphingolipid metabolites to levels that
induce PCD. The project will build upon emerging evidence for post-translational
regulation of sphingolipid synthesis through serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT),
a heterodimeric enzyme that catalyzes the first step in this pathway.
Arabidopsis homologs of new players in the SPT regulatory network will be
characterized. These include small subunits of SPT (ssSPT) that stimulate SPT
activity and ORMs that provide reversible negative-regulation of SPT activity in
response to intracellular sphingolipid levels. Contributions of members of
Arabidopsis ssSPT and ORM gene families to the regulation of SPT and
sphingolipid synthesis will be determined. Using yeast-based tools, post-
translational modifications of Arabidopsis ORMs will be assessed and
interactions of SPT and regulatory proteins will be determined. Experiments will
also be conducted to identify any additional components of the SPT regulatory
system. Results from the yeast-based studies will provide the basis for
experiments designed to uncover the in planta transduction of SPT regulation in
response to perturbations in sphingolipid homeostasis. These studies will take
advantage of Arabidopsis mutants with dysfunctions in sphingolipid biosynthetic
regulation and fungal mycotoxins that generate enhanced levels of PCD-inducing
long-chain bases. Elucidation of the mechanisms responsible for controlling the
synthesis of sphingolipids will not only have implications for crop productivity
but will also be of broad general interest since sphingolipids are both
essential and highly bioactive in all eukaryotic
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The project encompasses
graduate and undergraduate training and high school educational outreach. The
research will be conducted by graduate students at University of Nebraska-
Lincoln (UNL) and the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
(USUHS). Opportunities for an annual two-to-four week exchange of graduate
students between UNL and USUHS will broaden training experiences for student
participants. To meet a growing educational need at UNL, a graduate level, team-
taught course in lipid biochemistry will be established under the leadership of
PI Cahoon and co-PI Stone. This course will include modules on sphingolipid
function and metabolism and will broadly engage students with interests ranging
from nutrition, biofuels, and lipid signaling. Undergraduate training will be
incorporated into the project through the UNL Undergraduate Creative Activities
and Research Experiences (UCARE) program that provides a two year opportunity
for undergraduate students to develop and conduct independent research projects.
Undergraduate training in line with the project goals will also be provided
through established NSF REU programs at UNL and science and technology
mentorship programs at USUHS, which actively recruit women and underrepresented
minority students. The project will also facilitate educational outreach to high
school students through lab-based workshops for the annual UNL Women in Science
program and by hosting of high school students in the Nebraska EPSCoR-supported
Young Nebraska Scientist Initiative, a summer program designed to strengthen the
K-12 STEM student pipeline.