* 1158812
* IRFP: Physical Regulation of Long-Term Ecosystem Variability in the North Atlantic
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,11/30/2014
* Andrew Barton, Barton                  Andrew         D
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 11/30/2014
* USD 124,278.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-month research fellowship by Dr. Andrew D.
Barton to work collaboratively with Professors Richard Williams and Jonathan
Sharples at the University of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K., and Professor Susan
Lozier at Duke University, Durham, NC, U.S.A.

The structure of marine phytoplankton communities mediates the export of carbon
and other minerals from the ocean surface to depth and the transfer of organic
matter and energy through the food web. Climate variability is thought to impact
the structure of marine phytoplankton communities by setting the physical and
chemical environments in which phytoplankton and their predators reside. These
ecological changes, in turn, feed back upon global biogeochemical cycles, the
climate system, and marine ecosystems. However, the pathways by which climate
variability regulates marine phytoplankton communities are not well understood.

This research will quantify the linkages between the abundances of ~100
phytoplankton species and the observed, interannual to decadal variability in
physical oceanographic processes that determine the ambient light and
macronutrient supply supporting phytoplankton growth in the North Atlantic. In
this effort, phytoplankton abundance observations from the Continuous Plankton
Recorder (CPR) survey, an unparalleled record of ecological variability in the
North Atlantic over the last half-century, will be used. The goals of this
analysis are to: a) evaluate key physical mechanisms by which climate impacts
phytoplankton communities and b) examine how species with different functional
traits respond to that forcing. To further assess the physical mechanisms
identified by this analysis, simulations will be conducted with a combined
circulation, biogeochemical, and phytoplankton community model of the North
Atlantic for 1958-2010. By understanding the dynamic links between phytoplankton
communities and climate in the observational record, this work has the potential
to shed light on how marine ecosystems respond to climate variability and
change.

This research will build strong international collaboration between the
Principal Investigator and complementary research groups at the University of
Liverpool (Professors Williams and Sharples) and Duke University (Professor
Lozier). We are aided in our efforts by ongoing intellectual collaboration with
the research groups of Dr. Mick Follows (MIT) and Professor Zoe Finkel (Mt.
Allison University).