* 1158699
* Collaborative Research: Balancing the Portfolio: Efficiency and Productivity of Federal Biomedical R&amp;D Funding
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Padhraic Smyth, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2016
* USD 297,331.00

This cross-disciplinary, cross-institution collaborative research project
combines economic analysis with state-of-the-art methods from statistical
machine learning, to assess the relative efficiency and efficacy of research and
development expenditures across the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH)
portfolio of extramural projects. The novel combination of econometrics, topic
modeling, and document classification permits analysis of massive collections of
grant abstracts and scientific publications, identification of latent research
topics present in NIH-funded research, assessment of possible spillover effects
across research topics, and evaluation of causal linkages between changes in NIH
funding by research topic and scientific advances. Two specific research
outcomes are considered: scientific publications, classified by topic; and
pharmaceutical innovation, measured by drugs entering into clinical development
to treat specific diseases. Planned research also includes refinement of
existing economic theory to produce normative evaluations of the allocation of
public research spending.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research
will inform key policy questions related to federal funding of biomedical
research. First, fiscal austerity requires careful attention to the nation's
research portfolio and investments. This project will describe and evaluate the
productivity of those investments, as a first step towards policy
recommendations for rebalancing the portfolio, to maximize society's expected
return on investment. Second, if NIH funding for basic research spurs increased
pharmaceutical innovation, NIH possesses an important policy tool to promote
pharmaceutical R&amp;D in areas of high therapeutic importance or significant
health disparity.