* 1158560
* Defining New Functions in DNA Replication and DNA Damage Response Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Victoria Lundblad, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2014
* USD 300,000.00

Scientific goals: In the budding yeast S. cerevisiae, genome-wide collections of
mutant strains have been employed extensively to elucidate biological function
on a large scale. The resulting information has been used to place genes in
pathways, to identify points of intersection between different pathways and to
assign gene function to novel proteins. One flaw of these studies stems from the
nature of the mutant reagents in these genome-wide collections, where gene
function has been inactivated by either deletion or conditional depletion. Since
many, if not all, proteins execute more than one function, such mutations are
potentially pleiotropic. A potential solution is to employ separation-of-
function mutations that eliminate a single biological function of a protein.
However, identification of this particular class of alleles in the past has been
a logistic hurdle even for single genes. This research project is based on a
newly developed strategy for large-scale isolation of separation-of-function
alleles which will be applied to a set of inter-related genes involved in DNA
replication and response to DNA damage. Since very few mutations have been
isolated for many of these genes, this research should define new functions in
the DNA replication and DNA damage response pathways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The scientific goals of this research
project are closely intertwined with two broader impacts. First, the resulting
mutations will be made widely available to the yeast community, with a
particular focus on incorporation of these new reagents into genome-wide systems
analysis. Genetic networks constructed from separation-of-function missense
mutations are likely to uncover previously unappreciated interfaces that were
missed in prior systems analysis which employed currently available mutant
strains. Second, this project will rely heavily on entry-level researchers
(undergraduate and high school students) who will be responsible for generating
the panels of separation-of-function mutations. This experience will allow very
junior researchers to play a central role in a significant research project and
also introduce them to the critical function that mentoring plays in the
biomedical research community.