* 1158119
* DNA Methylation as a Mechanism to Increase Adaptive Potential in Invertebrates
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Steven Roberts, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 04/30/2015
* USD 243,090.00

Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Epigenetics refers to processes capable of
inducing changes in genetic activity without altering the underlying DNA
sequence. DNA methylation is one of the most studied mechanisms of epigenetic
regulation and refers to the addition of a methyl group to cytosine bases. DNA
methylation is presumed to be evolutionarily ancient, and, while the mark itself
is prevalent, the patterns of DNA methylation are incredibly diverse. Recent
research characterizing DNA methylation in certain invertebrates is providing
evidence that in some species the localized absence of DNA methylation could
directly contribute to changes in the expression of genetic information. Using
the Pacific oyster as a model system, this research investigates the theory that
the DNA methylation system provides a mechanism for increased ability to adapt
to changing environmental conditions. A combination of high-throughput
sequencing and microarray approaches are used to investigate genome-wide
methylation patterns and assess how these patterns influence gene expression in
an ecologically and economically important marine invertebrate. Multiple
developmental stages will be targeted as well as individuals subjected to acute
environmental stress. The experimental design allows for a comprehensive
characterization of mechanisms associated with DNA methylation, including
testing the theory that genes lacking specific methylation patterns will possess
a greater incidence of alternative ways of expressing the genetic
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact &lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute to the training and education of graduate and undergraduate students
and will be integrated into the formal classroom setting. Research activities
will be made available to the public and other scientists through open access
electronic lab notebooks and as part of hands-on education and outreach
activities. These outreach activities will increase scientific literacy and
appreciation of molecular processes and their relationship to our environment.
Furthermore, this project examines how epigenetics influences the ability of a
species to adapt to environmental change. Thus, this research could considerably
impact predictions of ecosystem-level responses to environmental change and will
contribute in the long-term to the conservation of natural resources.