* 1158572
* CAREER:  Safety as an Emergent Property of the Production System: Production Practices and Team Processes of High Reliability Crews
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/07/2011,08/31/2013
* Panagiotis Mitropoulos, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Konstantinos Triantis
* 08/31/2013
* USD 98,786.00

Construction injuries and fatalities remain a significant social and economic
problem. Current theories and practices of construction accident prevention have
important limitations as they ignore the role of work organization and team
processes. With regards to safety, the challenge for researchers and
practitioners is to develop work systems that are simultaneously highly
productive and highly reliable and can function effectively in the dynamic,
complex and competitive conditions that infrastructure projects face. The
primary objective of this research is to generate such new knowledge that will
enable systematic development of productive and reliable production teams and
processes. This requires new understanding of safety beyond the current
normative models. This research is based on a new conceptualization of safety as
an emergent property of the production system. From this perspective, the work
practices at the crew level (the way the production task is organized) and the
team processes of the work crew shape both the work situations that the workers
face (the task demands), and the likelihood of the workers' successful response
to these situations (capabilities). Consequently, the goals of this research
are: (1) to discover what work practices and team processes at the crew level
support both higher productivity and higher reliability (reduced likelihood of
accidents); and (2) to reveal the mechanisms by which these practices interact
and determine the likelihood of accidents. The research will perform a series of
in-depth field studies of the work practices and team processes of 'High
Reliability Crews' that is, construction crews who have consistently very high
performance in both productivity and safety compared to crews performing similar
work. Research activities: (1) Identify relevant constructs regarding effective
work practices and team processes that influence the likelihood of accidents.
(2) Develop a methodology to analyze the effect of such practices on task and
safety performance. (3) Document and analyze the practices of High Reliability
Crews (HRC) through videotaping, interviews and ethnographic-type data
collection. (4) Compare the HRC practices to the practices of average
performance crews in similar high-risk operations. (5) Develop empirically
grounded theory to explain what work practices and team processes affect task
and safety performance and how. (6) Validate the theory by predicting the
overall performance of additional crews based on observed practices; and (7)
Disseminate the results. Intellectual merit. This research will generate
fundamental knowledge regarding how the production practices and team processes
shape the safety and performance of construction operations. It will develop a
new comprehensive theory of construction accidents grounded on several fields of
knowledge and validated with empirical studies. This theory will integrate the
concepts of production with safety and open the way for new directions towards
error-tolerant systems. The research will also develop a new risk analysis
methodology to evaluate the 'safety margin' of construction operations. The new
theory and methodology will be of value to other researchers of construction
accidents. Finally, the findings will provide a basis for future modeling and
simulation of the performance of construction teams. Broader impacts. Capturing
and formalizing the practices of High Reliability Crews will enable systematic
development of production teams and processes. This will have a significant
impact on how the industry trains field personnel and organizes the work,
leading to increased accident prevention. The educational and outreach
activities will increase the participation of industry and students in the study
of production systems and accident prevention. Dissemination activities include:
(1) Workshops and seminars for practitioners, apprenticeship programs, and
community colleges. The close collaboration with industry associations and
centers will function both as a source of expertise and access to projects, and
as channels for systematic dissemination of the effective practices. (2)
Integration of the research with graduate and undergraduate productivity and
safety courses. Case studies and research-based field assignments will increase
the students' exposure to the actual work practices, and provide them with a
framework for understanding and interpreting practice. Field assignments will
also be used for data collection during validation. (3) Development of
simulation games as learning modules for ASU's TEAMS and WISE-Up programs. These
activities will increase awareness of the issues of teamwork and workplace
safety, and will attract underrepresented students to engineering disciplines as
they see how engineering and production integrate with teamwork and safety.