* 1158172
* Investing in science, research and technology: where is the biggest bang for the buck?
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Sandy Dall'erba, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2015
* USD 328,652.00

As regional economies increasingly compete at the national and international
levels to develop their innovative edge, helping regions identify and support
the factors at the origin of innovation has become one of the most important
tasks of regional economic developers. This project is based upon the knowledge
production function literature which relies on a statistical approach to
estimate the impact of investments in R&amp;D (Research and Development) on the
production of innovation. Because this project focuses on the production of
innovation at the regional level, it requires us explicitly to account for the
role of knowledge externalities between regions, a phenomenon brought to the
fore by the new literature in economic geography. As of today, however, only a
handful of studies use the appropriate statistical techniques to model and
measure interregional knowledge externalities; when they do, they make global
(not local) measurements which mask significant variations in the
characteristics of innovation across regions. As such, this work improves upon
the traditional approach by providing measurements of knowledge spillovers at
the local level, i.e. for every single region. This work also investigates the
dynamics of regional knowledge creation for four "high-technology" sectors to
better substantiate differences in knowledge externalities across sectors. In
addition, the statistical analysis is performed on three different spatial
scales (US counties, Metropolitan Statistical Areas and States), making this
work more complete and informative to local governments than traditional
approaches. Another contribution is a method of measuring the amount of income
and jobs created by R&amp;D investments, i.e. their social returns. This
contribution is accounted for through the modeling of interregional
externalities by means of two complementary techniques called spatial
econometrics and multi-regional input-output. Last but not least, the dataset
used in this project significantly improves upon previous studies. Not only do
the investigators rely on the most recent private R&amp;D investment data from
the US Patent and Trademark Office, but they also use the Consolidated Federal
Funds Report of the Census Bureau to estimate, for the first time, the role of
federally funded R&amp;D investments on knowledge creation at the regional
level. Overall, this project aims at showing where to maximize R&amp;D
investments and help regional governments tailor appropriate policies to promote
knowledge creation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
are threefold: first, the thorough statistical approach used in this project
will help local policymakers identify the key economic characteristics they
should rely on to stimulate knowledge creation in their locality. Second, a
clear estimation of the relative returns on public investments is essential to
support evidence-based fiscal policy. The private and social returns on R&amp;D
investments evaluated in this work can thus be directly compared with the
returns from other public investments such as education, transportation and
defense, for instance. Finally, in addition to the usual scholarly publications
and in-class presentations, the results of this project will be accessible
online and for free in the frame of a dynamic WebGIS (Geographic Information
System). Because it is able to give a large audience access to all the results,
this dissemination method promotes transparency, objectivity and accountability
in the research at hand.