* 1158548
* Protein Tuning of Metal Centers and Ligand Pathways to Achieve Specific Enzymatic Functions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Olof Einarsdottir, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 399,000.00

The Chemistry of Life Sciences Program funds Professor Olof Einarsdottirof the
University of California-Santa Cruz for research entitled "Protein Tuning of
Metal Centers and Ligand Pathways to Achieve Specific Enzymatic Functions." The
goal of this research is to understand how metal centers that bind O2, NO, and
CO are tuned by the protein environment within cells in order to perform
specific catalytic functions. Heme-copper oxidases from three oxidase families,
A, B and C will be investigated. The approach involves novel photolabile O2 and
NO carriers, single and double-laser techniques and classical/quantum mechanical
calculations to accomplish two goals. The first goal is to determine the
structural and dynamic features of the protein environment that give rise to
mechanistic differences in the O2 and NO reduction in the heme-copper oxidases.
The functional roles of specific residues, as well as the constriction points
and docking sites that control ligand accessibility to and from the active site,
will be established. A second goal is to determine how a diatomic ligand that is
bound to the binuclear center or in a binding pocket of the Thermus thermophilus
ba3, E. coli bo3, aa3, and cbb3 oxidases affects the binding of a second ligand.
The proposed experiments will establish how the protein environment can tune
metal-based prosthetic group(s) and ligand pathways to modulate catalytic
functions of the metal centers in the heme-copper oxidases for different
physiological environments. The proposed research will also provide excellent
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.

Metal atoms like iron and copper form complexes with certain proteins in cells
and play essential roles in important functions such as respiration, in which
oxygen is used to generate energy, and photosynthesis. To carry out these
functions, the chemical properties of the metals are altered by the surrounding
protein environment. This research will advance knowledge of how the protein
environment modulates access of small ligands, such as oxygen (O2), to the metal
centers in different heme-copper oxidases so that these enzymes can carry out
the essential function of generating energy in different physiological
environments. Special chemicals are used that can bind O2 and other gases, such
as nitric oxide (NO), then instantly release them with a flash of laser light.
These reactions can be monitored on time scales as fast as ten-billionths of a
second. Calculations are used to simulate the movement of O2 and NO to the metal
centers. The combination of experiments and simulations offers a unique approach
to evaluate proposed mechanisms for ligand binding to metal centers, as well as
to provide excellent research opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
students. This project is receiving co-funding from the Biomolecular Dynamics,
Structure and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.