* 1158516
* Silent Chromatin Mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* David Gross, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 06/30/2013
* USD 60,101.00

Intellectual Merit. In eukaryotic cells, the genome is organized into a
DNA/protein complex called chromatin. Chromatin can exist in two forms, termed
"euchromatin" and "heterochromatin." What distinguishes them is the identity of
the proteins that are associated with each type. Euchromatin typically contains
actively expressing genes (e.g., those that are ON), while heterochromatin
typically contains inactive genes (i.e., those that are OFF, silent). This
project will explore the molecular basis for how genes that are located in
heterochromatin, and are therefore normally silent, get turned ON (e.g., become
"transcriptionally activated") in response to stresses such as high temperature
or exposure to toxic chemicals. The project will use the power of yeast genetics
combined with the modern techniques of molecular biology and biochemistry.
Building on previous results that suggested genes in heterochromatin are
activated in a fundamentally different way than genes in euchromatin, this
project will provide important mechanistic insights into this striking
dichotomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. This project will provide
training for a postdoctoral research scientist. From the scientific perspective,
insights obtained about how heterochromatic genes are activated in yeast could
have wide-ranging impacts on regulation in other eukaryotic organisms.