* 1158181
* Metabolic networks of auxin biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Jose Alonso, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry Halverson
* 04/30/2016
* USD 724,905.00

Auxin is an essential plant hormone that regulates nearly every aspect of plant
life cycle, from embryo development to defense against pathogens. Despite the
key importance of this hormone for plant fitness, very little is known about the
multiple auxin biosynthetic pathways proposed to co-exist in plants. The study
of this hormone's biosynthesis is further complicated by the presence of
multiple metabolic pathways that feed on the same basic metabolic precursors
employed in the production of auxins. These critical knowledge deficiencies in
such an important biological process prompted the current project that focuses
on addressing two main aspects of auxin biology: 1) What are the genes that
compose the different auxin biosynthetic routes, and 2) how are the auxin
biosynthetic pathways coordinated within the large metabolic network in which
they are embedded? Taking advantage of the latest genetic and metabolic tools,
the biosynthetic routes that plants use to produce this hormone will be defined.
The metabolic network that integrates the different auxin biosynthetic pathways
will be examined at cellular resolution and the information obtained will be
compiled to generate three-dimensional predictive models.

Broader impacts. The anticipated findings of this proposal will reshape the
current understanding of auxin biosynthesis in plants. The output of this
project will include the generation of essential tools that can be used by the
scientific community to examine the role of auxin biosynthesis in a wide array
of plant processes. Furthermore, the three-dimensional analysis of the auxin
metabolic network represents a proof of principle for new strategies to study
networks and systems at cellular resolution.

The outreach component of this project includes: 1) a web-based bilingual
(English and Spanish) set of 14 experimental modules designed specifically for
young children (ages 5 to 12) that have English or Spanish as their home
language; 2) experimental demonstrations at local elementary schools, and 3)
monthly hands-on plant experiments at the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences. The overall objective of all these activities is to make science and
the scientific methods more accessible and interesting to young people.