* 1158755
* The Evolving Research Enterprise
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2018
* Janet Bercovitz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2018
* USD 432,258.00

Private foundation funding of academic research has grown substantially over the
past 10 years. Increasingly, foundations employ a new strategic funding process
modeled after venture capital investing, in which project outcomes are
identified by the sponsor with a specific problem to be solved, a team is
selected based their potential contribution and a community of common inquiry is
created and funded over a long period of time. This new funding model originated
with disease-oriented foundations, such as Michael J. Fox and Faster Cures and
is diffusing to other types of foundations and agencies within the federal
government, suggesting that this new model may offer advantages to scientific
inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, despite the growing importance of
foundations and strategic funding models, little is known either about whether
foundations complement or substitute for other sources of founding or whether
strategic funding practices can enhance the overall functioning of the American
research enterprise. This study considers the role of private foundation funding
in the larger university research enterprise as well as the impact -- both in
terms of research practices and research outcomes -- of this new strategic
funding model. This project describes how the university research enterprise is
evolving in response to the demands of new funding sources coupled with
increased institutional fiscal pressures and calls for greater problem solving
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This project uses detailed
records of research proposals, funded projects, and intellectual property (IP)
agreements from a set of diverse research universities to make three
intellectual contributions. First, it examines the extent to which private
foundation sponsorship provides a new model of research funding that affects the
conduct of research. Second, it compares the contractual agreements of
foundations employing strategic practices to managing funded projects to the
contractual research agreements of other sponsors to assess the extent to which
a new open model of innovation is being implemented. Finally, it evaluates the
extent to which foundations, in general, and venture philanthropy in particular,
complement or substitute other types of funding sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The current omission of foundation and
nonprofit funding presents a confounding effect that would introduce downward
bias in the estimation of the impact of public funding. This study expands the
discussion of the funding of academic research to recognize the role of
foundations and further to consider differences in funding strategies and the
use of contractual terms in sponsored research agreements. Recognition of this
richness provides evidence useful for measuring the impacts of research funding
and the ongoing debate about the efficacy of different research funding
strategies.