* 1158271
* Role of the nascent TnaC Peptide in the Inhibition of the Ribosome Function by tryptophan
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Luis Cruz-Vera, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2015
* USD 403,965.00

Intellectual Merit: Ribosomes are the molecular machines that carry out
template-directed protein synthesis in all cells. They translate the sequence of
the mRNA template into the corresponding protein sequence, in a process that is
subject to multiple levels of regulation, including the ability to respond to
the concentrations of certain cellular metabolites. An important but still
poorly understood regulatory mechanism involves the interaction of the new
protein (the 'nascent peptide') with specific cellular metabolites and with the
ribosome itself, while the new protein is still near the site of synthesis
inside the ribosome. The goal of this project is to elucidate how nascent
peptides transform the ribosome into a metabolite-responsive machine to control
protein synthesis, using as a model the regulation of the expression of the
tnaCAB cluster of genes (operon) by the amino acid L-tryptophan. Previous
studies suggest that when the nascent TnaC peptide of the tnaCAB operon is
present in the ribosome, L-tryptophan can also bind, causing translation of the
TnaC protein to stop, while increasing the expression of the downstream tnaA and
tnaB genes, which encode an enzyme in the tryptophan degradation pathway and a
L-tryptophan transporter, respectively. The planned work aims to identify the
mechanism(s) by which the nascent TnaC peptide promotes L-tryptophan binding to
the ribosome and arrest of translation of TnaC protein. The formation of the
L-tryptophan binding site will be addressed by designing a method to covalently
crosslink L-tryptophan with ribosome components in the presence of nascent TnaC
peptides. To complement the information obtained by cross-linking, structural
probing of ribosomal RNA will be carried out to localize changes induced by
L-tryptophan binding. Determination of the mechanism(s) of inhibition by
L-tryptophan will be studied by determining the dependence of the binding
affinities of antibiotics and translation factors to TnaC-ribosome complexes as
a function of L-tryptophan concentration. Also, the function of the ribosomes
containing the nascent TnaC peptide and L-tryptophan will be tested using
antibiotics, translational factors and organic solvents that are known to
activate the ribosome. These assays will help discriminate between inhibition of
the binding of these molecules to the ribosome and inhibition of the actual
chemical reactions performed in the ribosome active site. The planned
experiments will reveal which components of the ribosome are involved in
detecting cellular metabolites and which functions of the ribosome are regulated
by the nascent peptides to control the quality of protein synthesis and gene
expression. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: Each year, this project will
provide research training opportunities for two undergraduates majoring in
genetics and two advanced graduate students training in biochemistry. In
addition, a summer research experience will be offered annually to undergraduate
students from Oakwood and Alabama A&amp;M Universities, two schools in the
northern Alabama region that predominantly serve under-represented minority
populations. The PI and participating graduate students will contribute to
already established workshops in genetics and biochemistry for students from
Columbia High School, a minority-serving high school in the UA-Huntsville`s
neighborhood. Ten high-school students interested in biology careers will be
selected to serve as student instructors and will receive training in relevant
concepts and experimental techniques from the PI and his graduate students.
These students will serve as peer instructors to help the PI conduct workshops
to reach a larger group of 40+ high-school students, and in the process deepen
their own learning. Also, participating graduate students will help the PI
improve biochemistry laboratory courses offered at the undergraduate and
graduate levels at UA-Huntsville, by video recording laboratory procedures and
lectures, which will be made available through the UA-Huntsville web-page for
use by students, as well as by Columbia High School teachers. The active
engagement of the PI, as a mentor and role model to the growing population of
Hispanic-American students in the Huntsville area, will contribute
signifiicantly to science education in North Alabama.