* 1158602
* Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate (BASC) Activities in Support of NSF's Missions
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Chris Elfring, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 03/31/2015
* USD 808,983.00

This award provides core support to the Board of Atmospheric Sciences and
Climate (BASC) to aid the science community and advise federal agencies on
atmospheric sciences and climate research issues. The BASC strives to advance
understanding of atmospheric science, meteorology, and climate; foster
application of this knowledge to benefit the public; help ensure that U.S.
research programs are responsive to scientific opportunities and the needs of
the Nation; and help make scientific information more useful in government
planning and decision-making. Thus this activity has substantial broader
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BASC is part of the National Academies,
chartered by Congress in 1863 to provide independent science advice to
government. The BASC uses volunteer experts to assist in the design of research
studies and workshops and to review and assess findings and assess priorities.
The BASC also facilitates US involvement in international research programs such
as World Climate Research Program, Climate Variability and Predictability
Program. For 2012-2015, it will continue to plan activities where objective,
independent discussion and analysis are needed. Areas include severe weather,
scientific understanding of climate change, observational systems, climate
modeling and additional topics as requested. The BASC will seek opportunities to
use its role as a neutral, independent body to encourage open discussion of
issues.