* 1158445
* Control of Pre-mRNA Metabolism in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Lillie Searles, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 780,736.00

Intellectual Merit: A complex network of regulatory proteins functions in
eukaryotic cells to ensure that normal RNAs accumulate at the appropriate levels
and that aberrant or potentially harmful RNAs are not expressed. The deleterious
effects of transposable DNA elements are kept in check through surveillance
pathways that function at various steps in RNA metabolism to block expression of
transposon-encoded RNAs. Suppressor of sable protein [Su(s)] of Drosophila
melanogaster is a component of a nuclear regulatory process that inhibits the
accumulation of transposon-containing RNAs, such as those produced by alpha-beta
retrotransposons located in the vicinity of heat-shock induced Hsp70 genes. The
goal of this project is to learn more about this regulation and the specific
role that Su(s) plays in inhibiting alpha-beta and other RNAs. Prior research
indicates that Su(s) functions co-transcriptionally and interacts with
Wdr82/Swd2, a multifunctional protein that has been shown by other labs to
reside in at least two distinct complexes. One Wdr82/Swd2-containing complex
regulates a particular chromatin modification (H3K4 methylation) in yeast and
mammals. The other complex regulates 3' end processing and transcription
termination at small nucleolar RNA genes in yeast. The main objective of the
current research is to determine whether the activity of Su(s)/Wdr82 is related
to one of the known Wdr82 functions or a different process. Thus, two
hypotheses, which are not mutually exclusive, will be tested. The first
hypothesis is that Su(s) and Wdr82 are recruited to the heat shock locus during
heat stress and induce a chromatin modification that inhibits alpha-beta RNA
accumulation. The second hypothesis is that Su(s), which is known to be an RNA-
binding protein, binds directly to regulatory sequences in alpha-beta RNA and
induces transcriptional stalling/termination or nascent RNA cleavage. Other
experiments will map the Wdr82-interaction domain within Su(s). A multifaceted
approach will be employed in this research, including chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis, polytene chromosome immunofluorescence analysis,
reporter gene expression studies, in vitro RNA cleavage assays, and protein-
protein interaction analysis. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
results obtained from this research will advance the understanding of regulatory
mechanisms that minimize the deleterious and mutagenic effects of transposons in
multicellular organisms. In addition, this research is making a significant
contribution to the development of human resources in science, as this ongoing
project has supported and continues to support the training of numerous graduate
and undergraduate students. Throughout her career the PI has been active in
efforts at multiple levels--within her lab, the university, and beyond--to
promote the participation and success of underrepresented groups in scientific
research and academia. The PI also plays a leadership role in programs designed
to enhance the academic success of undergraduate science majors and their
participation in undergraduate research.