* 1158601
* Integration of Experiments and  Simulations for Molecular-Level Understanding of Membrane Fouling Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 08/08/2011,08/31/2014
* Baoxia Mi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 08/31/2014
* USD 335,357.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Biaoxia Mi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Number: CBET-1034158&lt;br/&gt;Institution: George Washington
University&lt;br/&gt;Title: Integration of Experiments and Simulations for
Molecular-Level Understanding of Membrane Fouling
Mechanisms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate molecular simulation
and multiscale experimental characterization to achieve a molecular-level
understanding of the fouling of reverse osmosis and nanofiltration (RO/NF)
membranes. RO/NF membranes are increasingly being used for water separation and
desalination. However, the performance of RO/NF membranes is severely hampered
by the long-standing problem of colloidal/organic fouling. Development of
efficient fouling-mitigation strategies and highly foulingresistant membranes
relies on the fundamental understanding of membrane-foulant interactions.
However, current experimental studies attempting to understand the effects of
membrane properties on fouling often draw inconsistent conclusions. In addition,
current efforts to develop antifouling materials are mostly based on
experimental trial-and-error, which is tedious, expensive, and time-consuming.
Therefore, we urgently need a more efficient approach to designing new
antifouling materials. Towards this goal, they will: (1) develop a novel hybrid
molecular simulation approach that is specifically fit for simulating the long-
time binding events between foulants and membrane surfaces; (2) conduct
multiscale experimental characterization, including nanoscale interaction force
measurement by atomic force microscopy, microscopic direct-observation of
foulant-deposition on membrane surfaces, and macroscopic characterization of
long-term membrane fouling behavior; and (3) integrate experimental measurements
and molecular simulations to achieve a molecular-level understanding of membrane
fouling, thus greatly facilitating the design of novel antifouling
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the proposed study is that it
represents the first-ever attempt to integrate experimental and molecular
simulation efforts to systematically unveil the molecular-level membrane-foulant
interactions, which cannot be fully understood by either experimental or
simulation approaches alone. This project will offer keen insight into many
membrane-foulant interactions beyond the DLVO theory, such as
hydrophobic/hydrophilic interactions, morphological/chemical heterogeneity
dependent interactions, functional-group-controlled specific interactions, and
flexible-chain induced interactions. A major outcome of this research will be a
hybrid simulation toolbox that is specifically designed for membrane fouling
studies. This project will be conducted through an interdisciplinary
collaboration between two faculty members with a joint expertise in experimental
membrane characterization and molecular simulations. Thus, it is highly
promising that the proposed project will unveil the underlying mechanisms of
fouling phenomena in RO/NF membrane processes and facilitate systematic design
of antifouling membrane materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular-level
understanding of the membrane fouling behavior will help develop the next-
generation highly fouling-resistant membranes for water separation. The research
also has significant impacts on energy efficiency and environmental friendliness
aspects of membrane-based water purification, leading to huge economic and
societal benefits. The combined experimental-simulation approach will exemplify
a paradigm of fundamental study on various membrane processes, including
pressure-driven processes (such as ultrafiltration and microfiltration) and
osmotically driven processes (such as forward osmosis and pressure-retarded
osmosis), as well as in other broader areas (e.g., wastewater reuse, food
processing, bioenergy production). Two PhD graduate students will be trained and
several undergraduate students will be actively involved in the proposed
project. Materials and outcomes of the proposed research will be integrated into
both undergraduate and graduate courses. The proposed research activities will
also impact underrepresented students at neighboring institutions (including two
historically black universities) within an existing university consortium. The
close collaborations between the PI and co-PI will stimulate critical thinking
and creative ideas. Research findings will be disseminated through journal
publications, conference presentations, research websites, and seminars, as well
as to the general public during the on-campus Engineering Open House. The PI has
initiated an educational outreach program at a local girls-only high school and
will offer lectures on the environmental technologies for sustainable water
purification and reclamation.