* 1158085
* X-ray Crystal Structure and Transport Mechanism of a Na+/galactoside Symporter
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Lan Guan, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2015
* USD 680,740.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT The membranes of living cells develop electrochemical energy
that provides a critical mechanism for numerous cell functions. Proteins
inserted in the membrane act like batteries and use the energy to move molecules
in or out of the cell, making the chemical composition appropriate for normal
cell function. The membrane protein called melibiose permease (MelB), present in
certain bacteria, couples the transport of a sodium ion with a sugar (melibiose)
molecule into the cell. In fact, it uses the favorable energy for sodium entry
to build a high sugar concentration in the cell. A MelB human homologue is
widely expressed in many tissues and has been found to be physiologically
important. There are many proteins that work similarly, yet the precise
mechanisms are not understood. The three-dimensional structure of MelB (at the
atomic level) will constitute a breakthrough essential for the understanding of
the molecular mechanism of transport. This project aims to obtain the high-
resolution crystal structure of MelB by X-ray crystallography and to identify
the specific amino acids in the protein responsible for selecting melibiose and
sodium ion. This will be done by generating mutant proteins and testing their
function with quantitative biochemical and biophysical methods. The results from
this research will add crucial information to the understanding of how a
membrane protein converts ionic energy to move sugar or other nutrients into a
cell.

BROADER IMPACTS This project will provide a platform to foster the integration
of cutting-edge research and higher education by recruiting and motivating
undergraduate students to pursue careers in basic science and by helping them
develop technical skills and passion towards experimental science. Minorities
constitute 20% of TTU undergraduate students. A particular effort will be made
to recruit and provide research opportunities to these students. Graduate
education and postdoctoral training are critical for science of tomorrow. This
research will also offer rich training and educational opportunities to graduate
students, to gain solid knowledge and experiential skills necessary for success
in research, and for postdoctoral fellows to further their education and
experimental armamentarium to become productive independent investigators. The
outcome of the research will be disseminated timely and broadly through high-
impact scientific papers, book chapters, course materials, invited lectures, and
presentations at scientific meetings or interdisciplinary conferences to reach
broad audiences. The expected high-resolution structure will be deposited in the
open-access Protein Data Bank for broader application.

This project is jointly supported by the Cellular Processes Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Chemistry of Life
Processes program in the Chemistry Division.