* 1158914
* IRFP: In Vivo Dissection Of Long-Range Cortical Circuits
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Jerry Chen, Chen                    Jerry          L
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2014
* USD 139,032.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jerry
Chen to work with Dr. Fritjof Helmchen at the University of Zurich, Brain
Research Institute in Zurich, Switzerland.

A key feature underlying the computational power of the mammalian brain is the
processing of neuronal activity occurring simultaneously on multiple levels:
from the integration of thousands of synaptic inputs in an individual neuron, to
the computations occurring within local circuits, to the feedforward and
feedback transmission of disparate streams of information across distant
cortical regions. Long-range communication between cortical brain areas is
essential for a variety of higher cognitive functions. However, the exact
information encoded in these long-range circuits and its relationship to the
computation occurring in local neuronal circuits is largely unknown.

This project determines how neuronal activity is transmitted and coordinated
across distant cortical regions and how this activity influences the processing
of information in local circuits. The mouse tactile whisker sensorimotor system
is used as a reduced and tractable model to study these cortico-cortical
interactions during behavior. Using in vivo imaging technology in combination
with molecular and genetic tools, the activity of optically identified long-
range range projection neurons are measured and manipulated as mice engage in a
trained sensorimotor task. Utilitzing the expertise of the host institute, a
novel in vivo imaging system is also being developed that will enable the
simultaneous measurement of neuronal activity across cortical areas with single
cell resolution. This enabling technology allows neuroscientists to study global
brain activity in a manner previously unachievable.

The dissection of long-range cortical networks with cellular resolution
contributes to a comprehensive understanding of the central nervous system
across multiple levels and bridges knowledge gaps between brain region function
and cellular physiology. Studying the function of these networks also aids in
the understanding of pathologies underlying various cognitive disorders such as
Autism Spectrum Disorder, Schizophrenia, and Alzheimer?s Disease where
disruptions in anatomical and functional cortico-cortical connectivity are
widely recognized hallmarks. Further, this work serves to strengthen and expand
already existing, internationally-funded projects in the lab, consisting of
collaborations with researchers throughout Europe: the BrainScaleS Project (EU
FET-Proactive FP7), the NeuroChoice Project (a Swiss Systems Biology
Initiative), and Barrel Cortex Function Project (a joint SNF-DFG grant).