* 1158781
* I-Corps:  Portable sensors using the widely available personal glucose monitor
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,06/30/2012
* Yi Lu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 06/30/2012
* USD 50,000.00

The team proposes to leverage the widely-available and inexpensive personal
glucose meter (PGM) and enable it for the detection of non-glucose targets with
a particular focus on the glycated hemoglobin HbA1c in diabetic patients. While
numerous sensors have been proposed and reported in the literature, few sensors
have been commercialized for on-site and real-time quantitative detection of a
wide-range of targets at home and in the field. Perhaps the most successful of
such sensors is the PGM as a result of &gt; 30 years of scientific research and
engineering effort. However, PGMs can detect only a single target--glucose.
Taking advantage of a recent breakthrough in the PI's group in demonstrating the
use of functional DNA (DNAzymes and aptamers) conjugated to an enzyme invertase,
the team can now enable any PGM to detect a wide range of targets from
recreational drugs like cocaine to disease markers like interferon-gamma of
tuberculosis to toxic metal ions like uranium. The team proposes to translate
this NSF-supported fundamental research into marketable products by focusing on
developing a new at-home test for diabetic patients while taking advantage of an
existing platform and established distribution
channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While glycated hemoglobin HbA1c is a clinically
proven marker for diabetic patients, testing for it is mostly administered in
central labs. The combination of a PGM with functional DNA is a simple and novel
application that can revolutionize the way people perform at-home and in-field
tests, making medical diagnostics significantly easier and cheaper. If the team
is successful with this first application, the same technology can be expanded
into dozens of new assays for other targets such as infectious diseases and
human cancer and heavy metal ions and pathogens in water and food, all of which
leverage the same commonly available PGMs. In making the technology easily
accessible to the public through the widely available PGM, this project will
make it possible to realize the potential of personal medicine.