* 1158886
* Collaborative Research: Coring the Line Islands Ridge for Paleoceanographic Research
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2012,01/31/2014
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 01/31/2014
* USD 74,468.00

Past changes in the behavior of two key features of the global climate, the
Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and the El-Nino Southern Oscillation
(ENSO), are not clearly understood at present. Continuous records from marine
sediments are needed to inform paleoreconstructions of these and other climatic
and oceanographic patterns during the Holocene. This project will attempt to
acquire such records from the Line Islands Ridge in the Central Tropical
Pacific, a key and sensitive location with little in terms of existing samples
or data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Line Islands Ridge is an ideal site to
capture paleooceanographic and paleoclimatic changes recorded in sediment for a
number of reasons. First, the ITCZ and ENSO are not as susceptible to seasonal
or spatial variation in this region as they are elsewhere. In addition, because
the Line Islands Ridge is a bathymetric high, the calcium carbonate shells that
contain the paleoenvironmental proxy indicators are less likely to be affected
by dissolution than in nearby deep ocean settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology,
Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, the Graduate School of
Oceanography at the University of Rhode Island, Texas A&amp;M University, Boston
University, and the University of California at Santa Cruz will collaborate to
conduct a reconnaissance coring survey of the Line Islands Ridge. During a
research cruise aboard the R/V Langseth, the PIs will collect bathymetric and
geophysical data to constrain optimal coring locations; once optimal locations
are established, they will collect a suite of physical samples (an initial
gravity core, a CTD/Niskin rosette cast, a piston core, and a multi-core) at
each site. Analyses of the cores will include determination of sediment
composition using scanning XRF, as well as development of stratigraphic and age
models using oxygen isotopes from planktonic foraminifera.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cores and associated data from this reconnaissance effort
will be made available to the broader community in order to facilitate future
research on paleoclimatic and -oceanographic change over scales of tens to
hundreds of thousands of years. Experts in the field foresee using these
datasets to better understand past changes in ITCZ and ENSO behavior, sea
surface temperature, ocean chemistry, productivity, nutrient and sediment
cycling, and eolian dust inputs in the region. Furthermore, these datasets will
provide additional opportunities to calibrate paleoclimate models, and may be
used to support a geographically overlapping US State Department initiative (Law
of the Sea?Extended Continental Shelf program). Additional broader impacts
include enhancing scientific infrastructure and disseminating information by
adding physical data (cores) to the LDEO sample repository, cataloguing samples
through SESAR (System for Earth Sample Registration), and contributing the
associated datasets to widely accessible databases (SedDB, NCDC). This project
will also involve training for several graduate students. Finally, the multi-
faceted approach of this project will provide NSF with an opportunity to
evaluate the multi-purpose functionality of the R/V Langseth.