* 1158573
* Characterizing and Engineering Cellular Networks using Stochastic Measurements
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Herbert Sauro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 10/31/2016
* USD 552,371.00

Intellectual Merit: Synthetic biology is a new engineering discipline that aims
to design and construct biological organisms that exhibit new and useful
biological properties. In any engineering discipline, the concept of modularity
is the key to successful and cost-effective design. Synthetic biology is no
different in this regard. Modularity enables engineers to construct, in a
predicable fashion, larger systems from smaller components. If the modules are
well characterized, it is possible to predict the behavior of the resultant
system from the individual components. Unlike other engineered systems such as
electrical circuits or mechanical devices, biological networks found in cells
are inherently noisy because there is random motion at the molecular level. This
project is motivated by results from a previous NSF project where it was found
that noise in cellular networks can be exploited to obtain relevant information
about their modular structure. This project will test this hypothesis
experimentally. In particular the degree of modularity will be measured, and
methods for improving modularity will be investigated in synthetic genetic
systems such as E.coli. Finally, the project will characterize the circuit
components themselves. The ultimate aim of this research is to help engineers
reliably and cost-effectively design and construct large-scale synthetic genetic
systems. This study will provide new theoretical insights into network biology
and important multi-disciplinary educational and training opportunities for
students at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This project
includes ongoing academic curricula development for undergraduate and graduate
students, including courses on synthetic biology and new courses on systems and
control. Furthermore, a number of undergraduates, interns, and European exchange
students will be assisted as a result of this proposal during the summer and
winter months. As part of the educational contribution, a new low cost
undergraduate text book "Systems and Control for Bioengineers" will be written
with the aid of this proposal. The project will also involve a close interplay
between previous projects which helped develop design software for synthetic
biology (TinkerCell) already widely used in the synthetic biology community and
undergraduate teaching. The proposed work will lead and inform the Synthetic
Biology Open Language (SBOL) community. In the broader societal context, newly
designed organisms will be able to address a number of critically important
challenges to our nation, for example, the development of novel and efficient
ways for biofuel production. Furthermore, synthetic biology will help lay the
basic scientific foundation for an entirely new range of future biotechnology
industries.