* 1158110
* Collaborative Research: Role of SCY2, a New Envelope Localized Translocase, in Plastid Biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Kenneth Cline, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2015
* USD 361,002.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT Most of the energy on earth comes ultimately from the sun,
and plant chloroplasts are critical cellular organelles because they allow
plants to capture solar energy and convert this energy to sugars through the
process of photosynthesis. Most of the proteins that perform these important
tasks in chloroplasts are synthesized in the cytosol of the plant cell, are
taken up into the chloroplast stromal compartment, and then have to be
specifically targeted to one of five additional chloroplast compartments by
translocases, enzymes that transport proteins across or into membrane bilayers.
A central unanswered question regarding this intricate protein localization
network is: What system(s) are responsible for targeting and integration of the
translocase proteins? A Sec translocase was recently discovered that is
localized to the inner envelope of the chloroplast. Mutations that disrupt this
translocase result in death, suggesting a critically important role in
chloroplast function. Preliminary results suggest that this system, designated
Sec2, is the master translocase, responsible for the placement of all other
translocase proteins into their correct chloroplast compartment. Sec2 will be
further characterized through this project. Specific aims include identification
of all the components of the system, characterization of the proteins targeted
and translocated/integrated by Sec2, and the establishment of an assay system to
investigate the requirements for energy, accessory factors, and targeting
information for this translocase system. Successful completion of the research
will result in increased insight into the pivotal role that this novel
translocase may play in the biogenesis of the chloroplast.

BROADER IMPACTS This project will provide cross-training opportunities in
genetics and biochemistry for young scientists at the undergraduate, graduate,
and postgraduate level. Project personnel will also learn valuable teaching and
mentoring skills by supervising undergraduate students in hands-on research
experiences. The plant lines that will be generated in this project will be
valuable research tools and will be distributed to other laboratories interested
in chloroplasts. Finally, because many vital metabolic and biosynthetic
functions, including photosynthesis and synthesis of fatty acids, essential
amino acids and vitamins, are centered in chloroplasts, the work may have
practical applications as people seek to modify, optimize, or otherwise control
these capacities.