* 1158780
* RAPID: Characterizing floodplain deposition from Hurricane Irene along the Lower Connecticut River
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Jonathan Woodruff, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 10/31/2013
* USD 21,493.00

This project will document sedimentation from Hurricane Irene in floodplain
environments along the Lower Connecticut River to gain insight into the
significance of these rare events in building the landscape of a low-gradient
river system. The work will be done by collecting transects of cores at six
previously sampled sites. Beryllium-7 will be used to identify recent
sedimentation in these cores. In addition, the project will evaluate the
composition and contaminant levels in the Irene deposits relative to deeper
sediments already obtained at each of the six locations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An accurate understanding of the evolution of fluvial
landscapes involves knowing the role of extreme flooding in the distribution
and/or remobilization of sediment along a river's floodplain. Such information
is often challenging to acquire due to the rarity of such events. The high
precipitation associated with Hurricane Irene offers one such rare example for
eastern US coastal rivers (indeed, extreme flooding by Irene presents an
opportunity to revisit unanswered questions on the contribution of 1955
hurricane-related sedimentation to floodplain evolution along the Lower
Connecticut River). From a land use perspective, most east coast rivers have a
legacy of contaminants now stored in floodplain sediments. Sampling sediment
deposited after Irene?s flooding will provide an opportunity to assess the role
extreme events play in the storage and/or remobilization of this material.