* 1158803
* Tracing Influence &amp; Predicting Impact in Science
* SBE,SMA
* 02/01/2013,01/31/2017
* James Evans, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 01/31/2017
* USD 506,920.00

This project develops powerful new measures and models that assess and predict
the impact of academic research on science, technology, and the public. The
evaluation of research has historically relied on quantity as a proxy for
quality: progress is inferred from the amount of research produced and attention
garnered, the number of articles is tallied, and academic citations and media
mentions are summed. These quantities are cheaply measured, but cannot capture
how fundamental a contribution is or identify the nature of its impact. Such
nuanced evaluation of research quality demands that new claims be considered in
the context of previous work. Building on progress in the measurement of
scientific and technological novelty, as well as phylogenetic models of
evolution, advances in computational language understanding, and the increasing
electronic availability of historical and contemporary scientific texts, this
project creates computational tools to identify scientific claims, embed them in
their historical, conceptual, and geographical context, and thereby provide a
multidimensional evaluation of the nature and scope of their impact. Claims
extracted from text are complemented by article citations and unpublished expert
opinions about paths of scientific influence, elicited through newly developed
interactive online games. Taken together, these data provide the input for
probabilistic models that exploit patterns in the structure of scientific
language, the graph of citations, and expert opinion to assess the evolutionary
and ecological importance of particular concepts and claims, articles and
journals, scientists and institutions within the unfolding network of scientific
and technical innovation. These rich models provide the nuanced assessment of
research quality and impact needed by scientists and policy makers at all
levels, from individual scientists choosing a new research focus to departments
making tenure decisions or federal agencies setting funding priorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods and models developed by this project are
relevant to scientists and policy makers in many areas. The initial focus,
however, is on the broad field of chemistry and its diverse, overlapping
subfields, from analytical, physical and organic chemistry to environmental and
agricultural chemistry, pharmaceuticals and toxicology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables
the creation of high resolution, dynamic maps of scientific influence in several
broadly related fields. In education, such maps can be made interactive and
serve as a teaching tool to help students understand the contributions and
forces that have shaped their field of science. These maps also facilitate the
social analysis of scientific production with a new level of precision, while
orienting researchers and policy makers to the forces that shape scientific
importance and technological promise. Most importantly, these influence maps
provide the foundation for a collection of sharp measures that can identify
different types of importance and the benefits and risks associated with each so
that they can be assessed and balanced by researchers and policy-makers. By
clarifying what is published and where, and by tracing the conceptual careers of
scientists and inventors, this research offers insight into the factors that
guide and deflect scientific attention and how these factors can be harnessed to
achieve the greatest impact from public investments in science and technology.