* 1158826
* IRFP: Total Synthesis and Biological Evaluation of Dictyoxetane
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jennifer Ciesielski, Ciesielski              Jennifer
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 137,300.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Jennifer
Ciesielski to work with Prof. Dr. Erick M. Carreira at the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology (ETH), in Zurich, Switzerland.

Until recently, oxetanes have been an underrepresented class of compounds. The
laborious synthetic effort required to assemble these four-membered rings has
prevented their use in organic synthesis. However, contemporary applications of
oxetanes in synthetic, medicinal, polymer, and agrochemistry have fueled an
influx of intriguing methodologies for their design. Although only a few natural
products contain the oxetane motif, most of them, for example taxolÂ®, docetaxel,
and thromboxane A2, are extremely biologically active and represent
pharmaceutical hits. Studies have already demonstrated that the presence of this
motif was critical to the potency of these natural products, but the exact role
of oxetane moiety has not been clearly defined. Amongst the oxetane containing
natural products, dictyoxetane presents a unique synthetic challenge and the
opportunity to gain a better understanding of its biological relevance,
especially the role of the oxetane. To date, no total synthesis has been
reported and the absolute configuration has not been established. Additionally,
biological assays have shown that the core of this molecule, the portion that
contains the oxetane, has a great potential towards human gastronomic carcinoma.
Therefore, a synthetic route to this molecule could provide a foray into its
potentially important pharmacological activity. The goal of this research will
be to develop an efficient route to dictyoxetane, examine its biological
activity, and, finally, investigate the role of the oxetane moiety by
synthesizing non-natural derivatives. During this endeavor, novel synthetic
methods will also be developed, which will be both general and tailored to this
natural product.

Exploring uncharted territories is the foundation of chemistry, and science in
general. It is these explorations that open the doors for new and interesting
discoveries beyond the intended research objective. The proposed project on
dictyoxetane is a perfect example of this kind of venture. Although recent
endeavors have unveiled the potential of oxetanes in drug discovery, its
implications in the context of natural products are far from clear. The
development of this project could result in major advances in the exciting field
of oxetane chemistry. This work is not limited to the synthesis of dictyoxetane
and its bioactive evaluation, it will also allow us to gain a better
understanding of the oxetane functionality for the future design of new
biologically active products. Depending on our results, applications can be
envisioned for both academic and industrial research.