* 1158323
* Regulation of Chromatin-associated Proteins by Ubiquitin Modification of Histones H2A and H2B
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2018
* Tingting Yao, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Weinreich
* 04/30/2018
* USD 829,995.00

In eukaryotes, the genetic material DNA is complexed with proteins and packaged
into chromatin. The proteins that organize the DNA are called histones. The
interplay between the genetic information in DNA and the additional (or
epigenetic) information conferred by the type of association with these histones
determines cell fate. The long-term goal of this project is to understand how
epigenetic information is interpreted by cellular machineries that instigate
changes in gene expression to regulate growth and differentiation. One form of
epigenetic information is the modification of histones by attachment of a small
protein called ubiquitin. In organisms ranging from flies to human, histones H2A
and H2B each can be modified with ubiquitin, but with different biological
consequences. Whereas H2A ubiquitination is associated with gene silencing and
DNA repair processes, H2B ubiquitination plays critical roles in active gene
expression. How ubiquitin attached to H2A and H2B histones are interpreted as
distinct signals that result in these different downstream effects is unknown.
To address this knowledge gap, methods will be developed to obtain chemically
homogeneous ubiquitin-H2A (or H2B) to identify proteins whose associations with
chromatin are regulated by ubiquitin. A combination of biophysical and
biochemical techniques will be used to characterize potential interactions
between ubiquitin and histones and to investigate the functional significance of
H2B ubiquitination in gene expression. Overall, this project will establish a
new approach to study epigenetics and will provide mechanistic details as to how
one type of epigenetic information regulates gene expression and ultimately cell
fate. Broader impacts: In addition to its scientific significance in the areas
of epigenetics and gene expression, this project provides outstanding training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. Many aspects of these
studies involve biochemical experiments that are well-suited for undergraduates
who may have limited time as well as limited laboratory experience. The
employment of a variety of biochemical, biophysical and cutting-edge proteomics
technologies provide broad training for graduate students and postdocs. In
addition, as part of the broader impact efforts, workshops will be provided to
graduate students and postdocs on innovative scientific teaching methods and
mentor training. Overall, this project will have a direct positive impact on
tomorrow's science educators.