* 1158608
* EAGER: Molecular-Level Stochastic Simulation To Predict The Dynamics of Protein Misfolding and Aggregation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Preetam Ghosh, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2013
* USD 123,835.00

EAGER: Molecular-Level Stochastic Simulation to predict the dynamics of Protein
Misfolding and Aggregation&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Summary: Proteins are
biochemical workhorses that are needed in many important biological functions.
Lately one aspect of these macromolecules have gained significant attention,
which is their ability to ¡¥stick to each other¡¦ to from ¡¥protein aggregates¡¦
or ¡¥amyloids¡¦. This behavior is more common when proteins fail to adopt a
¡¥correct¡¦ three dimensional shape, commonly known as a ¡¥misfolded¡¦ form.
These aggregates can be both beneficial and toxic for cellular processes.
Although seems simple, this process is extremely complicated and no precise
molecular understanding has emerged. Also, the ability of the proteins to
misfold and aggregate via multiple pathways leading to various forms of
aggregates has never been explored. Such molecular-level details of the process
are important to know since functional aspects of these aggregates are related
to the molecular size, shapes, stability and the rates of the formation. Since
many of these parameters of this stochastic process are extremely difficult to
analyze via conventional biochemical means, molecular-level computational
simulations can be valuable. A precise understanding of the protein aggregation
phenomenon would broaden the fundamental knowledge of both pathological and
functional aspects of biomolecular science besides throwing newer insights.
&lt;br/&gt; In this proposal, we will use amyloid-?Ò (A?Ò) peptide as a model
protein that is known to form misfolded aggregates to accomplish our goals. Our
main objective is to establish a fundamental framework for stochastic molecular-
level simulation of the ¡¥on-pathway¡¦ fibril formation process that will serve
as a basis for analyzing more realistic models with competing pathways to
precisely predict the dynamics and mechanisms of protein aggregation. We have
initiated a collaborative effort between two PIs at University of Southern
Mississippi, (USM) with expertise in computational and biophysical analysis, to
achieve our truly inter-disciplinary objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Protein aggregation is a nucleation-
dependent process, however, precise understanding of its kinetics is not yet
known. Aggregation and fiber formation is often considered to be a stochastic
process with large variations in macroscopic molecule behavior and hence,
stochastic molecular-level simulations would be essential to understand their
dynamics. Furthermore, it is not realistic to consider aggregation as an
isolated event as there are many different factors that influence protein
aggregation in a physiological environment. Broadly, these include molecules
that may ¡¥interact¡¦ with the protein besides others such as ionic strength,
temperature etc. Hence in this proposal, we are focused on developing a
fundamental framework of modeling protein aggregation and amyloid formation
phenomenon via molecular-level modeling and stochastic simulation methodologies.
The biophysical experiments can show the cumulative effects of the aggregates
whereas the simulation will be able to predict the concentration change dynamics
with respect to time for every aggregate involved in the pathway. This will
allow us to study the exact nature of each aggregate and their sensitivity to
the over-all pathway dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: USM is an
excellent place to conduct this research from a scientist training perspective;
MS being among the states with the highest levels of poverty besides providing a
truly diverse student population. The research will provide a broader impact to
the scientific community in the form of a fundamental mechanistic knowledge
about protein aggregation systems. Our educational outreach mechanisms will
involve giving seminars at participating undergraduate institutions in MS,
recruiting economically disadvantaged students (including women and minorities)
to perform summer research in the PI and Co-PI laboratories at USM. It will also
enhance our graduate program through the design of new inter-disciplinary
courses (e.g. ¡§Systems Biology¡¨ and ¡§Computational biophysics¡¨).