* 1158507
* RUI:   In Planta Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles: An Integrative Eco-friendly "Green Engineering" Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Shivendra Sahi, Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2017
* USD 375,413.00

Intellectual Merit: This research aims at developing a nanomaterial production
system using a model plant. A commonly found cress thale (Arabidopsis thaliana)
plant of cabbage family will be used to synthesize gold nanoparticles that find
varieties of industrial applications. Nanotechnology is a fast emerging area of
scientific development attracting immense research interests. This plant system
will be used to study the fabrication of gold nanoparticles of various
geometries and properties. To achieve an optimal production system, growth
conditions such as dosages, pH of potassium aurochlorate solution, temperature
and other factors influencing growth will be standardized. Various studies
indicate plant-inspired synthesis of nanomaterials, but currently there is no
knowledge about how these nanoparticles enter plant cells and get transported to
different plant parts. Once the molecular mechanisms are deciphered, the
production system can be easily manipulated for efficiency. The ultimate goal of
this research is to engineer plants to increase the transport and production of
gold nanoparticles. Conventional methods generate hazardous materials that have
the potential to affect environment and human health. This research thus opens
up a nonconventional approach of nanomaterial synthesis. The proposed green
engineering production pipeline will generate minimal wastes, and thus minimal
environmental concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
interdisciplinary research investigation will be an amalgamation of several
disciplines including plant biology, molecular biology, and quantitative and
analytical chemistry. Therefore, this research provides an excellent opportunity
of educating and training undergraduate and graduate students in the
multidisciplinary field of nanotechnology. Majority of the students that are
likely to be benefitted from this research endeavor will be underrepresented or
first-generation college attendees from rural and economically disadvantaged
backgrounds from the Appalachia region. These students will be trained not only
at Western Kentucky University, but also in an international setting through a
collaborator's laboratory in India. The overall aim is to impart sufficient
educational training for honing the skills of these students in various
laboratory techniques, writing scientific papers and presentation of research
works in national/international scientific meetings. It is anticipated that the
project would develop human resources in the area of nanotechnology and thereby
increasing diversity in the scientific community.