* 1158741
* Filling the Eastern Himalayan Gap: Structural Architecture and Kinematics of the Himalayan Orogen in Bhutan
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2011,12/31/2012
* Nadine McQuarrie, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2012
* USD 48,146.00

The 2,400 km long Himalayan fold and thrust belt extends from the Nanga Parbat
massif in northern Pakistan to the Namche Barwa syntaxis in eastern Tibet. There
are only a handful of estimates that quantify the magnitude and geometry of
shortening along this fold and thrust belt with no such estimates in the eastern
portion of the range, a region characterized by fundamental changes in the
geomorphic, geometric, and lithologic expression of the belt. In particular, the
lack of information on the magnitude, style, and timing of shortening in the
Lower Himalayan Series, a thick succession of early to middle Proterozoic-
Paleozoic greenschist facies to unmetamorphosed metasedimentary rocks within the
belt, inhibits understanding of the development of the Himalayan orogenic belt.
The goal of this project is to determine the geometry, amount of shortening, and
kinematic history of deformation in the Lower Himalayan Series as exposed in the
Kingdom of Bhutan. Toward this end, a team of scientists from Princeton
University and Bhutan are mapping the Lesser Himalayan Sequence from the Main
Central Thrust to the Main Frontal Thrust. These field relationships and new
U-Pb ages of detrital zircons are used to develop a regional stratigraphic
framework. Balanced crustal-scale structural cross-sections are restored
sequentially when combined with new thermochronologic and geochronologic ages in
order to elucidate regional cooling patterns and to constrain timing of fault
motion. These results allow evaluation of how deformation is partitioned in
space and time, prediction of minimum shortening estimates, determination of
minimum lateral and vertical erosion estimates compatible with both the balanced
section and thermochronometers, and in the end, comparison of the timing and
magnitude of deformation and exhumation between the Lesser and Greater Himalayan
Series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Himalayan mountain range is a consequence of
the ongoing collision between India and Asia. During collision, the sedimentary
cover that had blanketed northern India for the last 1.8 billion years became
detached from the underlying basement. This deformed sedimentary cover, and the
structures that developed within it, record the deformation history of the
collision. Although it is one of the world's most famous mountain ranges, only a
handful of estimates quantify this deformation and there are no such estimates
for the eastern portion of the mountain belt. This study of the deformed rocks
in the Kingdom of Bhutan will provide new estimates for this poorly understood
portion of the range and, when compared to estimates for other portions of the
Himalayan Range, will lead to a better understanding of the development of
collisional mountain belts. The project fosters scientific collaboration between
scientists from Bhutan and the United States and helps to build scientific
infrastructure in Bhutan by training of Bhutanese students and an improved
knowledge of the geology of the country, which in turn is important for
understanding earthquake hazards and natural resources.