* 1158138
* Time-Resolved Protein Structure from Non-Crystallized Molecular Ensembles
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Dilano Saldin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 04/30/2016
* USD 603,000.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fast changes in the structure of a
protein on photoexcitation have implications for the elucidation of many
important processes in nature, such as photosynthesis and other photo-induced
chemical reactions in proteins. Changes accompanying protein crystallization can
be experimentally followed by the technique of time-resolved X-ray
crystallography, which involves the measurement and indexing of Bragg spots.
However, not all proteins (particularly membrane proteins) involved in many of
the crucial processes of life, form crystals. In addition, reactions undergone
by proteins in a crystal may not mirror those of proteins in living systems. As
such, an ability to study experimentally photo-induced chemical reactions of
proteins in solution would constitute a significant breakthrough. The objective
of this project is to develop a valid theoretical method for extracting
structural information from a pump-probe experiment designed to follow
structural changes of single molecules immediately after photoexcitation. This
project will demonstrate this capability through measurements of diffuse
diffraction patterns from an X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) at the Linac
Coherent Light Source (LCLS). The diffraction pattern will be obtained from a
sample of liquid droplets, containing ensembles of identical proteins, before
and after photoexcitation. The photoexciting beam will be a laser, synchronized
with the XFEL pulses, which will excite the molecules a short time before they
are interrogated by the XFEL beam. The ability to take advantage of larger
signals from ensembles of molecules will be developed, for ensembles of randomly
oriented molecules, by the evaluation of angular correlations of the diffraction
data. The idea will be demonstrated initially with data from computer
simulations of such diffraction patterns and followed by demonstrations with
measured experimental diffraction patterns. The latter work will involve
collaboration with Prof. John Spence of Arizona State University, who has
experience of protein structure work with the XFEL at the Linac Coherent Light
Source (LCLS) in Stanford, CA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduates recruited with the help of the UW-
Milwaukee's undergraduate research opportunity program (UROP) will be integrated
into the research efforts. Cutting-edge techniques of structural biology will be
introduced into high-school classrooms with the help of K-12 teachers recruited
to the campus by the UW-Milwaukee's NSF-funded research experience for teachers
(RET) program. Teachers will first participate in research efforts with the
principal investigators and transfer what they learn into their classrooms. A
newly designed web-page will increase the visibility and impact of the research
efforts.