* 1158273
* A Systems Approach to the NPK Nutriome and its Effect on Biomass
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2017
* Alessia Para, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 03/31/2017
* USD 1,185,284.00

Intellectual Merit: This project aims to use a systems biology approach to
identify the genes that control plant biomass production by sensing and
integrating responses to nutrients in soil. The research focuses on the
interactions of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium (NPK), the main nutrient
chemicals used in commercial fertilizers. Optimizing plant growth in response to
NPK nutrient interactions has the potential to increase biomass production,
while decreasing the toxic leaching of these chemicals (especially nitrogen and
phosphorus) into surface and ground waters, thus impacting the environment and
human health. In now classic experiments, Murashige and Skoog (1962) showed that
the interactions of NPK could lead to an increase in biomass under low N-input
conditions. This project seeks to identify the gene networks underlying the "NPK
interaction effect" on biomass by combining genomic, phenotyping, and network
inference approaches. Our experimental and analytical strategy is the result of
a highly successful collaboration between biologists and computer scientists,
and involves an iterative cycle of experimentation and computation, a hallmark
of systems biology. The aims of the project are to: 1. Identify combinations of
NPK treatments that result in high biomass under low N-input; 2. Define "early"
molecular marker genes that act as predictors of biomass; 3. Conduct genome-wide
RNA analysis and modeling to identify gene regulatory networks associated with
low-N High-biomass state; and 4. Test candidate regulatory genes. The ultimate
goal is to uncover genes and pathways that control plant growth under NPK
treatments and to manipulate them to optimize N-use efficiency and biomass
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The long-term advantage of
this project is to identify and target critical regulatory components
controlling nutrient use efficiency to create crops that produce high biomass
with a reduced amount of fertilizer, hence decreasing the health and ecological
impacts of leached chemicals. In addition, the generation of nutrient-efficient
crops would ameilorate their cultivation on impoverished or nutrient-poor soils.
This project will involve the training of scientists at the graduate and
postdoctoral level across computational and experimental biology. As the
research entails the development of Systems Biology approaches, biologists will
be engaged in teaching computer scientists about topics like genetics,
experimental genomics, and the computational challenges of analyzing genomic
data. In turn, computer scientists will be involved in developing and testing
optimization as well as machine learning algorithms for network inference that
predicting network states under untested conditions, the ultimate goal of
systems biology. The project will also include an outreach program that provides
high school students the opportunity to work in a laboratory environment at the
interface of Biology and Computer Science. As part of this program, the NYU
Center for Genomics and Systems Biology produced 4 semifinalists and 2 national
finalists (out of 40) for the Intel Competition in 2012. One of these Intel
finalists was mentored by the PI of this project. The PIs of this project are
committed to increasing diversity and will continue to actively seek out and
recruit scientists from under-represented minorities to participate in the
research and outreach components. The project has and will continue to involve a
diverse team of researchers. The PI has served as a mentor for many women
scientists and will continue this role in the future.