* 1158965
* EAGER: Carbon Substitution and Sequestration (CarbSS)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2014
* Michael Antal, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Ruey-Hung Chen
* 09/30/2014
* USD 299,860.00

PI: Antal, Michael J.&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of
Hawaii&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1158965&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER proposal deals
with biomass carbonization, the characteristics of the biocarbons produced, and
the combustion of bicarbons in small scale combustors. This effort is a
collaboration between Prof. Antal at University Of Hawaii (UH) and the Norwegian
University of Science and Technology (NUST). At UH, the biomass will be
converted to bicarbon at different pressures and temperatures, and will be
characterized at NUST using SEM, TGA and XRD (common tools for material and
structure analysis). Using bench top combustor at NUST the combustion of
bicarbon and it's characteristics will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UH
students will gain an unique experience with their time split between UH and
NUST, working in two different countries and two different group of advisors.
Their research experiences in the two countries will be unique and
complementary, with production of the bicarbon at UH and characterization and
combustion of the bicarbon at NUST. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of the research stems from the fact that the structure, properties and burning
behavior of bicarbon as a function of its initial processing parameters such as
pressure and temperature are poorly understood. The proposed study will
undertake a systematic study of the dependence of characteristics and combustion
of bicarbon as a function of the pressure and temperature used to produce the
bicarbon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bicarbons or charcoal can be used as an
environmentally benign substitute for coal as a reducing agent in the
manufacture of silicon and ferro-silicon. They can also be used instead of coal
for power generation, space heating and combined heat and power applications
without the deleterious emissions characteristics of pulverized coal plants.
Potential benefit to enhance agricultural plant growth is also cited. Since
bicarbon is produced from biomass they can be considered to be carbon neutral.
Thus, success and understanding of bicarbons can have significant benefits from
sustainability and environmental viewpoints.