* 1158966
* IRFP: Migration Conditions, Maternal Effects, and Offspring Performance in Pacific Salmon: Intergenerational Effects of Adult Stress
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* Amanda Banet, Banet                   Amanda         I
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 183,080.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Amanda I.
Banet to work with Dr. Scott G. Hinch at the University of British Columbia in
Vancouver, Canada.

In recent years, sockeye salmon have experienced temperature and water
velocities during migration that are higher than their historical average. This
project examines the influence that the maternal environment during migration
has on offspring swimming ability in migratory sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus
nerka). Recent work shows that sockeye salmon females that are physiologically
stressed upon arrival at spawning grounds produce offspring with impaired
swimming performance, which in turn can reduce migration success and make them
more vulnerable to predation. This research disentangles the effects of maternal
identity, external environment (migration conditions), and internal environment
(stress hormones in utero) on offspring swimming performance by using offspring
reared from females that experienced natural migrations, simulated migrations,
and simulated maternal hormone treatments. Three main hypotheses are addressed:
(1) High levels of maternal stress have persistent negative effects on offspring
swimming performance, (2) maternal effects on offspring performance have an
environmental component, and (3) deleterious maternal effects are exaggerated
under stressful conditions.

This project examines genotype by environment interactions and intergenerational
effects in a rapidly changing habitat. Maternal effects are widely recognized in
biology, but few studies have examined them in the context of changing climate
and anthropogenic habitat degradation. Results from this project will contribute
to the fields of evolutionary biology, ecology, conservation biology, and
physiology.

Traditional management and conservation of migratory fish populations has relied
primarily on facilitating reproduction. However, if deleterious maternal effects
caused by a difficult migration environment persist into the next generation,
then conventional recovery programs may not be enough to ensure the continued
health and sustainability of a species. The results of these studies will
provide information that will be invaluable to environmental managers making
decisions affecting aquatic migratory species.