* 1158795
* Career Dynamics in the Science and Engineering Workforce
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2012,11/30/2014
* Catherine Weinberger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 11/30/2014
* USD 100,467.00

This project analyzes more than three decades of data on U.S. scientists and
engineers to examine the career dynamics of Ph.D. scientists and engineers.

Intellectual Merit: The current textbook explanation for gender differences in
labor market outcomes among older workers, including (if not especially)
scientists, is that women tend to fall behind men as they choose a less career-
oriented work-family balance or as the effects of discrimination in promotion
accumulate over the course of a career. Recent work finds the opposite to be the
case when individual workers (or scientists) are followed over time. Women tend
to earn less than men from a very young age, but tend to be on a similar, or
even faster, growth path than men. The low average earnings of older women are
predicted by their low earnings at labor market entry. The research examines
whether Ph.D. scientists and engineers (either as a whole, or within subsets
defined by field of study) tend to follow patterns similar to the highest-paid
scientists at the bachelor's or master's degree level, as opposed to the overall
patterns observed within samples of somewhat less educated workers, or whether
new patterns of career dynamics are yet to be discovered. This study leads to
new knowledge about the dynamics of career progress, the role of working long
hours, and how these processes vary by gender and race. Broader Impacts:
Benjamin Franklin made tremendous contributions to science and technology
without devoting his entire life to science. Today, many scientists work long
hours per week in an environment of intense competition. If particularly
talented individuals with the potential to make enormous contributions to
science are either discouraged from becoming scientists, or train to become
scientists but do not receive the support that will allow them to do their best
work, an opportunity is lost to all. Indeed, the 1981 Congress requested a
periodic evaluation of the status of women and underrepresented minorities in
the science and engineering workforce. The improved measurement and
understanding of labor market processes and outcomes generated by this research
should inform policies to efficiently promote gender equity, scientific
productivity and the retention of talented scientists within a population of
workers in whom we as a nation have invested enormous resources.