* 1158863
* Assessing Engineering Students' Understanding of Social Responsibility from Undergraduate and Graduate Education into Professional Life
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Angela Bielefeldt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 346,190.00

This engineering education research project seeks to understand the long-term
impact of service learning on engineering students' career trajectories and
their ability to make ethical decision making in their careers. The project will
both develop fundamental understanding of service learning's impact on students
as well as develop metrics for measuring the impact of service learning which
can be widely adopted by the increasing number of engineering programs that
utilize service learning in their curricula. One particular element of note in
this study is that it engages current and former Army
officers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of this
project will be that it will generate knowledge that can broadly impact how
universities design and evaluate service learning programs, which is of
particular relevance for engineering degree programs due to accreditation
requirements. Service learning programs have been shown to attract a large
number of students who are traditionally under-represented in engineering degree
programs, thus this research may additionally result in increased diversity.
This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goal of transforming the frontiers
through preparation of an engineering workforce with new capabilities and
expertise. Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for society is enabled by
supporting the development of innovative learning systems.