* 1158394
* Riboswitch-sRNA for Dual Transcript Control by a Ligand
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* David Wood, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,004.00

1158394/ Lease

The capacity to reprogram bacteria to carry out useful tasks builds upon
existing genetic circuit elements that can be repurposed. Two challenges to the
design of synthetic bio-circuits include coordination of expression from
multiple genes,and integration of metabolite feedback for expression control.
Engineered trans-acting RNAs are flexible tools for rapid and specific control
of gene expression. Naturally occurring bacterial small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs)
can simultaneously target multiple mRNA transcripts via specific base-pairing,
and can either stabilize or destabilize target transcripts. The importance and
activity of these native small nucleic acids have been established, and it is
time for their development for applications. The goal of the research is to
create a ligand-responsive riboswitch-sRNA fusion molecule for improved
fermentation cultures that produce biofuels and medicines.

The Engineering of multi-target sRNA will enable coordinate and discoordinate
mRNA stability/ translation control for metabolic engineering. Riboswitches
integrated for control of RS-sRNAs will create a platform for user-specified
targeting of mRNAs and integration with riboswitchbound metabolite feedback.
Riboswitches integrated for stability control of sRNA will probe sRNA structural
dynamics and activity, and will inform future design considerations for
engineered sRNAs in their biological context.

The proposed work will create fundamental tools for synthetic circuit
development from the sRNAs, advance biochemical engineering by further bridging
the disciplines of engineering and genetics, and enable us to train the next
generation of biochemical engineers. The construction and analysis of modified
sRNA genes can be parsed into smaller project subunits amenable to inclusion of
undergraduates and summer students.