* 1158003
* Investigating the Contribution of Membrane Trafficking to Cell Division
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Ahna Skop, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 05/31/2018
* USD 774,897.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;During embryonic development, the identity of cells
in tissues and organs is determined by a series of asymmetric divisions. Cell
asymmetry is controlled by two mechanisms: cell polarity and cytokinesis. Errors
in these events often lead to changes in cell proliferation and growth. The
plasma membrane and underlying cell cortex play an important role in cell
polarity and cytokinesis, yet very little is known about how it is regulated and
maintained during development. To address this issue, the project is focused on
the protein dynamin, which has an essential role in both of these events. It is
hypothesized that dynamin influences cell polarity and facilitates the temporal
and spatial control of the cytokinesis machinery through its role in endocytosis
and actin dynamics. This project will employ an interdisciplinary strategy to
reveal the role of the dynamin using a combination of genetics, cell and
molecular biology and high-resolution, in vivo microscopy techniques. The
project will focus on the early divisions of the nematode, Caenorhabditis
elegans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The work outlined in
this proposal will be used in numerous minority outreach opportunities and
scientific art shows. The P.I., Dr. Ahna Skop has extensive experience with
outreach to minority groups at the local, state and national levels. Through her
consistent involvement in the SACNAS, AISES and MARC programs at New Mexico
State University, she has contributed to a very positive trend in minority
graduate student enrollment on the UW-Madison campus. The P.I.'s dedication to
increasing and retaining minority, undergraduate and graduate students in the
STEM fields is a priority, and part of her mission is to make science accessible
to every race and group and welcome these students any chance she gets. In
addition, the P.I. has continued to pursue the curation of various scientific
art shows nationally and internationally, which inherently promote the beauty of
science and provide public access to scientific research.