* 1158347
* Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences: Investigator-initiated research projects (MCB)
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2012,10/31/2015
* Nikolai Skrynnikov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 10/31/2015
* USD 446,165.00

In the last decade it has become clear that dynamic disorder is prominently
represented in the proteome. In particular, intrinsically disordered proteins
(IDPs) are widely involved in signal transduction. In this role, they bind to
their (structured) targets; in doing so they themselves acquire a measure of
structural order. The details of the binding process are, therefore, of both
fundamental and practical importance. The salient feature of the binding
mechanism is that it often relies on electrostatic interactions. Initially, the
IDP is pulled toward its target by long-range electrostatic forces, forming what
is termed an electrostatic encounter complex. Starting from this point, it
quickly finds the correct conformation and binds tightly to the target. To
obtain insight into the structure/dynamics of the electrostatic encounter
complex, the PI will study the binding of a proline-rich peptide (which serves
as a minimal model for an IDP) to an adapter protein (the c-Crk N-SH3 domain).
The original system is altered by introducing one or two point mutations into
hydrophobic grooves of the adapter protein SH3 domain. This abolishes tight
binding and shifts the equilibrium toward the intermediate state. The resulting
increase in the population of the encounter complex makes it amenable to a
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) study using chemical shifts, paramagnetic
restraints, and relaxation data. This experimental dataset is used to construct
an in silico model of the system. Toward this goal, a number of ~1 micro sec
molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories of the complex are generated. These MD data
are used as a source pool to form an "ensemble of MD trajectories", which is
tailored to reproduce the experimentally measured NMR parameters. Of note, this
model can rigorously predict the pieces of data that are inherently dynamic.
Such experimentally calibrated MD ensembles are expected to provide a number of
new insights into the structure and dynamics of disordered protein systems.

Although IDPs constitute a broad and fundamentally important class of proteins,
they receive little or no coverage in college textbooks. In this sense there is
a perceptible and growing gap between the concepts emerging in the research
laboratories and the classroom teaching. The PI will contribute to bridging this
gap by (i) making presentations at several undergraduate institutions, namely
Bradley, Carleton, Oberlin, Butler, and Juniata College, all of which are
historically connected to Purdue; (ii) developing visual materials that can be
used by other teachers; the main findings of this project will be presented in a
form of MD-based movies, designed and rendered by undergraduate students
recruited into the PI's laboratory; (iii) publishing article(s) in Scientific
American and/or the Journal of Chemical Education to provide a broad audience
with an accessible introduction to IDPs. When discussing IDPs with students, the
PI will stress the element of "thinking outside the box" that led to the
emergence of this new concept in protein science. The realization that active
research constantly challenges the textbook dogmas should provide a source of
inspiration for interested students and help to steer some of them toward a
career in science. In particular, the PI will use this special opportunity to
engage the students from underrepresented groups. In this effort he will rely on
the continuing support from the local chapter of NOBCChE (National Organization
for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers).