* 1158319
* Molecular Interactions in Fungal Multistep Phosphorelay Signaling Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Ann West, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 04/30/2016
* USD 626,455.00

Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;Two-component signal transduction pathways and
expanded multi-step His-Asp phosphorelay signaling pathways control how bacteria
and fungal organisms respond and adapt to environmental stress. The His-Asp
phosphorelay pathways found in eukaryotes frequently feature multiple upstream
sensor kinases (HKs) and downstream response regulator (RR) proteins, yet nearly
all depend on a single intermediate histidine phosphotransfer (HPt) protein for
phosphoryl group transfer. Although several thousands of HK-RR cognate pairs
have been identified in bacteria and fungi, very little is understood about
protein-protein interactions that govern specificity within a particular pathway
and prevent cross-talk within a single organism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
relative simplicity of the signal transduction pathway (one HK, one HPt and two
RRs) in the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, together with recent X-ray
crystallographic studies of the Ypd1 HPt protein in complex with the Sln1
receiver domain, provides an excellent foundation for the investigation of
molecular interactions within a phosphorelay signaling system. The long-term
goal of this research is to understand regulation of phosphate flow from Ypd1 to
the downstream response regulators, Ssk1 and Skn7, as a function of
environmental stress. The main objective of this project is to achieve a
detailed understanding of the structural, biochemical and functional
implications of Ypd1 interactions with the three homologous response regulator
domains associated with Sln1, Ssk1 and Skn7.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims are designed to test the hypothesis that molecular interactions within the
yeast phosphorelay signaling pathway are influenced by external environmental
signals and the phosphorylation state of the interacting signaling partners. A
multidisciplinary approach using structural, biochemical and genetic approaches
will be taken. Specific Aim 1 is structural characterization of Ypd1 (HPt)
protein complexes with cognate RR domains. Specific Aim 2 is to determine the
effect of site-specific mutations in Ypd1 and/or RR domains on protein binding
affinity, phosphotransfer and specificity of interaction. Specific Aim 3 is to
determine the in vivo consequences of mutations that affect Ypd1-RR interactions
in the SLN1 pathway.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has broad significance with
respect to how signaling partners interact with each other and influence
fidelity of signal transduction. The results are expected to reveal, for the
first time, key structural features that contribute to HPt-RR interactions and
signaling specificity within multistep phosphorelay systems from all three
domains of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Results from
this project are expected to provide significant new insight into the principles
that govern signal transduction pathways, specifically, the role of protein
phosphorylation and its impact on regulating protein-protein interactions. The
integration of research and student training is an important aspect of this
proposal. A summer exchange program for undergraduate students at the University
of Oklahoma and the University of Iowa will provide cross-disciplinary training
in structural, biochemical and in vivo genetic approaches. In addition, a hands-
on laboratory-based X-ray crystallography course will be developed and offered
at the graduate-level or senior undergraduate capstone level at University of
Oklahoma. Students will have the opportunity to access state-of-the-art (NSF-
funded) crystallization robotics instrumentation and apply X-ray diffraction
techniques to solve the three-dimensional structure of biomacromolecules.