* 1158773
* Science of Science and Innovation Policy:  Principal Investigator Conference, 2007-2011 Awards
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Kaye Husbands Fealing, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Rosenbloom
* 12/31/2013
* USD 324,000.00

In 2006, U.S. Science Adviser John H. Marburger, III called for a
multidisciplinary approach to creating a solid evidentiary platform for science
policy at national and sub-national levels, as well as the emergence of a field
of science policy studies. Science and innovation policy practitioners have long
had a keen interest in obtaining quantitative data and qualitative information
that they could use to deliver more effective policy decisions. Researchers in
several disciplines -- including chemistry, computer science, economics,
engineering, political science, sociology, physicists, psychology, and visual
analytics -- have for decades sought to push the boundaries of understanding
various elements of the global ecological system of innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heeding Dr. Marburger's call and heightened interests of
practitioners and researchers, the National Science Foundation initiated the
Science of Science and Innovation Policy program (SciSIP) to encourage basic
research and to further the development of a community of practice in this
field. Since the first awards were made in 2007, the SciSIP program has funded
more than 150 researchers and their graduate students. The program has also
spawned the STAR METRICS (Science and Technology for America's Reinvestment:
Measuring the Effect of Research on Innovation, Competitiveness and Science)
program, a collaborative effort between the National Science Foundation and the
National Institutes of Health. The STAR METRICS program develops tools and
mechanisms by which federal expenditures on scientific activities can be
measured, with particular focus on quantifying productivity and employment
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fifth year of the SciSIP program, therefore,
is a critical milestone and an opportune time to showcase its research
productivity and contributions to many long-standing questions regarding
investment in and organization of science, engineering and innovation activities
in the U.S. and in other nations. In keeping with the goals of the SciSIP
program, the National Academy of Sciences convenes a two-day public conference
to foster intellectual exchange among funded researchers and between these
researchers and science, technology and innovation policy practitioners. The
conference is intended to be the largest gathering of SciSIP principal
investigators since the program's inception. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SciSIP
principal investigators conference features invited presentations and
discussions, as well as poster sessions. Topics highlight advances in the
emerging field of the science of science and innovation policy. In particular,
models, frameworks, tools, and datasets comprising the evidentiary basis for
science and innovation policy are the focus of the event, and presentations by
SciSIP researchers fall under several themes, including: return on investment
models; organizational structures that foster accelerated scientific
productivity; linkages between commercialized scientific knowledge and job
creation; the roles of universities and government in technology transfer and
innovation; technology diffusion and economic growth; non-economic impacts of
science and innovation expenditures; regional and global networks of knowledge
generation and innovation; mechanisms for encouraging creativity and measuring
outputs and outcomes from transformative research; and development, manipulation
and visualization of data representing scientific activities. In addition to
discussions and collaborations among the SciSIP researchers, an important
benefit to the research community stems from discussions between researchers and
leading practitioners. This network of scientists and practitioners constitutes
a fruitful Petri dish that spawns exciting new scientific explorations in the
SciSIP field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Academies prepares a summary
report of the conference's presentations, roundtable discussions, and specific
recommendations for future research and data-gathering, manipulation and
visualization activities. Select papers are included in the appendix of the
report. The report contains a glossary of published papers and reports in the
SciSIP field, as well as links to archival datasets that were sponsored by the
SciSIP program. This report constitutes a compendium of leading-edge research in
this emerging field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The conference
facilitates interdisciplinary discourse between researchers in several fields.
It also fosters communication and learning between academicians and
policymakers. This activity advances the development of the SciSIP community of
practice. The summary report is also a useful guide to data and tools that
practitioners may utilize in day-to-day policy decision-making activities. The
conference is also a rich venue for graduate students who are writing
dissertations in this field.