* 1158759
* I-Corps:  Mobidemics: Using Mobile Gaming for Healthcare
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Douglas Hutchings, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

Traditional study of infectious diseases is based on pure simulation, patient
interviews, or mathematical models. Since these techniques are not founded on
real social interaction data, they are usually error-prone. To mitigate the
above challenge, the PIs propose Mobidemics, a mobile phone-based gaming system
that aims to change the way epidemiologists study the transmission of
communicable diseases. Mobidemics provides a live interactive social gaming
platform based on physical location and is tuned to the spread of infectious
diseases. Working with computational epidemiologists, the team has identified a
set of variables that can be used to describe infectious/contagious diseases.
For instance, the distance at which a patient is infectious depends on the
disease class and can be modeled in the virtual (gaming) world as a distance
constraint at which a player can infect or shoot each other. Similarly, other
changes to the game variable set can be made on the fly using the Mobidemics
backend to provide an unprecedented control over a disease spread study and to
model real life events and possibilities. The gaming frontend provides the
necessary incentive to users to share their location and social interaction
data. Mobidemics is a unique platform for collecting location data, social
interaction data, and infection spread data. It provides the flexibility to tune
the strategy based on the disease class being studied. The key components of
infection spread, such as immunity to a disease (which is a function of age,
build, and gender) is modeled as simple semantics. Hence, realistic real-time
emulations of spread of infectious diseases can be performed using Mobidemics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infectious diseases such as the H1N1 flu accounts for
thousands of human casualties every year. With better understanding of how
infections spread in a social network, remedial action can be taken to contain
them. Mobidemics provides a platform for understanding disease spread as well as
collecting and analyzing disease spread data through a real time mobile phone
based game. Hence, Mobidemics can have a large societal impact. The data
collected and the services provided would also be useful to broader group of
epidemiologists, companies, and municipalities interested in social interaction
data.