* 1158024
* RUI:   Roles for Tissue-specific ATP Synthase Subunits and Other Proteins in Mitochondrial Shaping during Drosophila Spermatogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Karen Hales, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 12/31/2016
* USD 398,055.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria, the structures inside cells where
energy is harnessed from food, are moved and shaped in specialized cells such as
neurons and sperm to fulfill different energy needs. Spermatogenesis (sperm cell
formation) in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster is an ideal context for
determining the molecular basis of mitochondrial shaping, since mitochondria
undergo dramatic events during sperm development, and since the fruit fly is a
well-characterized model organism. The project addresses two broad questions: 1)
do tissue-specific ATP synthase subunits control tissue-specific mitochondrial
shaping, and 2) how are distinct mitochondrial populations defined and
maintained within the same cell? Both will be pursued through genetic and
molecular analysis of Drosophila male sterile mutants showing defects in the
Nebenkern, the structure in post-meiotic spermatids that consists of exactly two
interwrapped giant mitochondrial derivatives. The hypothesis that a testis-
expressed version of an ATP synthase subunit contributes to the dramatic
internal structure of the Nebenkern will be tested through microscopy, molecular
biology, fly husbandry, and transgenic techniques. Roles for testis-expressed
paralogs of other ATP synthase subunits will also be explored. In addition, to
determine how distinct mitochondrial populations are defined, the role of Parkin
and PINK1 proteins in the segregation of the two mitochondrial derivatives in
the Nebenkern will be assessed. The research could demonstrate how tissue-
specific mitochondrial morphology is governed by specific ATP synthase isoforms,
as well as how distinct viable mitochondrial populations are
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS&lt;br/&gt;The project will
result in the research training of many undergraduate students including four to
eight students each academic semester and three summer students. Additionally,
one undergraduate student per summer from a historically black college or
university (HBCU) will be involved in the research. Davidson students from
underrepresented groups in science will also be encouraged to embark upon
research in the laboratory. A laboratory technician (usually a recent college
graduate aiming to attend graduate school) will also receive research training.
For most students this will be their first research experience. All students
will be mentored in scientific communication and data presentation, and they
will present their work at the Davidson College research symposia that occur
annually in May and September. A subset of these students will present their
experimental results at the Annual Drosophila Research Conference. Outcomes will
be tracked as these students embark upon careers in science. In addition,
elements of the project will be integrated into the teaching of a Genetics
course so that the entire class (approximately 32 undergraduate students per
year) will carry out original research and will be challenged and stimulated to
make publishable discoveries.