* 1158670
* Incubators of Knowledge: Predicting protege productivity and impact in the social sciences
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Cassidy Sugimoto, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 240,197.00

Doctoral education plays a pivotal role in shaping the careers of future
scholars and, thereby, in making an impact on the trajectory of knowledge
creation in a nation. During a doctoral program, students are acculturated to
the norms of the discipline, learning scholarly practices and behaviors that
guide them for a lifetime. Advisors, as guides to these scholarly journeymen,
serve as critical gatekeepers to the discipline and can have a profound
influence on their doctoral students. Doctoral students comprise a larger
portion of the academic workforce, yet scholars have very little knowledge of
their place in scholarly networks, the degree to which they contribute to
scholarly output, and the impact of this output. Very little quantitative
analysis shows the relationship between advisors' scholarly practices and the
future success of their advisees. This study investigates these issues from two
main angles: understanding the contribution of doctoral students to social-
science research (the extent and character of this contribution) and the impact
of this research (visibility through citations); and examining the advisor's
knowledge base and knowledge-diffusion practices, and whether these factors are
involved in expanding knowledge frontiers and how they relate to the career
trajectories and future success of doctoral students. This approach allows
quantification of advisor behaviors and documentation of patterns within advisee
behaviors. This research thus produces a viable framework for predicting advisee
success based on advisor qualities and individual students' publication
practices in the course of their doctoral studies. This predictive model can
then be used by science policy makers and administrators for more efficient
allocation of resources and to identify ways to promote innovation in higher
education. This work supports a quantitative-based understanding of contribution
of doctoral students to the creation of knowledge and of the relationship
between the scholarly practices of advisors and the productivity and impact of
their proteges. Such a model will also enhance our understanding of how the
different scientific practices of the advisors -- including their embeddedness
in particular disciplines, degree of mobility among different disciplines, and
involvement in highly collaborative interdisciplinary work -- will have an
effect on the career trajectories and scientific success of their advisees. The
combination of multiple datasets and the innovative analyses in this first
research study on proteges provides a rich foundation for the development of new
metrics and evaluations of knowledge diffusion, scholarly productivity, and
scientific impact in doctoral education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Educational opportunities are provided through the funding of students and the
integration of this project into the classroom. In addition, this research
provides a platform for future analyses on the interaction of mentoring in
doctoral education with individual protege characteristics. The research
products of this work will be disseminated at national and international
conferences and workshops. The process of matching heterogeneous datasets, as
well as the datasets themselves, will be detailed and made available online in
order to enhance replicability and enable other scientists to adopt and expand
these approaches.