* 1158411
* EAGER: WI-FI-US: Virtual Institute for Wireless Research Between Finland and USA
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2011,08/31/2015
* Alhussein Abouzeid, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 08/31/2015
* USD 289,181.00

This project establishes a new virtual institute, Wireless Innovation between
Finland and US (WIFIUS), for promoting and sustaining mutually-beneficial
research and education collaborations between US and Finland in the area of
wireless networks. The institute provides an environment for creative
international collaboration that leverages the synergies and resources for
research and education in the two countries in order to accelerate the rate of
development of research innovations and the development of talent and work-force
capable of excelling in the a new highly interconnected world. The objectives of
the institute are to: (1) facilitate and support existing and new international
research and education activities in the broad area of wireless networks, (2)
enable sharing of knowledge and cross-fertilization among the participants of
various relevant international projects, (3) enable sharing of expertise with
emerging experimental platforms, standards and wireless technology policies in
the two countries, and (4) facilitate and support interaction between academia,
industry and government agencies of the two countries. The proposal also
describes the activities and mechanisms that will be adopted in order to achieve
these objectives. The technical focus of the institute is on wireless spectrum
efficiency technologies, which intellectually aligns along the interests of
researchers in the two countries, as well as the countries' national priorities.
The institute employs a number of activities including: (a) a web portal that
provides services and content to participants, (b) physical and virtual PI
meetings, (c) physical and virtual student investigator meetings, (d) yearly
summer schools and (e) graduate student exchange.