* 1158867
* Investigation of Emissions and Ozone Photochemistry over China and Their Environmental Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Yuhang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2015
* USD 353,192.00

The rapid economic growth in China has led to large increases of pollutant
emissions but current understanding of their subsequent chemical evolution,
large-scale atmospheric transport, and environmental implications is limited.
Recent observational evidence suggests that photochemistry over China has
characteristics distinct from those considered by current generation of 3-D
chemical transport models. These differences may reflect limitations in chemical
schemes as implemented in current models or large underestimation of emissions
for fast-reacting aromatics over China. Evidence also suggests an increasing
influence of the trans-Pacific transport of emissions from China on O3 over the
western United States. The research effort will improve scientific understanding
of atmospheric photochemistry over China and the associated larger-scale
implications via analysis of satellite and in situ observations and associated
model calculations. The specific research objective is to investigate the
effects of volatile organic compounds, particularly aromatics, on regional O3
photochemistry over China. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research problems that will
be addressed through this effort are not only relevant to current understanding
of atmospheric chemistry but will also provide the scientific basis for
evaluating the environmental consequences of economic development and exploring
effective emission control measures. One graduate student will be supported and
trained in modeling and data analysis through the project. Results will be
published in journal articles, presented to the public in lectures, and employed
as case studies in graduate-level atmospheric chemistry courses. The
collaboration of Chinese scientists in the research effort will facilitate the
transfer of knowledge and technology and thereby help improve air quality in
China and, indirectly, in the United States.