* 1158721
* I-Corps:  Pilot Production Of Large Area Uniform Single-Crystal Graphene Films
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2011,03/31/2012
* Alan Johnson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Errol Arkilic
* 03/31/2012
* USD 50,000.00

This Innovation-Corps project will explore the commercial feasibility of
production of high quality, uniform large-area graphene films, translating into
new products the knowledge that resulted from prior NSF-funded fundamental
studies. The team submitted for patent a low cost, large-scale graphene
synthesis technology with key advantages including: 1) no need for vacuum and
high temperature during synthesis, thus enabling flexible, economical design and
operation; 2) graphene film size not limited by furnace dimension with the
proposed roll-to-roll processing concept; 3) production of graphene films with
high electronic quality (large grain size, high carrier mobility, low sheet
resistance); and 4) a continuous production method that is easily modified to
industrial scale. The proof-of-concept demonstration to be achieved by this
project is production of an ultra-compact, low power vapor sensor device for
sensitive and selective detection of ethanol in breath. This will reflect the
fact that the carrier mobility of the graphene will exceed 5000 cm2/V-s, a level
suitable for numerous next-generation electronic applications. Successful
completion of the project will result in a clear go/no go decision on the
technology and a plan for commercial transition to market if appropriate.

Graphene is an emerging "super material" with numerous proposed applications
including flexible transparent conductors for touch screen displays and solar
energy systems; high frequency electronics for communications; and advanced
sensors for medical diagnostics, analysis of food and water purity, and
environmental monitoring, all in real-time. Availability of high quality "wafer-
scale" graphene material in industrial quantities will thus enable the
development of these applications and others by the business community, with
substantial potential benefit to society. The technology proposed will have
advantages of cost, quality, and design flexibility over competing concepts.
Successful completion of this I-Corps project will enable technology transition
from the lab to the market place.