* 1159731
* GOALI: RUI: Collaborative Research:  Development of Transferable Force Fields and Monte Carlo Algorithms and Application to Phase and Sorption Equilibria
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2015
* Becky Eggimann, Wheaton College
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 50,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1159731&lt;br/&gt;Eggimann, Becky L.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOALI: Collaborative Research: Development of transferable
force fields and Monte Carlo algorithms and application to phase and sorption
equilibria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of sustainable processes in the
chemical and biotechnology industries and of novel formulations in the personal
care and detergent industries is of tremendous commercial and environmental
importance. Molecular-level knowledge is essential for moving from trial-and-
error based approaches to knowledge-driven design of these chemical processes
and formulations. To this extent, accurate molecular models and efficient
simulation algorithms will be developed by a collaborative team led by Siepmann,
Eggimann, and Koenig to advance molecular simulation as a tool for high-fidelity
property prediction and for providing molecular-level insights on phase and
sorption equilibria. Specific applications relevant for biofuel production and
detergent formulations will be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model Development. The TraPPE (transferable
potentials for phase equilibria) family of force fields will be extended at
multiple levels of resolution. TraPPECG (coarse-grain) will include polymers,
asphaltenes, and water; TraPPE?UA (united-atom) will add siloxane and vinyl
chloride polymers; TraPPEEH (explicit-hydrogen) will address environmental
pollutants and fermentation inhibitors. The range of systems and processes
amenable to predictive simulations will be enlarged through the parameterization
of TraPPE salt for inorganic ions and TraPPE zeo for porous zeolite frameworks.
A web interface will be designed to increase the accessibility of the TraPPE
force fields&lt;br/&gt;for other research groups. Algorithm Development. Novel
Monte Carlo algorithms will be developed that can improve the sampling of phase
transfers (e.g., in liquid-liquid equilibria and sorption isotherms from
solution phases) and spatial distributions in microheterogeneous fluids (e.g,,
surfactant systems). Applications. Molecular simulations using the TraPPE force
fields will be employed as an engineering tool to predict thermophysical
properties of a variety of complex systems, thereby adding to the available
experimental database. The simulations will provide a wealth of microscopic-
level insight into how molecular architecture and composition determine
macroscopic phenomena. Specifically, simulations will be carried out to
investigate (i) the solvent-based extraction of ethanol from fermentation
broths, ii) the sorption isotherms of oxygenates and fermentation inhibitors
from aqueous solution, (iii) the adsorption of surfactants at interfaces and to
polyelectrolytes, (iv) the capacity limit of organics in micellar surfactants,
and (v) the phase coexistence in mixed surfactant
bilayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration
of Research and Education. Because the excitement of discovery is a significant
motivating factor in student learning, computational exercises and topical
results from molecular simulation research are routinely integrated by Siepmann
and Eggimann in their classroom teaching (spanning from of a freshman seminar on
the material world to graduate-level statistical mechanics). Hands-on science
classroom for third graders have been taught by Siepmann and a full day of
activities centered around computational chemistry is organized for UMN's
Exploring Careers in Engineering and Physical Sciences Program. An active
undergraduate research program is leveraged by Eggimann to promote general
scientific literacy and research-as-teaching pedagogies. Development of Human
Resources. This university industry partnership uniquely advances the education
and training of the graduate students and postdoctoral associates by allowing
for extensive interactions with industrial chemists and experience with real-
world surfactant applications. Additionally, this project will foster the
participation of undergraduate and high school students, with special efforts
made to recruit these students from traditionally underrepresented groups.
Impact on Science and Engineering Infrastructure. The microscopic-level
understanding afforded&lt;br/&gt;by the proposed computational investigations
will be highly beneficial for the design of improved separation processes for
biofuels and surfactant systems. The computing infrastructure is advanced by the
development of the TraPPE force fields, the associated cybertool, and the MCCCS
(Monte Carlo for Complex Chemical Systems) molecular simulation package, which
are freely distributed.