* 1159841
* Detection and amplification of  DNA at near room temperature
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Giuseppe Palmese, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 06/30/2018
* USD 339,984.00

The overall goal is to investigate both detection and improvement of DNA using a
device known as cantilever sensor. We will investigate systematically the role
of intense surface vibration on bound double stranded DNA behavior. We
hypothesize that the intense vibration will open up the molecule. Currently we
do such a reaction by heating. Our preliminary work suggests that vibration
directionally applied will cause DNA?s two parts to come apart. We will
investigate if a method of increasing the DNA on the sensor can be accomplished.
If these two goals are accomplished we may be able to detect DNA that is present
in extremely small amounts. The implication of such a capability is we can
detect harmful bacteria quickly saving lives; detect human and animal diseases
rapidly and inexpensively. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Three merits are: (1)
A new and cheaper approach will be developed for the detection of DNA at a very
low level. (2) We will also develop a fundamental understanding of how vibration
intensity affects DNA reaction, (3) Training of PhD students in the
interdisciplinary area at the intersection of the broad field of nucleic acid
chemistry (kinetics and thermodynamics), electromechanical resonators, and
measurement science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Students of various
backgrounds ? high school, undergraduates in various disciplines ? will be
exposed to DNA measurement techniques. An important broad impact will be a new
methodology that has sensitivity similar or better than the current expensive
methods used in disease diagnosis and presence of harmful bacteria.