* 1159500
* Engineering and study of a new multifunctional sensing nanoprobe for direct and rapid delivery of cargo to cytosol, reporting on the delivery event, and quantification of delivered
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Swadeshmukul Santra, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

1159500&lt;br/&gt;Gesquiere&lt;br/&gt;Goal. The goal of the proposed research
program is to engineer an OFF/ON biosensing probe that will be specifically
designed for direct cellular uptake to the cytoplasm, will report on the
delivery of cargo in the intracellular environment and the associated location
of delivery, and will provide quantitative data on the amount of cargo delivered
in the intracellular environment. The biosensor will integrate these multiple
functionalities in an all-in-one design.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. The
development of nanobiosensors and multifunctional nanoparticle cargo delivery
systems has lead to recent significant advances in biomedical research. However,
many issues have remained unresolved with respect to these developments,
including (i) a lack of quantitative data obtained from these nanobiosensors,
(ii) a lack of study of the cytotoxicity/biocompatibility, (iii) a lack of
understanding of the cellular uptake mechanism, and (iv) a lack of study and
understanding of the fate (e.g. disintegration, aggregation in cytosol) of these
nanobiosensors after use. Specifically for cargo delivery systems with targeting
or/and sensing functionality, it is often not clear if the delivery was
successful. Herein, a new multifunctional nanobiosensing platform will be
developed that will address (i) the development of a biosensor particle designed
for direct uptake and delivery to cytosol (ii) sensing the intracellular
delivery event i.e. report on successful delivery, and (iii) quantitative
sensing of amount of delivered cargo, while investigating the (iv) cytotoxicity
of biosensor, and (v) fate of biosensor as a function of cellular uptake
mechanism. The proposed program will yield fundamental insight from the design
rules of such a system to the function/application and fate of the proposed
biosensor particle in vitro at the cellular level. The approach presented in
this proposal is unique and transformational in several ways: (i) the sensing
and quantification capabilities are not limited to specific dye-target pairs
(e.g. Ca2+ ratiometric imaging requires use of specifically designed dyes) since
reporting functions are covered by a NAC-cargo construct where NAC (N-Acetyl-L-
Cysteine) acts as the QDot quencher, i.e.&lt;br/&gt;this concept is broadly
applicable to reporting on delivery and quantification of different cargo types
that can be attached to NAC, (ii) all functionalities are built into the
biosensor particle, so no additional staining is necessary to report on delivery
or for quantification of delivered cargo (integrated all-in-one
design).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact. Research, education and outreach
will be integrated in order to make significant&lt;br/&gt;contributions to
increasing the awareness for STEM and development of STEM skills of
students,&lt;br/&gt;teachers and the community at large in an inclusive manner.
The students that will be involved in this&lt;br/&gt;proposed research will be
trained in the interdisciplinary field of chemistry, materials, cell biology
and&lt;br/&gt;nanotechnology. Topics that are related to the proposed research
project will be integrated in courses and labs. Recruitment and Training of
graduate and undergraduate students will occur through REU projects and the
NanoFlorida symposium (www.nanoflorida.org). NanoFlorida is a trans-Florida
student-organized conference. Students from underrepresented groups already make
up more than half of the labs of the investigators on this proposal. Further
recruiting of minorities will occur through NSF?s Florida Georgia Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minorities Participation in Engineering and the organization of the
NanoFlorida conference. A major broader impact component is the proposed
community outreach program in collaboration with the Orlando Science Center
(OSC). OSC?s Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) located in a room in the exhibit
halls will be made available to UCF graduate students to participate in
educating the general public about our research activities. By using this
facility in their work graduate students will learn about the importance of
working with people and how to communicate with people in layman terms,
something they can not experience easily in a college setting. Lab activities
and online learning modules will be developed where children and parents can
interact and learn together about nanoscience and biotechnology. The activities
will be designed to be accessible to a broad audience. These initiatives will
serve as a kick-off for a series of longer term plans that will lead to the
creation of a critical mass of nanoscience and biology/biotechnology related
exhibits and educational materials at the OSC. When successful the OSC will
enable the PI?s to enter the Central Florida school system in order to take
science education to classrooms. Given Central Florida?s demographic, the
schools that are targeted often qualify as ?majority minority? and historically
black? institutes.