* 1159295
* Collaborative Research:  High Surface Area Mesoporous Carbons for Facile Biofuel Recovery from Dilute Aqueous Solution
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Bryan Vogt, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2016
* USD 221,455.00

1159295/1159200&lt;br/&gt;Vogt/Nielsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant
developments in producing sustainable liquid transportation fuels from renewable
biomass resources, end-product toxicity remains a key, productivity-limiting
factor in most conventional bioprocesses. One effective approach to relieve
biofuel product toxicity is through its in situ recovery from the culture, which
requires low cost, low energy, and biocompatible separation technologies that
selectively remove biofuels from dilute aqueous solutions. Low energy separation
processes have been proposed, but most prior studies have focused on model,
biofuel-water solutions; real processes are challenged by complex biological
mixtures prone to cause fouling and poor material biocompatibility, which
adversely impact separation performance and overall process viability. Here, we
propose to systematically examine magnetic, mesoporous, carbon-based materials
to elucidate how fundamental physicochemical properties impact adsorbent
performance for biofuel (ethanol and n-butanol) recovery in both idealized
solutions and growing cultures. Fundamental and mechanistic characterizations of
biofuel-adsorbent interactions, as well as nonideal interactions (fouling
phenomena), will provide structure-function relationships in real systems.
Ultimately, the productivity enhancements that can be realized through
continuous, in situ biofuel recovery will be assessed by integrating these
materials with biofuel-producing microbial cultures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
surface area and pore accessibility of ordered mesoporous materials make them
attractive for biofuel separations. We propose to utilize soft templated
mesoporous carbons as biofuel adsorbents; synthetic tuning of the pore size,
surface area, and pore morphology will provide a fundamental understanding of
how these properties impact biofuel adsorption capacity, partition coefficients,
and heats of adsorption. We propose a single pot synthesis to include cobalt
nanoparticles in the carbon without significantly impacting the mesostructure to
enable magnetic separation of the adsorbent from culture. Recovery efficacy will
be systematically examined to determine if magnetic separation is a viable
mechanism for adsorbent recovery. We will begin with fundamental studies using
model solutions for direct comparison with other commonly examined adsorbents
for biofuel separations; however, additional considerations will be critical in
real applications. In reality, biofuel-producing cultures are complex mixtures
wherein fouling and other non-ideal interactions lead to altered separation
performance. Meanwhile, the microbial biocompatibility of mesoporous carbons is
relatively unknown. Accordingly, we will systematically examine the nature and
degree of non-ideal interactions to define and incorporate material properties
promoting sustained performance under realistic process conditions. Two
different recovery strategies will be developed and examined for comparative
analysis: a traditional, externally circulated packed-bed column, and the novel
dispersion of magnetic adsorbent particles throughout the culture (followed by
their magnetic collection). We anticipate the latter novel approach, which has
never been examined in growing, biofuel-producing cultures, will provide
improved efficacy as it enables continuous contact between the adsorbent and
culture medium without costly and cell-damaging pumping requirements. This end-
to-end, this proof-of-concept study will enable evaluation of how adsorbent
physical properties impact performance as applied to continuous, in situ removal
of ethanol and n-butanol from growing microbial cultures. These capstone
experiments uniquely allow direct evaluation of if and how fundamental
characterizations performed under idealized conditions can predict performance
in real systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental understanding of the
property-structure relationships of mesoporous materials for biofuel adsorption
would enable more efficient separations of biofuels from culture broths and will
aid in reducing the U.S. dependence on foreign fossil fuels. The broader
educational impact will involve participation of graduate and undergraduate
students in this highly interdisciplinary area of inquiry. Moreover, concepts
and results from this research will be incorporated into a new teaching lab
module on bioreactors and biofuels. Outreach activities to local
underrepresented K-12 students are proposed to discuss the societal importance
biofuels and the challenges associated with their separation and production;
additionally, these activities will aim to correct common misconceptions
regarding nanotechnology. Broader dissemination to P-16 will be enabled through
the Akron Global Polymer Academy, which has worldwide reach.