* 1159852
* Bioinspired ECM Network  Hydrogels as Templates for Engineering Vascular Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Lakeshia Taite, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 07/31/2015
* USD 299,999.00

Taite/ 1159852

This award to the Georgia Institute of Technology by the Biotechnology,
Biochemical and Biomass Engineering Program and the Biomaterials Program
supports the development of hybrid materials that facilitate the engineering of
a natural protein matrix within a synthetic material for use as a template for
the formation of cardiovascular tissues. Engineering stable vascular substitutes
has the potential to improve the health of the large portion of our population
suffering from cardiovascular disease, and this work will lead to the design of
a new class of biologically active materials designed to encourage development
of the extracellular matrix (ECM) that provides mechanical support and the means
of cellular communication within vascular tissues. Currently, the replication of
tissue structure and function has not been achieved by the use of natural
protein or synthetic polymer biomaterial scaffolds. The long term goal of this
project aims to blend synthetic and natural biomaterials to form a scaffold
capable of instructing human cells to arrange the appropriate tissue structure
using cell-adhesive hydrogels as the base mechanical support for engineering a
functional ECM by encapsulated human cells. This will be accomplished by: 1)
incorporating the cell adhesion and crosslinking motifs that are found naturally
in the protein elastin into poly(ethylene glycol) hydrogels to form an ECM-
templated scaffold, 2) studying the kinetics of elastin fiber formation and
cellular interactions within this hybrid matrix, and 3) optimizing protein
production by tailoring the hydrogel environment to further support cellular
growth and organization. The proposed research builds upon previous developments
using tailorable hydrogels as ECM mimics that promote cell adhesion, while the
intellectual merit lies in development of the natural component of our hybrid
synthetic/natural copolymer system by human cells and the physical linkage of
the two materials through the crosslinking biologically inspired peptide
sequences. The development and optimization of this system will reveal much
about the signals necessary for structural development of the ECM and the cues
necessary for engineering healthy vascular tissues.

The success of the proposed research will guide the way to new classes of
materials optimized for tissue formation. The ability of cells to control their
own spatial and temporal remodeling of biomaterials will allow optimal scaffold
design to facilitate tissue engineering. These materials can be broadly applied
to other areas of tissue engineering and biomaterials research by providing a
tool to study how the integration of synthetic materials and naturally derived
ECM impacts cell-cell and cell-material interactions in different tissues and to
study the mechanisms of ECM deposition and remodeling that are yet unknown.
Through the integrated education plan, students will have exposure to
biomaterials through undergraduate coursework and mentored research. The
proposed activities will also allow the continuation of an undergraduate summer
research experience designed to increase underrepresented student success in
chemical engineering through interactions with Dual Degree-participating
programs throughout the Southeast.