* 1159092
* Isotachophoresis for Rapid Nucleic Acid Hybridization and Sensitive Detection of Urinary Tract Infections
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Juan Santiago, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

1159092&lt;br/&gt;Santiago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed is a study of the
theory and practice of a novel assay which integrates on-chip ITP with sequence
detection capability of molecular beacons (MBs). MB are synthetic
oligonucleotide DNA which fluoresce strongly upon hybridization with their
complimentary nucleic acid sequence. ITP is a non-linear electrokinetic
technique which can focus target analytes with high selectivity in a sharp
electric field gradient. The Santiago group proposes the use of on-chip ITP to
achieve 100,000-fold preconcentration and mixing of MBs and rRNA into the same
10 picoliter virtual reaction chamber at an ITP focal zone. This focusing causes
~100,000-fold increase of hybridization rates. The Santiago group has
demonstrated the principle of the ITP/MB assay, and here propose a
transformative new method which can attain a dramatic, 1000-fold increase in
sensitivity over their preliminary work combining ITP and MBs. The proposed 100
fM sensitivity would cover the full clinically relevant range, including
presymptomatic UTI infections. They propose a novel two-step assay which
initially preconcentrates, mixes, and hybridizes MBs, and subsequently separates
un-reacted MBs from hybrids immediately prior to detection to minimize non-
specific background fluorescence. They will minimize sample dispersion using
geometric modifications to on-chip channels. To improve their design and
optimization capabilities, they will, in parallel, develop a novel and unique
computational tool for coupling finite rate reactions with non-linear
electrokinetic flows. They will validate this computational tool using a set of
well-controlled experiments. These computational tools will be incorporated into
a free, open-source code with a user-friendly interface, and be portable across
major platforms (Windows, MAC, and Unix). This unique code will be made
available through downloads, a blog website for updates and commentary, tutorial
videos, relevant data bases, documentation (including peer-reviewed journal
papers describing the solution methods), and example input and output files. In
summary, the proposed study will (1) explore the basic limits and potential of
leveraging ITP to create widely applicable on-chip virtual reaction chambers for
fast hybridization; (2) create a novel react-then-separate assay which speeds up
hybridization rates by 100,000 fold and maximizes sensitivity; (3) demonstrate
prototype miniaturized systems for UTI diagnosis from human urine in 10 min; and
(4) develop new, free, open-source computational tools for the electrokinetics
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infectious diseases caused by bacterial
pathogens remain one of the most common causes of mortality worldwide. This
proposal focuses on urinary tract infections (UTI), the second most common
infection in the US. UTI affects all patient demographics; and causes $3.4
billion total medical expenditures, approximately 8 million clinic or emergency
department visits, and over 100,000 hospitalizations per year. Similar to most
other bacterial infections, diagnosis of UTI requires a centralized clinical
microbiology laboratory and trained professionals to perform bacterial culture
and phenotyping, which typically takes 1-3 days. Molecular amplification and
diagnostic methods exist, but are rarely used for UTI and still require trained
personnel in centralized laboratories. This delay time in diagnosis is at least
partially responsible for overuse of antibiotics and the associated emergence of
drug resistant bacterial strains. To address this need, the Santiago group
proposes to develop a prototype demonstration of a low-cost microfluidic device
with potential to reduce bacterial diagnostic time from ~3 days to ~10 min
including sample loading, on-chip sample preparation, and sequence specific
detection. This system will be designed with practical implementation in mind,
including ease of use and minimal fluid handling. This work has application to
both conventional clinical microbiology laboratories and point-of-care settings,
and can potentially eliminate dependence on trained operators. Santiago will use
isotachophoresis (ITP) to extract and concentrate nucleic acid bacterial
signatures, including 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA), directly from untreated urine
lysate, and detect and quantify its presence using sequence specific molecular
beacon probes on a miniaturized device. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Websites will be
developed to describe the work to the general community and to share models and
methods with the scientific community; host a science high school teacher in
their laboratory each summer; incorporate assignments based on this research
into a Fluids Engineering undergraduate course; host 1-2 undergraduates in the
lab; and incorporate research-level material into an advance graduate course.