* 1159100
* IRFP: GENIE Modeling of Paleogene Hyperthermals
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,08/31/2016
* Sandra Turner, Kirtland                Sandra         E
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 147,772.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program?s awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise, and experimental conditions abroad.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-four month research
fellowship by Dr. Sandra Kirtland Turner to work with Dr. Andy Ridgwell at the
University of Bristol in Bristol, United Kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By the
end of the 21st century, the continued build-up of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere means that radiative forcing of Earth's climate will surpass anything
seen on Earth for tens of millions of years. Numerous abrupt warming events
(hyperthermals) that occurred in the warm, 'greenhouse' climate before ~40 Ma
provide our best analogs for future climate change. During these events, there
is evidence for rapid injections of massive amounts of carbon into the oceans
and atmosphere, accompanied by intense warming and ocean acidification.
Characteristics of these events, including their regular occurrence and fast
rate of recovery, suggest gaps in understanding of carbon cycle instabilities
and feedbacks in a warm climate. To fully exploit the potential of these events
to inform Earth's predicted long-term response to fossil fuel emissions, it is
critical to combine datasets that reconstruct these events with models that test
hypotheses regarding the controls on their occurrence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses an Earth system model of intermediate
complexity called GENIE (Grid-Enabled Integrated Earth system model) to test key
questions regarding the mechanisms responsible for initiating and terminating
hyperthermal events on a greenhouse Earth. The first objective is to use the
GENIE model to assess the fidelity of individual paleoclimatic records in
recording abrupt climate transitions. This exercise involves the development of
a methodology to improve estimates of the size of these events by incorporating
and systematically assessing the biases that influence preservation of event
size and shape in the geologic record. The second objective is to add key model
capabilities to GENIE that will 1) enable study of how variations in Earth's
orbit impact the timing and size of hyperthermal events and 2) test the role of
carbon sources that are not yet explicitly included in existing carbon cycle-
climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to her research, Dr. Kirtland
Turner is interested in the broader social and political implications of
paleoclimatology and carbon cycle-climate modeling. She hopes to use results
from her reconstruction and modeling of hyperthermal events to educate the
public and policymakers about the true lifetime of fossil fuel CO2 emissions and
characteristics of a warm world. Finally, this research will help develop new
international collaborations between the PI, collaborators at Scripps
Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, CA (Dr. Richard Norris? research
group), and Dr. Ridgwell?s research group at the University of Bristol, U.K.