* 1159966
* Extending the Luminescence Lifetime in Breast Cancer Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Stefan Bossmann, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 304,576.00

CBET-1159966&lt;br/&gt;Bossmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit.
Developing cancer diagnostics for recognizing breast cancer at the localized
stage, in combination with the exact identification of the tumor boundaries
during surgery, would be very advantageous, because virtually all breast cancer
mortality occurs after the cancer has metastasized. In 2012, the National Cancer
Institute anticipates approx. 230,000 new breast cancer cases and 40,000 deaths.
The 5-year relative survival of breast cancer decreases to 23 percent at the
distant stage, from 83 percent at the regional stage and 98 percent at the
localized stage. Numerous proteases are overexpressed in breast cancer and
surrounding tissue. Luminescence assays have the potential to be three orders of
magnitude more sensitive, when compared to immunoassays. Furthermore,
luminescence assays are able to detect only chemically active proteases, whereas
immunoassays detect a mixture of active proteases and zymogens. The major
impediment that has prevented the breakthrough of luminescence assays for in-
vitro and in-vivo protease detection is the autofluorescence of blood and
especially tissue. Autofluorescence of biospecimens limits the sensitivity,
specificity and statistical reproducibility of optical cancer detection methods.
This is especially valid for the detection of early cancers (in blood tests) and
early metastases (in-vivo). Using the current state-of-the-art cancer treatment,
early detection of cancer remains the only valid option for decreasing cancer
mortality. &lt;br/&gt;Whereas spin-allowed energy transfer proceeds within
nanoseconds, spin-forbidden energy transfer requires significantly more time (50
to 250 ns). The autofluorescence of blood and tissue decays within less than
25ns. Therefore, only the signal from the luminescent protease sensor will be
visible after that time. The absence of autofluorescence will greatly enhance
the signal-to-noise ratio. It will also significantly shorten the time required
for in-vitro and in-vivo protease measurements. Spin-forbidden energy transfer
occurs between a ruthenium-poly-pyridyl sensitizer and a chemically attached
cyanine-dye upon excitation of the sensitizer. The sensitizer-dye diad will be
attached to iron/iron oxide core/shell nanoparticles. Intense plasmon quenching
of all luminescence occurring from the diad will occur as long as the diad is
attached to the nanoparticle. The linker between diad and nanoparticle will
consist of a consensus sequence (oligopeptide) that can be cleaved quickly only
by its respective protease. Up to four different cyanine dyes featuring
different absorption and emission maxima will be used as components in a diad.
Upon release by a protease from the nanoparticle, each diad will exhibit a
characteristic, long-lived luminescence signal (Light Switch for Protease
Detection). &lt;br/&gt;The nanoplatforms capable of spin-forbidden energy
transfer mediated luminescence will be tested in BALB C mice bearing 4T1 tumors.
The 4T1 metastatic breast cancer model is a syngeneic model. We will image the
tumor location, surgically excise the tumors, characterize the excised tumor
tissue and conduct a mouse survival study after tumor excision. The core/shell
iron/iron oxide NPs can also potentially be used for MRI
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. Significance and Broader Impact:
The results from the project could potentially lead to a new and relatively
inexpensive method for early cancer diagnostics and a new standard of care in
breast cancer surgery. In addition, the project will provide quantitative data
with respect to how the activity of cancer-related proteases varies depending on
in-vitro and in-vivo conditions. These findings will be of importance for the
development of enzyme-activatable anticancer drugs. The Departments of
Anatomy&amp;Physiology and Chemistry at Kansas State University (KSU) will
create one block course for the duration of one week in order to enhance their
students? perspective on biophotonics, biosensing and nanomedicine: Dr. Bossmann
will develop and teach this block course entitled ?Theranostics? during the
spring semester as a part of the ?Materials Chemistry Course? (CHM 852) of
Chemistry at KSU. This course is open to all graduate and undergraduate students
in veterinary medicine, chemistry, biochemistry, biology and physics. The
proposed study will help extend this research to ongoing collaborative efforts
on cancer therapy and diagnostics at Kansas State University. The research will
also create opportunities to incoming REU (Research Experience of
Undergraduates), SUROP (Summer Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program) and
DSP (Developing Scholars? Program) students at KSU. The proposed instrumental
development will be open to collaborations with other Universities and Research
Institutions.