* 1159609
* Rapid Identification of Pathogenic Bacteria Based on Long-range SERS Microarray Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Qiuming Yu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 12/31/2015
* USD 330,664.00

Yu&lt;br/&gt;1159609&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of biosensors for the
rapid identification of pathogenic bacteria with high sensitivity and
specificity is highly desired for environmental monitoring, biomedical
diagnostics, and homeland security. Current detection methods, such as
bacteriologic culture, serological, and PCR tests, are either time consuming or
require the use of high-end instruments and species-specific antibodies, greatly
complicating their engineering transition to real world applications. Biosensors
based on surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) for direct detection and
discrimination of bacteria offers many advantages over the current detection
methods such as being reagent-less, multiplexing and the potential for on-line
and infield applications. However, conventional SERS is a near-field effect
which severely limits the detection of bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
In this work, the PI challenge the current pathogenic bacteria detection methods
by proposing to develop a new biosensor platform based on long-rang SERS
(LRSERS) for the sensitive detection and rapid identification of pathogenic
bacteria. The LR-SERS concept is supported by the fundamental physics in that
the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) can be extended to a long distance from the
metal surface by the coupling of SPRs at both metal/dielectric interfaces of a
metal thin film. This work is aimed to rationally design fundamentally new LR-
SERS substrates using theoretical electromagnetic calculations and to develop a
microarray biosensor based on the LR-SERS platform. Electromagnetic finite-
difference time-domain (FDTD) calculations will be performed first in order to
rationally design the plasmonic nanostructures with the strongest local electric
field away from the metal surface to ~ 50 nm, the length covering bacterial cell
walls. Subsequently, the LR-SERS substrates will be fabricated via electron beam
lithography (EBL) for the detection of bacteria. While the LRSERS microarray
biosensor developed in this project is targeted for rapid identification of
any&lt;br/&gt;pathogenic bacteria, we will use the isolates of vibrio species
for testing because the pathogenic&lt;br/&gt;marine bacterium V.
parahaemolyticus is the leading cause of seafood-borne bacterial illness in the
word. The LR-SERS spectra of isolates of V. parahaemolyticus from different
phylogenetic groups and sources (environment and clinical) will be collected and
analyzed to determine the correlation of LR-SERS spectral characteristic peaks
to the gene encoding outer membrane and&lt;br/&gt;cell wall proteins of
pathogenic strains. A method for the quick identification of pathogenic
V.parahaemolyticus from a mixture of bacteria strains will be established using
LR-SERS barcode and principle component analysis (PCA). And finally, LR-SERS
microarray biosensors will be integrated with a microfluidic system for the in-
situ, sensitive, and high-throughput detection and identification of pathogenic
bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The LR-SERS microarray biosensors developed
in this project provide a new approach strategy that can lead to, for example,
the development of biosensor networks deployed off-coast for health early
warning systems. Results from this project will make significant impact on the
related fields such as analytical chemistry, biomedicine, pharmacology,
forensics, food safety, agriculture, bio-fuel research, environmental
monitoring, and bio-defense.&lt;br/&gt;Graduate, undergraduate, and community
college students will receive training and participate in this highly
interdisciplinary research project, especially students from underrepresented
groups such as female. The participation of international exchange students will
promote the international collaborations. The knowledge gained from this work
will be disseminated through the lectures the PI provides for the courses every
year and via outreach programs established by the UW Center for Nanotechnology
and the Seattle Pacific Science Center.