* 1159396
* Conference: Operando IV at Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY, April 29 - May 3, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Carsten Sievers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 12/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

Abstract 1159396 Sievers

In situ and Operando spectroscopy have become the cutting edge of catalysis
research. Probing the physicochemical properties of catalysts while
simultaneously measuring the catalytic activity and selectivity provides
unprecedented insights into catalytic structure ? activity/selectivity
relationships. The development of such fundamental structure ? activity
relationships allows for the design of advanced catalysts for targeted reaction
products.

This proposal requests support for the 2012 Operando IV conference at Brookhaven
National Laboratory, April 29 through May 3, 2012. The objective of the meeting
is to create an environment for fruitful discussions between researchers from
universities, national laboratories and industry. Operando IV will cover all
aspects of operando spectroscopy for catalysts including heterogeneous and
homogeneous catalysis. Areas of interest include application of theory, new
experimental approaches and techniques, time and spatial resolution, and various
combinations of techniques. It is expected that there will be an emphasis on
fuel cells, electrocatalysis, and catalysis related to the production of
biofuels, and other energy related areas where catalysis is playing a major role
in renewable energy.

The requested funds will enhance the educational impact of Operando IV by
supporting the participation of graduate and undergraduate catalysis
researchers, as well as young faculty members, from U.S. institutions. Operando
IV will be the first operand meeting in North America. This meeting will provide
American researchers with a unique opportunity to be exposed to the latest
developments at the cutting edge of catalysis research and also a chance to
present their research work to global leaders in this subfield of catalysis.