* 1159218
* IRFP: Semiclassical Quantum Gravity
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Harold Haggard, Haggard                 Harold         M
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 160,000.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and by
the Physics of the Universe Program in the Division of Physics.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Hal M.
Haggard to work with Dr. Carlo Rovelli at the Centre de Physique Theorique de
Luminy, Marseille, France.

There is now substantial evidence that the classical limit of loop gravity is
general relativity. This research uses semiclassical techniques to study the
first order quantum effects of loop gravity and to clarify the structure of the
theory so that these effects can become solid predictions characterizing the
quantum nature of gravitation. The work proceeds along three main lines: At the
Planck scale, a quantum behavior of the geometry of space is expected. Loop
gravity provides a specific realization of this expectation and predicts a
granularity of space with each grain having a quantum behavior. The first line
of this work investigates the geometrical character of the spin network basis,
the basis that captures this discreteness. In particular, a manner for
investigating the volume of more complex grains of space, beyond the tetrahedral
case usually studied, is being pursued.

There is a well known one parameter ambiguity in the loop quantization of
gravity, which is coded in the Immirzi parameter. In the second line a new
method for investigating the origin of the Immirzi parameter is being
investigated. Clarification of the role of this parameter is essential for the
theory to make definite predictions. Finally, in the third line, a novel method
for the calculation of the perturbative graviton propagator is being
investigated. This method uses the tools of semiclassical mechanics and could
substantially streamline the calculation of propagators and n-point functions in
the theory. Successful development of this method will also allow the
calculation of the first order quantum corrections in the theory.

Completing this research program will establish loop gravity as a strong
candidate for the description of gravity at the Planck scale; a description that
not only provides a quantum picture of spacetime at microscopic scales and is
compatible with our current understanding of quantum field theory but one that
can predict signatures that will be experimentally tested as they enter the
domain of technological feasibility. Experimental astrophysics and cosmology are
achieving unprecedented measurements of the large-scale universe. This project
aims to predict new quantum gravitational phenomena so that we can witness
science at its best: prediction and experimental measurement arriving together.