* 1159178
* IRFP:  Sexual Conflict in a Tropical Bird: The Evaluation of a Unique Mating System
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Joseph Maddox, Maddox                  Joseph
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 144,182.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. J. Dylan
Maddox to work with Drs. Juan Carlos Castro and Roberto Pezo at the Universidad
Nacional de la Amazonía Peruana in Iquitos, Peru.

The evolutionary interests of males and females are frequently in conflict.
Perhaps nowhere is this better illustrated than in species that are sexually
size dimorphic in which dominant males can control mating opportunities simply
due to their size and strength advantages over females. In these taxa, males are
thought to "win" bouts of mating conflict, and thus many studies focus only on
the mechanisms that determine male dominance. There is mounting evidence,
however, that females may have far more latitude for exerting mate choice than
has been previously recognized, which suggests that studies also need to
determine the traits selected by females that circumvent the reproductive
benefits of male dominance.

This project investigates mating conflict by studying both the determinants of
male dominance and female mate-choice in a colonial tropical bird species: the
yellow-rumped cacique (Cacicus cela). Using a combination of experimental
manipulations, behavioral observations, and molecular and genetic analyses, this
project will yield important insights into how female choice and male dominance
interact in a system that has traditionally been viewed as male-controlled.
Apart from the intellectual merit, this fellowship will also forge new
collaborations between the PI and Latin American scientists.