* 1159640
* Enhancing the innate cellular degradation capacity
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Theresa Good
* 05/31/2016
* USD 339,700.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1159640&lt;br/&gt;Segatori,
Laura&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein biogenesis involves the progression of a
polypeptide chain through a series of folding intermediates in search for the
most thermodynamically stable conformation - the native 3D structure. Taking
place in the crowded cellular milieu, this process can lead to native folding or
off-pathway misfolded species. Protein misfolding can result in destructive
consequences for the cell as it not only impairs functions but can also favor
formation of aggregates. A folding quality control system balances synthesis,
folding and degradation of proteins thereby maintaining protein homeostasis in
eukaryotic cell. Manipulating protein expression to increase protein production
perturbs protein homeostasis and results in accumulation of misfolded proteins
and formation of aggregates. Misfolding and aggregation, in turn, cause
induction of proteotoxic stress and activation of apoptosis. The accumulation of
misfolded proteins favor misfolding of newly synthesized proteins, further
compromising folding and stability of the proteome, and the formation of
aggregates is highly cytotoxic. Not surprisingly, protein misfolding and
aggregation are key impediments to the high-yield production of recombinant
proteins, which is one of the fastest growing sectors of the pharmaceutical
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The molecular mechanisms that regulate the
disposal of misfolded proteins still remain elusive. This project will address
these fundamental cell biology questions and will make use of synthetic biology
approaches and protein engineering techniques to decipher and manipulate the
innate cellular degradation capacity. Results from this work will enable the
design of novel cell engineering strategies to limit accumulation of misfolded
proteins, prevent aggregation and enhance production of natively folded
proteins. These strategies have the potential to significantly impact the high
yield production of recombinant proteins for research, industrial and diagnostic
applications. In addition, the knowledge gained from this study will advance our
understanding of aging and protein misfolding diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed experimental plan will provide a setting to educate undergraduate
students. It will also create an effective platform for reaching out to high
school students and inspire their interest in science and technology with the
goal to increase and diversify the pool of students interested in biotechnology
related disciplines. The educational plans incudes creating a series of
mentoring programs and research experiences to engage undergraduate and high
school students, with particular emphasis to women and underrepresented
minorities.