* 1159244
* Integration of scheduling and control using closed loop implementation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2012,06/30/2018
* Marianthi Ierapetritou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2018
* USD 354,575.00

1159244&lt;br/&gt;Ierapetritou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: Given the strenuous
economic environment and the fierce competition that almost all industrial
sectors have to face, a lot of research and development have recently focused on
advanced manufacturing. The initiative that the president announced this summer
to invest $500M on the Advanced Manufacturing Partnership (AMP) points in this
direction. More specifically this effort targets the collaboration of industry,
universities, and the federal government "to invest in emerging technologies
such as information technology, biotechnology, and nanotechnology". There are
already some steps towards this direction that aim in reducing the time to the
market and increasing the efficiency of manufacturing processes. This proposal's
objective is to develop approaches that can lead to more efficient product
operations by incorporating the process dynamics into the production scheduling
problem. The full coupling of process control and production scheduling can
substantially increase production feasibility and optimality. However,
simultaneous consideration of process control and scheduling problems is
currently plagued by (a) the lack of communication between the associated
research communities; (b) its computational intensity, and (c) the inherently
complex nature of manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: We propose an integrated approach to address the problem of scheduling
considering a closed loop implementation of control in a process level. This
will result in more efficient utilization of resources most importantly in the
face of disturbances. However the incorporation of control within the already
complex scheduling problem results in a very difficult problem and conventional
solution methods turn out to be inefficient. The main outcome we are targeting
is to provide the decision maker solutions that are optimal in terms of
production capacity and feasible in terms of process dynamics in the face of
disturbance.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this target, the following ideas will be
investigated:&lt;br/&gt;1. Integration of closed loop control with short term
scheduling following the basic idea of Model Predictive Control (MPC)
strategy.&lt;br/&gt;2. Investigation of MPC integration using multi-parametric
programming.&lt;br/&gt;3. Investigation of efficient solution methodologies for
the integrated scheduling and&lt;br/&gt;control
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The ultimate goal of this work is
to optimize the production scheduling considering the details of process
dynamics. Realistic case studies from chemical and pharmaceutical manufacturing
will be utilized to test and verify the results of the proposed analysis tools.
The impact of the proposed work goes beyond specific industrial sector since the
general ideas and findings can be applied or extended to different types of
production facilities. The educational component of the proposed work involves
one graduate and two undergraduate students. Funding for the undergraduate
students would be pursued through REU initiative. Students affiliated with
program SUPER (Science for Undergraduates a Program for Excellence in Research)
of Douglass College of Women will be actively involved with this project.