* 1159626
* GARDE: Developing a World-Class Rehabilitation Engineering Workforce in America's Heartland
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Carl Nelson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 125,000.00

1159626&lt;br/&gt;PI: Nelson, Burnfield and Gu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to pair two to four undergraduate mechanical engineering design teams with
disabled individuals as clients annually for five years, with the target of
creating new devices to aid in rehabilitation and/or routine daily living. The
proposed senior capstone design program at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
has several objectives, all centered on using these directed undergraduate
capstone projects to prepare a well trained and skilled engineering workforce in
the area of rehabilitation engineering. The objectives are to: 1) provide
opportunities for undergraduate students to become engaged in socially relevant
design projects, with an emphasis on helping/rehabilitating individuals with
disabilities to facilitate daily living; 2) cultivate teamwork and project
management skills in undergraduate students; 3) leverage dissemination and
outreach opportunities to attract more female students to engineering
disciplines; and 4) provide undergraduate students with an introduction to
entrepreneurship in the context of engineering
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;Students will work
with Madonna Rehabilitation Hospital to identify disabled clients for whom to
design specialized assistive devices. They will perform needs assessment,
brainstorm and evaluate solution concepts, and bring their designs to fruition
through analysis, prototyping, and testing. As the students learn and implement
the design process, special emphasis will be placed on entrepreneurship and
dissemination of the designs. It is anticipated that new assistive technologies
will be created through this process, leading to the advancement of engineering
knowledge. Publications and patent applications with student participant
authorship are expected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The
impact of the proposed project is expected to be very broad. The expected
outcomes of these activities include: 1) increase in undergraduate students'
interest to pursue careers and advanced studies in biomedical/mechanical
engineering and related STEM fields, especially female students; 2) stimulation
of an interest in commercialization of ideas and technology; 3) publications
with the student participants as authors; 4) intellectual property disclosures
based on the students' designs. The educational outcomes will also be published
in engineering education journals. Additional disseminations efforts will be
pursued through local K-12 schools, Scouting organizations, and student clubs,
helping to attract more and diverse students into STEM disciplines. The
technical outcomes of the students' designs may also lead to positive changes in
rehabilitation and treatment for significant patient populations.