* 1159771
* Microfluidic Single-Cell Melting Curve Analysis for Broad-Scale Detection of Microbial Organisms
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jeff Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2016
* USD 397,884.00

Despite considerable progress made in developing microfluidic technologies for
biological analysis, including droplet microfluidics to enable scalable
partitioning of fluid into tiny compartments for single cell analysis,
transforming the technology into practical applications are still hindered by 1)
inadequate macro-to-micro interface to cope with large volume biological samples
containing complex matrix; 2) complicated post-PCR processing for multiplexed,
broad-scale genotypic analysis; and 3) insufficient progress toward system
integration. In this project, we plan to develop a fully integrated micro total
analysis system (&#56256;&#56861;TAS) for high throughput broad-scale microbial
detection and genotypic identification from a mixed population at single cell
resolution. Our novel platform will incorporate a microfluidic droplet generator
to encapsulate single bacterial cells into a large quantity of pL-sized droplets
where the cells are lysed and enzymatic reactions take place to facilitate high
throughput single cell PCR amplification. For broad-scale bacterial detection
and species identification, we will incorporate a previously validated 16S rRNA
PCR assay coupled with high resolution melt analysis (HRMA) for amplicon
sequence analysis. This platform will not only provide highly accurate
quantification of bacterial load, but the incorporation of HRMA at the single
cell level permits both broad-scale species identification, as well as
unprecedented resolution in measuring relative abundance of bacterial species
present in a mixed population.