* 1159561
* Fast Saccharification of Lignocellulosic Biomass under Mild Conditions in the Medium of Concentrated Lithium Bromide
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Xuejun Pan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2016
* USD 298,686.00

Intellectual Merit: Inability of energy- and cost-effectively releasing sugars
from lignocellulosic biomass is a bottleneck retarding commercial success of the
technologies based on the sugar platform for producing biofuels and chemicals.
In response to this challenge, this research is to establish an innovative
chemical process for low-cost production of sugars from lignocellulosic biomass.
Specifically, biomass like corn stover, switchgrass, hardwood, and softwood is
directly hydrolyzed and fractionated in concentrated lithium bromide (LiBr, 60%
w/w) in presence of small amount of acid as catalyst under mild conditions
(120~140ÂºC, 5-60 min) without any pretreatment. Cellulose and hemicellulose of
the biomass are quickly and completely hydrolyzed into monomeric sugars (hexoses
and pentoses), which can be converted into biofuels and chemicals biologically
or chemically. The used LiBr can be separated from sugars by ionexchange resin,
solvent extraction or crystallization and reused in the process. Lignin is
separated as insoluble residue when cellulose and hemicellulose are dissolved.
The lignin is expected to have a good potential for co-product development. It
is anticipated that the process could significantly reduce the production cost
of sugars from lignocellulose and therefore promote the sugar-based bioeconomy.
Compared with existing technologies, such as acid hydrolysis or enzymatic
saccharification, the LiBr-enhanced saccharification process (1) can directly
handle small size wood chips and therefore save the cost and energy for size
reduction; (2) has a high sugar recovery yield because of complete
saccharification and limited sugar degradation; (3) generates a concentrated
sugar stream for downstream conversion; (4) is fast chemical process and does
not need expensive enzymes; and (5) achieves fractionation of the biomass into
sugars and lignin, facilitating utilization of biomass components.

Broader Impacts: In addition to innovative research program, this proposal also
emphasizes on high-quality education, development and dissemination of new
knowledge, and outreach activities. The success of proposed process would
provide an alternative approach for producing sugars from lignocellulosic
biomass at low cost and low energy consumption. We anticipate the new process
would greatly promote the bioeconomy for producing biofuels, chemicals, and
materials from biomass, which could reduce greenhouse gase emission, eliminate
current dependent on fossil fuels, promote rural economy, and improve energy and
national security. The proposed research covers broad range of fundamental and
applied aspects of science and engineering. This would provide an ideal and
unique platform for teaching, training and learning. The integrated education
plan will target broad range of students. In addition to regular undergraduate
and graduate students, special attention will be paid to the students from high
school and underrepresented groups by encouraging them participating summer
projects on bioenergy. New concepts, research findings, innovative knowledge and
technologies will be disseminated to academia, industry, students, government,
and the general public through publishing research papers in scientific
journals, presenting research outcomes at conferences, enhancing curriculum, and
writing articles for non-academic magazine or media. All these will directly
and/or indirectly benefit the community of research, production, learning,
education, and policy-making in the area of bioenergy.