* 1159973
* Collaborative Research: Engineering morphology and protein secretion to enhance productivity in filamentous fungal fermentations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Mark Marten, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 274,993.00

1159973/1159933&lt;br/&gt;Marten/Harris &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filamentous fungi
are capable of producing and secreting proteins in stunning (i.e., &gt; 100 g/L)
quantities. Yet for many recombinant proteins productivity is much lower, often
due to inadequate protein secretion. The overarching goal in this project is to
develop a deeper understanding of protein secretion in filamentous fungi, so
that strategies can be developed to improve productivity during fungal
fermentation. It is hypothesized that fungal protein secretion and hyphal
morphology are intimately linked, such that identification of morphological
mutants will also select for both hypo- and hyper-secretors. To test this
hypothesis, temperature sensitive (Ts) morphological mutants with aberrant
protein secretion will be developed. These mutants will then be characterized
using modern tools (i.e., genome sequencing and proteomic analysis) to identify
the genes and molecular mechanisms responsible for their phenotypes. This
combination of a classical genetic screen with modern "-omics" technology will
allow rapid identification of gene function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filamentous
fungi are used extensively in the bioprocess industry to produce a vast array of
compounds worth billions of dollars. In contrast, fungal pathogens are a
significant problem, responsible for significant morbidity and mortality in
humans as well as billions of dollars in crop losses annually. Insight gained
from this work, will not only improve productivity in fungal bioprocesses but
has the potential to identify novel targets for improved antifungal therapies.
The Ts mutant library generated will be made available to the broader fungal
research community and has the potential for transformational impact because of
the important role fungal morphology and protein secretion play in nearly all
filamentous fungi. This research will also have broad impact on human capital,
as it has a significant educational component. Much of the mutant screening work
will be accomplished by undergraduate students, providing many a first exposure
to research. At the graduate level, students will be trained at the interface of
molecular biology and engineering and thus will gain valuable interdisciplinary
experience. They will also gain supervisory experience as they help coordinate
the research of undergraduates participating in the project.