* 1159509
* IRFP: Elucidating Incipient Coevolutionary Speciation Through Experimental and Transcriptomic  Approaches
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2016
* David Hembry, Hembry                  David          H
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 161,975.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and by
the Evolutionary Ecology Program in the Division of Environmental Biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support an eighteen-month research
fellowship by Dr. David H. Hembry to work with Dr. Atsushi Kawakita at Kyoto
University in Otsu, Japan, followed by a six-month research fellowship for Dr.
Hembry to work with Dr. Michael B. Eisen at the University of California,
Berkeley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of coevolution between species in the
diversification of life on earth is one of the major questions in evolutionary
biology. In particular, evidence that coevolution between species in mutualistic
relationships (in which members of both species benefit) promotes
diversification, as well as the mechanisms by which it might do so, remains
equivocal. Specialized pollination mutualisms between insects and plants,
particularly those between figs and fig wasps and yuccas and yucca moths, have
long been used as models for this research because the role that pollinators
play in transporting their hosts' gametes makes them especially likely
candidates for coevolutionary diversification. However, evidence for coevolution
driving diversification in these systems is equivocal from both empirical and
theoretical angles, and few studies have explicitly investigated speciation in
these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to use a
combination of experimental and transcriptomic approaches to examine a putative
case of nascent coevolutionary speciation in a specialized, insect-plant
mutualism that has recently diversified on oceanic islands in French Polynesia.
Leafflower moths (Lepidoptera: Gracillariidae: Epicephala) are the sole
pollinators of their leafflower plant hosts (Phyllanthaceae: Phyllanthus s. l.
[Glochidion]) but their larvae consume a subset of the host's seeds in return
for the service of pollination. This project will ask whether mechanisms exist
that promote reciprocal specialization in this mutualism, whether such
specialization leads to population differentiation in the leafflower moth
pollinators, and what kinds of differences in gene expression or genome sequence
are evolving in tandem with this reciprocal specialization. These questions will
be addressed through a combination of methods including bioassays, flower odor
analysis (GC-MS), population genetics, and transcriptomics. In doing so, this
study will explicitly investigate both nascent coevolutionary speciation between
coevolving organisms, and the mechanisms by which such nascent speciation
occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of the mechanisms that
give rise to biodiversity, particularly in the tropics, is vital to conserving
both species diversity and interaction diversity. This research has both long-
term value and short term value in this regard, since Phyllanthus trees are one
of the major endemic plant radiations in the South Pacific, with many rare taxa
threatened by invasive species and habitat destruction. Additionally, the use of
transcriptomics in the study of host-race formation in insects has clear
agricultural applications. This program will facilitate the Principal
Investigator's training both in next-generation sequencing methods in
evolutionary biology, and his international research experience. Finally, this
project will facilitate international collaboration between the Principal
Investigator and research groups at Kyoto University, Japan (Dr. Atsushi
Kawakita, Dr. Makoto Kato, Dr. Tomoko Okamoto, and Dr. Hirokazu Toju), Kyoto
Prefectural University, Japan (Dr. Issei Ohshima), the University of California,
Berkeley (Dr. Michael Eisen), and the Délégation à la Recherche, French
Polynesia (Dr. Jean-Yves Meyer).