* 1159829
* A Chemoselective Microreactor Device for Trace Carbonyl VOC Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Richard Higashi, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2016
* USD 299,952.00

CBET - 1159829 Fu

This NSF award by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work
by Professors Xiao-an Fu, Richard Higashi, and Michael Nantz to investigate a
microfabricated reactor for analysis of trace volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
in air and human breath. The analysis of human breath holds promise as a
powerful noninvasive diagnostic tool for many diseases including lung cancer,
tuberculosis, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Breath
is a mixture of air, carbon dioxide, water, and a large number of trace VOCs and
non-volatile organic compounds. The analysis of breath VOCs could lead to the
discovery of metabolic biomarkers of a large number of lung diseases and
fulfilling breath analysis as a noninvasive diagnostic tool.

The principal objective of this project is to investigate a chemoselective
preconcentration approach for quantitative analysis of trace carbonyl VOCs in
air and human breath. Carbonyl VOCs in air are directly related to air quality,
while carbonyl VOCs in human breath are relatable to oxidative damage from
diseases. Some carbonyl VOCs could be used as cancer biomarkers for early
detection of lung cancer. The proposed novel microreactors have microfluidic
channels and micropillars coated with custom-synthesized compounds for capturing
and concentrating trace carbonyl VOCs via unique chemical reactions. Chemically
selective reactions of the custom-synthesized micropillar coatings with carbonyl
VOCs solve many interference problems encountered in breath analyses. The
innovation of this project is development of microreactors that have unique
microstructures and surfaces to take full advantage of the custom-synthesized
compounds for chemoselective capture of trace carbonyl compounds in air and
human breath. The microreactors fabricated by microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) technologies provide considerable advantages, such as multiple highly
reproducible production, much lower cost, and a microfluidic scale that is
intrinsically well-suited for nanoelectrospray Fourier-transform-ion-cyclotron-
resonance mass spectrometry (FTICR-MS) analysis. The proposed study of the
effects of the microreactor microstructure and the selectivity and reaction
kinetics of the synthesized compounds on the capture efficiencies of trace
carbonyl compounds will provide fundamental chemical engineering knowledge for
future development of microreactors for trace VOC separation and detection.

The outcome of this research is directly linked to high-priority national
environment and healthcare issues. This collaborative research program in the
same institution will allow us to establish a multidisciplinary undergraduate
and graduate education and training program. The PIs are committed to utilize
this research opportunity to recruit and train undergraduate and graduate
students from under-represented groups. The interdisciplinary nature of this
project provides excellent opportunities for the PIs to disseminate chemical
microsystem technologies and demonstrate novel breath analysis method to K-12
grade students and their science teachers through the university outreach
programs. The PIs also plan to recruit local high school students to do their
science projects for participating Louisville Regional and the State of Kentucky
Science Fairs.