* 1159098
* Variation in Small RNA Pathways Across Maize Tissues and Inbreds
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Marja Timmermans, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 926,887.00

Intellectual Merit: Small RNAs play critical roles in development and in the
plant's ability to cope with unfavorable environmental conditions and pests.
Small RNAs negatively regulate the activity of select target genes recognized
based on sequence complementarity. Small RNAs are further important for
maintaining chromosome stability through the repression of repeated elements
contained within the genome. Much of the knowledge on how small RNAs are
generated and act comes from studies in Arabidopsis. Next generation sequencing
technologies have been employed in Arabidopsis as well as several other plant
species to analyze the small RNA content and to identify targets to elucidate
their function. Despite the importance of maize as a crop, maize small RNAs
remain relatively poorly characterized. Particularly, our knowledge of the maize
genes and processes targeted by small RNAs is extremely limited. The limited
data available indicate that while the mechanisms of small RNA production and
action are largely conserved, only a tiny fraction of the millions of small RNAs
identified in Arabidopsis are conserved in maize. Differences in small RNAs and
their targets even exist between closely related maize varieties, and these may
underlie important agronomic traits and contribute to the enhanced vigor and
improved yield of hybrids. This project seeks to take advantage of the latest
genomics approaches to perform a comprehensive analysis of small RNAs and
targets in tissues of two diverse, commonly used lines of maize. These will be
placed into distinct pathways through analysis of mutants defective in the
biogenesis of microRNAs (miRNAs) and trans-acting small interfering RNAs (ta-
siRNAs), and bioinformatics tools will be used to assess how the small RNA-
regulated gene networks vary across tissues and genetic variants. A subset of
newly identified small RNAs and their targets will be characterized in detail to
address biological function, developmental regulation, and how the extensive
allelic diversity contained within the genome of maize affects small RNA
targeted gene networks. These experiments will provide a deeper functional
understanding of small RNA-regulated processes in maize and an evolutionary
perspective of miRNA- and siRNA-mediated regulatory circuits. The analysis of
small RNAs in different inbreds of maize provides a unique opportunity to assess
how small RNA networks vary within a species, and will shed light on the
contribution of small RNAs to hybrid vigor and the phenotypic diversity present
between inbred lines that is exploited for crop improvement. Thus, this study on
maize will give invaluable insight into the diversity of small RNA function in
plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: An important aspect of this
project is to provide excellent research opportunities for undergraduate and
high school students, as well as research and professional training for two
Postdoctoral Fellows. Each year, two undergraduate or high school students will
contribute to genetic experiments, small RNA target analyses, and the
characterization of novel small RNAs. A partnership program has been established
with South Side High School in NY, which includes lectures as well as research
opportunities for selected students each year. The PIs will work closely with
the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory DNA learning center on the development of web
resources and teaching tools for pre-college and college students on a variety
of topics, including maize genetics and plant genomics, and will develop custom
bioinformatics tools that will allow students to functionally annotate novel
small RNAs and their predicted targets identified in these
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by
the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.