* 1159078
* ABI Innovation: Building a Comprehensive Catalog of Conserved Alternative Splicing Events from Heterogeneous Data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2015
* Liliana Florea, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Maglia
* 07/31/2015
* USD 574,124.00

A grant is awarded to the University of Maryland, College Park to develop a
methodology for building catalogs of conserved alternative splicing events from
heterogeneous sequence data. Alternative splicing (AS) is a widespread, likely
universal mechanism in higher organisms. A single gene can be spliced into
multiple variants, each capable of producing different functionality under
different cell conditions, for instance different tissues or developmental
stages, which has the potential to explain how complex organisms evolve by re-
using a relatively small number of genes. Creating a comprehensive catalog of AS
variations is therefore a critical step in understanding the biology of a
species, one which has been limited so far by the availability of data. This
project will establish the first methodology and the supporting computational
infrastructure for building comprehensive catalogs of AS events within and
between species by integrating heterogeneous sequence data, including those from
RNA-seq experiments. This research will provide critical insights into how to
analyze the massive amounts of heterogeneous data to detect AS variations and
map them efficiently and accurately between species. It will produce novel
software tools that can seamlessly align the various types of sequence data to a
target genome, and will use them to construct models of genes and their splice
variants and map them between species. The methods will combine comparative
genomics approaches with statistical models of sequences and alignments, and
with novel computational biology concepts such as the splice graph.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create powerful bioinformatics tools to
help biologists analyze RNA-seq data and create similar repositories for other
species, including animals, insects and plants. (All tools will be released free
of charge as open source software.) The collection of conserved and species-
specific events will be an invaluable resource to support studies of splicing
evolution and splicing regulation. Additionally, the project will create
electronic resources to support cross-cutting education in computer science and
biology, including web-based bioinformatics modules that will be used in the
curriculum at the University of Maryland and will also be made available to the
community of science education professionals through the National Lab Day forum.
Lastly, it will create opportunities for training and education of students from
high-school through graduate levels through Summer internships. The database,
results and software for this project will be accessible from
http://cbcb.umd.edu/~florea/research/ .