* 1159967
* Engineering and characterizing nanoparticles for cancer targeting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Efrosini Kokkoli, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 145,000.00

1159967/ Kokkoli This NSF award by the Interfacial Processes and Thermodynamics
and the Biotechnology, Biochemical and Biomass Engineering programs supports the
development of novel aptamer functionalizes stealth liposomes that bind to a new
cell surface molecule (fractalkine) on cells associated with cancer and
inflamation. Aptamers are short single-stranded oligonucleotides. They are
chemically produced, have the capability of binding with high affinity and
specificity a variety of different targets, and have been shown to be useful as
therapeutic agents and diagnostic tools. Their affinities are often comparable
to those observed for monoclonal antibodies, and are significantly higher
compared to those of peptides. As aptamer-amphiphiles, aptamers attached to a
hydrophobic tail, they can assemble with other lipids into liposomes that can be
used as targeted nanoparticles to treat different diseases, including cancer.
Researchers will engineer and characterize in vitro fractalkine targeted stealth
liposomes and evaluate their binding affinity and specificity for fractalkine
expressing colon cancer cells, as well as internalization and trafficking by
these cells. These experiments will identify the optimal aptamer concentration
that will be used for the design of the targeted delivery system. The PI will
then characterize the aptamer functionalized nanoparticles in vivo and evaluate
their ability to reach the tumor site selectively in a murine model of
colorectal cancer while avoiding health areas, as well as its efficacy and
toxicity. For this task the nanoparticles will be loaded with doxorubicin. The
innovative aspect of this proposal is the proposed use of the novel molecule,
fractalkine, as a target for the delivery of nanoparticles that encapsulate a
therapeutic payload. The proposed work will be of fundamental but also of
practical significance as the engineered aptamer-functionalized stealth
liposomes that will result from this study can be used as targeting
nanoparticles in different applications and encapsulate different loads of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI integrates her research with her
educational plan. One educational activity focuses on targeting underrepresented
minority students at the Saint Paul College, A Community &amp; Technical College
(with a large representation of a wide range of minority populations) with the
focus of exposing them to the research performed in the PI's lab, and motivating
them to transition into four-year colleges and universities. The PI is currently
collaborating, and will continue to do so in the future, with MRSEC. Through
MRSEC the PI will be hosting during the summer high school teachers, and
minority undergraduates from a nationwide pool of applicants, through a well
established network of high schools, and minority undergraduates from a number
of Minority Serving Institutions. To further attract underrepresented minority
undergraduates in the her laboratory, the PI will be attending and presenting at
the North Star STEM Alliance symposium. Furthermore, the PI has participated,
and will continue to participate, in outreach activities organized by different
organizations and societies with the goal of attracting and mentoring women in
sciences and engineering (a long term goal for the PI). As part of this goal the
PI is proposing to organize a seminar series in the Department of Chemical
Engineering and Materials Science at the&lt;br/&gt;University of Minnesota,
entitled "Women Engineers in Academia and Industry" with monthly seminars given
by women that will serve as positive role models for the female students and
postdocs.