* 1159045
* IRFP: The Geometry and Combinatorics of Symmetric Subgroup Orbit Closures on Flag Varieties
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2013,01/31/2016
* Benjamin Wyser, Wyser                   Benjamin       J
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 01/31/2016
* USD 152,934.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Benjamin
Wyser to work with Dr. Michel Brion at Universite Joseph Fourier Mathematics in
Grenoble, France.

Given a complex reductive group G and an involution of G, one can consider the
subgroup K of G consisting of elements fixed by the involution. Such a subgroup
is referred to as "symmetric". The set of K-orbits on the flag variety for G is
finite, and comes with a natural partial order. The poset structure is described
by elaborate combinatorial machinery. If this combinatorial structure is
understood, then information about one orbit closure can often allow one to draw
a conclusion about another orbit closure related to it in the partial order. To
give an example, given a formula for the equivariant fundamental cohomology
class of one orbit closure, a formula for the class of a higher orbit closure
can be computed from it using something known as a divided difference operator.

One goal of this project is to determine the extent to which this computation
can be extended from equivariant cohomology to equivariant K-theory. Using
techniques of localization, it should be possible to compute formulas for the
equivariant K-theory classes of closed orbits. The goal is to then use those
formulas as a basis for a recursion by which divided difference operators would
give the remaining formulas. This approach is known to work for Schubert
varieties, for instance. A certain class of K-orbit closures (called
"multiplicity-free") should be amenable to these techniques as well, since their
singularities are known to be no worse than those of Schubert varieties.
However, not all examples are multiplicity-free. Indeed, there exist some
symmetric subgroups whose orbit closures do exhibit worse singularities. For
such orbit closures, new ideas may be needed to compute their K-theory classes,
perhaps involving a more detailed study of the exact nature of their
singularities.

Another main goal is to investigate possible further roles of K-orbit closures
in positive Schubert calculus on the full flag variety, building upon recent
results in this area. The main idea is to compare a recently discovered rule,
which relates some Schubert structure constants to chains in a poset of
K-orbits, to other known rules in instances where the cases handled by various
rules overlap. The hope is that in examining how the various rules agree in such
cases, one rule which generalizes all of them can be found.

Schubert varieties are objects which are of great importance in many areas of
mathematics, such as algebraic geometry, combinatorics, and representation
theory. They have been studied exhaustively by experts in all of these fields,
and many deep and interesting connections between them have been discovered as a
result. K-orbits and their closures have much in common with Schubert varieties.
However, they are not nearly as well-studied, particularly from the geometric
and combinatorial viewpoints. Recent results suggest that these objects are
worthy of further attention. They hold the potential to reveal yet more of the
deep connections between these various interrelated areas of mathematics.