* 1159726
* Magnetic bead based preconcentration and sampling for biosensing in complex media
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Peter Hesketh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 01/31/2016
* USD 356,500.00

Hesketh&lt;br/&gt;1159726&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in bioassays is
the capturing of a target from a complex matrix. We propose to develop a new
sample preparation and pre-concentration microfluidic technique from complex
mixtures that uses functionalized magnetic beads guided by soft-magnetic
structures and rotating magnetic fields to mix and collect specific reagents. A
mesoscale computational model will be developed to study the key characteristics
of the capture process. The long term objective is to develop a practical
compact portable pre-concentration and pathogen purification system for complex
mixtures important for food and environmental safety that can be applied to a
wide range of assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: A fundamental
limitation of sampling with magnetic beads is low efficiency of target capture.
Optimal operation conditions for magnetic-guided sample preconditioning
microfluidic systems leading to high capture efficiency will be established as a
function of the size of the target relative the bead, the relative flow and bead
velocity, adhesion forces between the target and bead and other
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The overall objective is to
demonstrate efficient sampling from a complex matrix real world sample of
relevance to food safety. Utilizing rotating external magnetic fields and
microscale soft magnetic features the movement and placement of magnetic beads
can be manipulated to improve target capture. This novel method will have
significant impact on many types of bioassays where a target analyte is at low
concentration or where the sample matrix is complex including clinical
assays.&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary and Education Impact: This interdisciplinary
research on bead based sampling and mixing requires expertise in mechanical
engineering, electrical engineering and food science. Application of the
optimized experimental fluidic device to the detection of pathogens in food
samples at the Center for Food Safety at University of Georgia will be
demonstrated. This work will have significant impact on many types of bioassays
including clinical assays, where a target is at low concentration in a complex
matrix is complex. This project will involve and train graduate and
undergraduate students, high school teachers and high school students.