* 1159699
* A conformation-switching peptide probe for rapid, specific, quantitative and sensitive detection of amyloid aggregates
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Jin Ryoun Kim, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 328,052.00

INTELLECTUAL MERIT. The goal of this project is to develop a conformation-
switching peptide probe for rapid, specific, quantitative and sensitive
detection of conformationally distinct yet similar analytes. Our target analytes
are aggregates formed by a natively unfolded peptide, &#946; amyloid (A&#946;)
implicated in Alzheimer?s disease (AD), known to form oligomeric and fibrillar
assemblies. The heterogeneous A&#946; aggregates formed during aggregation
display different conformations and exert a varying extent of toxic effects.
Thus, accurate and reliable detection of distinct A&#946; aggregates represents
a significant step toward a better understanding of the exact nature of A&#946;
aggregation and the development of early diagnostics as well as therapeutic
drugs. Unfortunately, the existence of conformational similarity among distinct
A&#946; aggregates makes specific detection extremely difficult. Rapid,
specific, quantitative and sensitive detection is particularly important yet
currently unavailable in probing A&#946; oligomeric aggregates, which are
believed to be the major toxic agents in AD. In our previous studies, we
developed a peptide probe, PG46, for rapid, specific and quantitative detection
of A&#946; oligomers. PG46 was created by integrating A&#946; self-recognition
sequences with the conformation-sensitive biarsenical dye, FlAsH. PG46 was found
to specifically bind to A&#946; oligomers and display an increase in FlAsH
fluorescence upon such binding. Rapid, quantitative measurements of A&#946;
oligomers were also possible with PG46. Sensitivity for detection of A&#946;
oligomers was further improved by engineering of PG46. The sensitivity of our
current peptide probes, though significant, is still not optimal. Peptide probes
detecting other A&#946; aggregates are also urgently needed for accurate
profiling of A&#946; aggregation. Moreover, understanding of the detection
mechanism of our peptide probes is limited. A broader mechanistic understanding
is critical for not only the refinement and optimization of our initial design
principle to develop highly effective A&#946;-specific probes, but also the
extension of our strategy to create molecular probes for detection of amyloid
aggregates formed by other natively unfolded proteins. The principal objective
of the proposed project is to (1) create a novel class of peptide probes for
highly specific and sensitive detection of distinct A&#946; aggregates at
physiological concentrations and (2) reveal the mechanism of detection of
A&#946; aggregates by our peptide probes.

BROADER IMPACT. Our strategy to create peptide probes for A&#946; detection
represents a new paradigm for design of conformation-switching biosensors,
motivated by Nature?s use of natively unfolded proteins as structure-switching
biosensors for rapid and specific signaling processes. When successfully
completed, our peptide probes will serve as biosensing tools to (1) advance
understanding of the molecular basis of A&#946; aggregation under
physiologically relevant conditions, (2) identify, in a highthroughput assay,
aggregation inhibitors/modulators targeting a specific aggregation step and,
ultimately (3) establish correlations between A&#946; aggregation profiles in
biological samples and cellular/clinical manifestations of A&#946; aggregation.
Outcomes from our mechanistic studies are anticipated to provide an important
foundation for (1) understanding of conformation-switching biosensors derived
from natively unfolded proteins, (2) additional optimization of A&#946; specific
probes and (3) the creation of a biosensor for detection of other amyloid
protein aggregates, implicated in > 20 protein misfolding diseases. The
integration of research, education and outreach will result in the educational
and professional development of K-12, undergraduate and graduate students as
well as teachers in a multidisciplinary area that overlaps biochemistry,
biophysics and protein engineering. The problem-driven learning through research
projects, the biochemical engineering courses taught by the PI and an outreach
effort through New York Hall of Science will foster students? creativity and
problem solving ability. The proposed education and outreach plans tightly
integrate with the research plan, and will focus on expanding the participation
of underrepresented minority students in the study of science and engineering.
The research results and educational materials will also be made available to
the public in various formats including a video file on the PI?s web site.