* 1159544
* Upper limb kinematics and muscular compensation during activities of daily living in older adults with rotator cuff impairment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2013
* Katherine Saul, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Ted A. Conway
* 12/31/2013
* USD 238,890.00

PI: Saul&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1159544&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 20-50%
of older adults live with a rotator cuff tear, which is associated with
decreased shoulder strength, range of motion, and limited upper limb function.
These deficits compromise the performance of activities of daily living (ADLs),
and ultimately lead to loss of independence. Individuals with a torn rotator
cuff use compensatory movements to complete upper limb tasks, with deviations
from the desired movement and a reliance on unimpaired muscles for movement
production. The muscles most responsible for the ability to perform important
ADL tasks with and without compensation have not been identified. The primary
muscles associated with both healthy and compensatory movement strategies would
be excellent targets for rehabilitation if they were known. In addition, while
the PI's laboratory has previously shown that upper limb functional strength is
significantly related to isometric strength, minimal strength thresholds
necessary to perform ADLs have not been established. Such thresholds would
provide a clinically relevant, proactive way of identifying individuals at risk
for disability. Quantitative analysis of compensation in ADL tasks is needed to
understand the functional consequences of a rotator cuff tear in older adults
and to design rehabilitation strategies to strengthen muscles and improve
function after injury. The objective of this study is to investigate the effect
of rotator cuff tear on joint movement and muscular compensations in important
upper limb ADL tasks, using subject assessment and musculoskeletal modeling. The
research aims are to (1) characterize joint postures used by older adults with
rotator cuff injury and age-matched healthy older adults in performing 6 common
ADLs spanning the upper limb workspace (forward and upward reach, functional
pull, perineal care, axilla wash, and hair comb); (2) use a simulation approach
to identify the primary muscles responsible for performing each movement in each
of these groups; and (3) identify minimum isometric strength thresholds for
performing these task. The investigators' expertise in biomechanical analysis
and computational modeling of upper limb movement and rotator cuff impairment
make them uniquely qualified to complete these goals.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The proposed work will, for the first time, characterize normative
kinematics at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist for healthy older adults and older
adults with rotator cuff tears for ADL tasks critical to independence and self-
care. These data will provide a foundation for other researchers to evaluate
functional movement relative to established behaviors for these groups.
Uniquely, this project will apply dynamic computational simulation to ADL tasks
to explore the roles of individual muscles and reduced strength associated with
aging and rotator cuff injury. Ultimately, the simulation approach described
here could inform a) improved treatment and rehabilitation strategies for
individuals impaired by rotator cuff injury, and b) future analysis strategies
for other neuromuscular impairments and clinical
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts. The kinematic profiles and
corresponding nominal computational solutions for muscle control of the
movements measured in this project will be made publicly available through the
SimTK online repository system. We will identify the muscles most critical for
normal and compensatory movement production, which will be important targets for
strength training interventions to improve ADL performance. The proposed
research also will result in clinically relevant guidelines for minimal
isometric strength thresholds necessary for performing ADLs, enabling clinicians
to clearly identify at-risk patients before onset of disability. The PI proposes
to develop a collaborative graduate course sequence in movement biomechanics
with the Physical Therapy program of the new School of Health Sciences at High
Point University, a non-PhD granting institution. This course sequence will
permit collaborations between engineers and rehabilitation students
(predominantly female), thus encouraging translation of research outcomes and
clinically relevant concepts. The ultimate goal is to provide a bridge between
engineering research and rehabilitation trainees, improving communication of
research findings to the next generation of therapists working to restore upper
limb function.