* 1159746
* Morphology Design of Organic Crystals Grown from Solution
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Michael Doherty, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2015
* USD 361,801.00

1159746 Doherty

This work is funded by the Chemical and Biological Separations Program of the
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) and the
Chemical Measurements and Imaging Program of the Chemistry Division.

Over ninety percent of all pharmaceutical products are formulated in
particulate, generally crystalline form. Similarly, over seventy percent of the
products from the chemical industry are sold as solids. Solution crystallization
is the most common operation in these industries for the separation and
purification of products that are solids at room temperature and pressure.
During crystallization, many physical-chemical characteristics of the substance
are defined, including crystal polymorph, shape and size, chemical purity and
stability, bioavailability, solubility and dissolution rate. Accordingly,
solution crystallization is a very important field of research. However, control
over the physical form of organic crystals has remained poor, mainly due to
inadequate understanding of the basic growth and dissolution mechanisms, and the
influence of impurities, additives and solvents on the growth rate of individual
crystal faces. A key aspect of this research is to develop and test a crystal
growth model for non-centrosymmetric (noncentric) solute and/or impurity
molecules of realistic complexity, which will provide a platform for designing
crystal systems of defined shape. Crystal growth is a surface-controlled
phenomenon in which solute molecules are incorporated stereo-specifically into
surface lattice sites in order to yield the bulk long range order that
characterizes crystalline materials. Such surface processes are naturally highly
susceptible to the presence of small concentrations of other surface active
molecules. These may be deliberately added to a crystallization process or may
be inherent as reaction by-products - either way their activity is based on
their stereo-chemical similarity to the desired solute and they are known to
play havoc with the crystallization of organic crystalline materials. For fifty
years, crystal growth models of this effect have assumed that adsorbed immobile
impurities decrease the perpendicular growth rate of a crystal face by reducing
the velocity (rate of solute uptake) at an edge. Specifically, the immobile
impurities partition the edge into a collection of segments and the growth of
those segments whose length is less than or equal to some critical length is
arrested, thus decreasing the edge velocity. However, we argue here that under
dilute imposter conditions (the normal situation) this is not expected. Rather,
we argue the distances travelled by edges during the first turn of a growth
spiral on a crystal face are increased, thereby decreasing the density of steps
across the face and reducing the perpendicular growth rate of the crystal face.
Research is proposed to test and extend this new predictive model so that it
becomes a useful tool for process scientists and engineers. Model test systems
will include paracetamol (acetaminophen) grown from aqueous solution in the
presence of p-acetoxyacetanilide impurity (solute and impurity are both
noncentric); adipic acid (centric solute) grown out of aqueous solution in the
presence of hexanoic acid and octanoic acid (both noncentric) additives, and
selected API systems in collaboration with our industrial partners.

The intellectual merit of the new approach to crystal growth rests entirely on
the fact that the models provide a predictive method for anticipating the shape,
and shape evolution, of faceted crystals. This will greatly reduce the number of
experiments needed to define the design space for crystals with an engineered
shape.

The broader impacts of this work include (a) providing undergraduate research
experiences in my laboratory for students from UCSB, from universities across
the USA more broadly, and for undergraduates from international universities,
(b) dissemination of the research results through workshops, invited lectures
and with industrial collaborators at Eli Lilly, Abbott Labs, and others, (c)
tech transfer of the results through the creation and dissemination of software
tools that will enhance the productivity of US pharma companies.