* 1159635
* Telerehabilitation balance training for community dwelling older adults
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Kathleen Sienko, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 297,927.00

PI: Sienko&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1159635&lt;br/&gt;There are substantial physical,
emotional, and monetary costs associated with balance impairments and the falls
that typically ensue from acute or chronic bouts of instability. Given the large
percentage of older individuals that experience balance problems, and the desire
of these individuals as a whole to live independent lives, decreasing fall risks
is of paramount importance. Balance training reinforces the development of
sensorimotor strategies to improve postural control and functional mobility
which is crucial for fall prevention in the older adult population. Sensory
augmentation is a technique of augmenting or replacing compromised sensory
information through, for example, vibrotactile cues of body position. The PI and
other investigators have demonstrated that sensory augmentation decreases trunk
sway during real-time operation in a laboratory setting, and preliminary results
suggest that persistent improvements in balance performance exist over time
periods of minutes to hours following a small number of training sessions. While
the results of a single case study have shown improvements that lasted up to
eight weeks, no systematic studies have been performed to determine the
influence of sensory augmentation training on long-term retention following a
large number of balance training sessions. The three primary goals of the
proposed work are as follows: 1) Develop and characterize the efficacy of a
telerehabilitation cell phone based balance training tool intended for use in
the homes of community dwelling older adults; 2) Test for the persistence of
balance improvements for older adults who receive vibrotactile sensory
augmentation during standard at-home balance training exercises (intervention
group) compared with the persistence of improvements for those who perform these
exercises without sensory augmentation (three control groups); and 3) Assess the
effect of telemedicine-assisted balance training on exercise program
compliance.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Despite the success of
sensory augmentation technologies over the past ten years in improving standing
balance for persons with balance deficits in laboratory settings, significant
scientific questions remain unanswered; specifically, whether or not the carry-
over effects of training with a sensory augmentation technology exceed the
carry-over effects of training alone. Furthermore, existing sensory augmentation
technologies were developed for continual use over a short number of supervised
sessions rather than periodic rehabilitative use over many unsupervised session;
specifically, user-centric, easy-to-use, homebased technologies have yet to be
developed, thereby impeding potential widespread adoption. This work will
develop a sensory augmentation device that is appropriate for repeated at-home
use by older adults, based on a cell phone platform. Appropriateness, defined by
ease of use, clear and accurate exercise instruction, proper stability
thresholds (i.e., when to give corrective feedback), and correct assessment of
progress (i.e., when to move on to the next exercise), will be supported by co-
creative design of the device by engineers, prospective older adult end users,
and those administering rehabilitation (physical therapists) throughout the
design process. Furthermore, we will utilize the device's intrinsic
functionality for telemedicine to communicate detailed information regarding at-
home exercise compliance to the study team for evaluation of the cell phone
platform as a means to increase compliance during at-home rehabilitative
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;If balance improvements following
an extended series of sensory augmentation sessions are demonstrated to be
retained for time periods of weeks to months, significant impact on quality of
life for balance-impaired individuals may be achieved through decreased fall
risk, increased confidence in performing daily tasks, and ability to remain in
an independent living facility for a longer period of time. Furthermore,
periodic maintenance of these balance improvements may be enabled in a
straightforward, home-based, and low-cost manner through the development of the
cell phone balance trainer proposed here. For family members and other
caregivers, this technology is expected to reduce the amount of required
balance-related assistance. From a clinical standpoint, the telerehabilitation
functionality of this technology will provide physical therapists with a
mechanism to monitor compliance with prescribed at home balance therapy programs
and track patient progress over a large series of sessions. By facilitating and
recording balance metrics for a large number of rehabilitative training sessions
that can take place over a long period of time, the device will provide a means
to gather data that currently is unknown regarding the relationship between
number of training sessions with sensory augmentation and persistence of
positive outcomes. This understanding is critical to achieve satisfactory
rehabilitation.