* 1159443
* GOALI:  Multi-scale Optimization for the Design, Capacity Planning and Operation of Power Intensive Process Networks under Uncertain Electricity Prices and Market Demands
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Jose Pinto, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2016
* USD 301,951.00

1159443&lt;br/&gt;Grossmann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summary: Power intensive
industries such as air separation, cement and chlor-alkali manufacturing will
face increased electricity prices in the future due to environmental pressures
to reduce CO2 emissions. Furthermore, another challenge is that since
electricity markets became deregulated in the 1990s, electricity prices have
been subject to hourly as well as seasonal variations. These are also likely to
become more acute as renewable sources of energy like wind and solar are
introduced for power generation. These trends have led to a considerable amount
of uncertainty and variability in the daily operating expenses of power
intensive industries, which in turn affect their competitiveness and long term
planning. The aim of this GOALI proposal, which will be performed in
collaboration with researchers from Praxair, is to develop a multi-scale
modeling framework that can be used as a decision-making support tool to
optimize designs so as to introduce flexibility in plant operations to
effectively address uncertain hourly variations in electricity prices and
uncertain product demands. In order to tackle the problem of uncertain
electricity prices and product demands, we consider as a first step the
development of an optimization methodology for the deterministic case when the
electricity prices and demands are assumed to be known (e.g. in terms of
forecasts). We propose a short-term mixed-integer operational optimization model
that is based on offline computations or measured plant data, and that is
integrated with the design and long-term capacity planning problem, which
involves decisions on installing or upgrading equipment, or increasing storage
capacity. To solve the resulting multi-scale mixed-integer linear program (MILP)
model for a single plant, we plan to develop a tailored bi-level decomposition
algorithm. Also, to consider the case of process networks consisting of several
plants, we intend to investigate the solution of the large-scale model with a
Lagrangean decomposition scheme based on a novel hybrid cutting plane and
subgradient method to accelerate convergence. As a second major step, we will
address the treatment of uncertainties of product demands and electricity prices
for which we intend to investigate a novel hybrid stochastic programming/robust
optimization approach. The basic idea is to model the long-term design decisions
and uncertain demands with multistage stochastic programming, and the short term
operating decisions and uncertain prices through robust optimization. The
proposed models will be tested with process models and real world data of air
separation plants supplied by Praxair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
The major intellectual challenges in this project lie in the multi-scale
integration of the short-term operational model with the design and long-term
capacity planning problem, the treatment of uncertainties in product demands and
electricity prices, and the development of effective computational algorithms
for solving large-scale optimization models. In order to address these
challenges, we propose a strategy for multi-scale integration that effectively
incorporates the operational model with the design and capacity planning model.
Furthermore, we propose decomposition schemes that have the potential of
effectively tackling large-scale deterministic models for realistic process
networks of power intensive plants, particularly for air separation plants.
Finally, we propose a potentially promising hybrid stochastic programming/
robust optimization model and solution method in order to anticipate the effect
of uncertainties in the product demands and electricity
prices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The proposed GOALI project has the
potential of yielding significant economic savings in the enterprise wide
optimization of power intensive industries to make them more competitive. The
proposed GOALI project will involve summer internships for the Ph.D. student and
visits by the PI to Praxair. The project also has the potential of collaboration
and dissemination of the basic methodologies to several petroleum, chemical and
engineering/software companies of the Center for Advanced Process Decision-
making (CAPD) at Carnegie Mellon. We also intend to collaborate with the
Electric Energy Systems Group at Carnegie Mellon. We plan to involve
undergraduates for documenting case studies that will be made available through
the internet in our cybersite on MINLP. Finally, we also plan to participate in
the University outreach program at Carnegie Mellon where we intend to expose
high school students to technology on air separation and major issues in
operation under fluctuating electricity prices by using simple day-to-day
examples like deciding what appliances to turn on and off at their houses if the
utilities charged electricity prices that changed on an hourly basis.