* 1159236
* IRFP: Metalanguage Identification for Interactive Language Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Shomir Wilson, Wilson                  Shomir
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 02/28/2015
* USD 98,100.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise, and experimental conditions abroad.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-month research fellowship
by Dr. Shomir Wilson to work with Prof. Jon Oberlander at the University of
Edinburgh in Scotland and Prof. Alan Black at Carnegie Mellon University in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metalanguage is a crucial
linguistic mechanism which allows us to communicate information about language
itself. It is essential for many language activities, including attributing
statements, explaining meaning, assigning names, clarifying assumptions, and
correcting misunderstandings. The ability to understand metalanguage is a skill
that humans employ frequently in conversation and assume in fellow
interlocutors, regardless of context or topic. However, in spite of its
centrality to linguistic communication, metalanguage has received little
attention in the development of interactive language technologies, leaving such
technologies unable to cope with or exploit occurrences of the phenomenon in
human-computer dialog. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is the first effort
to study the use of computational methods to identify occurrences of
metalanguage in informal English contexts. This project consists of three
stages. The first is the creation of corpora of instances of metalanguage in
informal contexts, particularly from spoken conversations and informal blog
texts. The second is the detection and delineation of the phenomenon, using
features of metalanguage that are peculiar to the phenomenon. Finally, the third
stage is the practical evaluation of metalanguage detection and processing
within the context of a spoken dialog system deployed for use by the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will fill a long-standing and
consequential research gap in artificial intelligence and computational
linguistics. The practical applications of spoken dialog systems - such as voice
menus, car GPS voice interfaces, and accessibility software for the blind - are
expanding rapidly, as improvements are made to speech recognition, natural
language processing, and other technologies that support conversational
interaction with computers. Studying metalanguage will remedy a missing element
in the design these of dialog systems, bringing them further in-line with users'
expectations and thus making them more natural to use. Moreover, this research
will lead to new international collaborations between the principal investigator
and the two hosts' research groups, the Institute for Language, Cognition, and
Computation (ILCC) at the University of Edinburgh and the Language Technologies
Institute (LTI) at Carnegie Mellon University.