* 1159168
* IRFP: Towards Global Synthesis of Mud Crabs: Utilizing Phylogenetic Relatedness to Derive a Biologically Meaningful Classification and Infer Historical Origins of Cryptogenic Taxa
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Brent Thoma, Thoma                   Brent          P
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 02/28/2015
* USD 0.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Brent P.
Thoma to work with Prof. Peter K. L. Ng at the Raffles Museum of Biodiversity
Research, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.

This project aims to clarify the evolutionary relationships of the
geographically widespread and taxonomically diverse superfamily of mud crabs
known as Xanthoidea. The integration of studies on New and Old World taxa
represents the largest genetic dataset of mud crabs, to date, with data for 10
genes from nearly 300 species. This information allows for the inference of
evolutionary relationships of the mud crabs on a global scale in an effort to 1)
test if the morphological characteristics currently used to delineate various
xanthoid taxa reflect evolutionary relatedness or are the result of convergence,
2) determine if short branch lengths along the backbone of the xanthoid
phylogeny are representative of a rapid radiation event that occurred early in
the evolution of the mud crabs, and 3) infer the historical origins of
potentially invasive or cryptogenic taxa.

In addition to the obvious benefit of increased knowledge about the evolution of
mud crabs, this research will help develop new international collaboration
between the PI and research groups at Raffles Museum of Biodiversity Research
and the National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore (Prof. Peter K.
L. Ng, Dr. Joelle C. Y. Lai, and Dr. J. C. Mendoza) and the University of
Louisiana at Lafayette in Lafayette, Louisiana, USA (Prof. Darryl L. Felder).