* 1159118
* IRFP: Harnessing Biodiversity for Sustainable Agriculture; The Microbial Ecology of Disease Suppressive Soils
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2013,07/31/2014
* Allison Jack, Jack                    Allison        L
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 173,056.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and by
the Ecosystem Studies Program in the Division of Environmental Biology.

This award will support a twelve-month research fellowship by Dr. Allison L. H.
Jack to work with Dr. Jos Raaijmakers at the Wageningen University Research
Center in Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Managing soil organic matter inputs to create and maintain a soil's ability to
protect plants from disease even when the pathogen is present is a crucial
aspect of sustainable agriculture. However, in order to effectively manage this
biological phenomenon, we must first understand how it works. Novel DNA-based
techniques in microbial ecology have enabled detailed analyses of the bacteria
associated with the suppression of plant pathogens. The high level of complexity
inherent in soil microbial communities has historically limited these detailed
studies to a single substrate and plant host. Important unanswered questions in
this field require a comparison of taxa and genes associated with suppression
across a range of substrates and plant hosts. Seed colonizing microbial
communities are less complex than those in rhizosphere soil by several orders of
magnitude and are implicated in the suppression of Pythium spp. I propose to use
a simplified plant-associated microbial community in the form of seed-colonizing
bacteria during early stages of germination in order to compare a range of
substrates and hosts. A combination of metagenomic and metatranscriptomic
analyses carried out on seed-colonizing communities will allow me to answer the
following questions; 1) Is there a core seed colonizing bacterial community that
characterizes disease suppression across a range of substrates? And 2) Is there
a core transcriptome for suppressive seed colonizing bacterial species shared
among multiple substrates?

This research will help generate practical tools for sustainable agriculture
where predicting and managing soil suppressiveness has historically been
difficult. Being able to effectively harness soil biodiversity for natural
suppression of plant pathogens would contribute to reductions in pesticide use,
which has both human and environmental health benefits. The unique approach used
in this proposed study could be adopted for many pathosystems in both natural
and agroecosystems. In addition, having the opportunity to collaborate with a
lead international researcher in this field would allow the PI to broaden her
professional network and achieve her goal of co-organizing and participating in
cross-institutional international studies on the microbial ecology of disease
suppressive soils. Spending time in the Netherlands' Food Valley will allow her
to observe how government, universities and private companies work together to
create a thriving agri-food sector that contributes substantially to the
national economy. As a PI at either a research university or the USDA ARS, she
would like to assist in re-creating the success of the Dutch model in the US by
participating in industry-university collaborations and enterprise development
initiatives throughout my career.

In addition to the practical benefits to agriculture through enhancing our
understanding of disease suppressive soils, this research will help develop new
international collaboration between the PI and research groups at Wageningen
University Research Center (Prof. Jos Raaijmakers), the Plant-Microbe
Interactions Group at the University of Utrecht (Dr. Peter Bakker) and Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY USA (Prof. Eric Nelson).