* 1159072
* Restructuring Foreign Sovereign Debt: Theory and Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2011,01/31/2016
* Mark Wright, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 01/31/2016
* USD 174,996.00

Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;Concern about the recent debt crisis in Europe, as
well as debt repayment difficulties in many developing countries, was motivated
by past experience with the ineffectiveness of negotiations to restructure
sovereign debts: delays often exceed seven years, creditors appear to lose
roughly 40% of the value of their claim, and debtors typically exit default as
indebted as when they originally defaulted. The fact that creditors and the
debtor have trouble reaching mutually beneficial agreements is an exmaple of a
widespread phenomonon, found also in, for example, union-employer bargaining,
congressional lobbying, and in international diplomacy such as the negotiation
of environmental treaties.&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our understanding
of inefficiencies in bargaining over sovereign debt reÂ¬structuring, and in
bargaining more generally, in three ways. First, it will construct new estimates
of indebtedness that allow us to more accurately map our theories of debt
restructuring into observed data. These data will be of use to researchers
studying sovereign debt more generally. Second, it will contruct estimates of
the outcomes of this bargaining for what is close to a census of all sovereign
defaults between 1980 and 2006. Third, these estimates of bargaining outcomes
will be used to test the empirical validity of models that alternatively explain
delays in bargaining as (1) a mechanism for signalling private information by
the parties to the bargaining; (2) a result of the inability of the parties to
honor the terms of the bargain; and (3) as a resu(t of collective action
problems among parties to the bargain. Finally, the project advances the
literature on the estimation of models of financial constraint by extending
these techniques to models with defaultable debt contracts, and, in particular,
to models that endogenize the punishment to default through
bargaining.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Both the pricing of debt, and
assessments of the riskiness of debt to its holders, depend on forecasts of the
likely recovery rate in the event of a default. By constructing data on recovery
rates for all defaults since 1980, the project will enable more accurate pricing
of debt. It will also allow regulators assessing the adequacy of capital levels
of financial institutions to more accurately monitor the soundness of their own
domestic financial systems. More accurate measures of indebtedness will also
improve the predictive properties of our empirical models of sovereign default.
This will also improve the pricing of sovereign debt, but perhaps more
importantly will allow policy makers in both creditor countries and at
supranational institutions to target assistance to the most vulnerable countries
more promptly. Finally, by improving our understanding of the costs of default,
this project will also aid policy makers in the appropriate design of
interventions in the market for international debt. To the extent that the
project identifies collective action problems as important in generating social
inefficiencies, the models tested can be used as the basis for assessing the
role of alternative contractual structures in reducing the cost of default ex
post while still encouraging appropriate borrowing by countries ex ante.