* 1159510
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Grammar and Interaction in Kula [tpg], a non-Austronesian Language of Eastern Indonesia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Barbara Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 02/28/2014
* USD 12,000.00

Kula is an endangered and undocumented non-Austronesian language spoken by
approximately 5,000 people in the eastern highlands of Alor, Indonesia. Alor and
neighboring Pantar are home to around 20 non-Austronesian (or 'Papuan')
languages. This group of 'Papuan outliers' has become of increased interest to
linguists in the past decade for their typologically unique features and for the
light they shed on the topic of Papuan prehistory. Despite this increased
interest, Kula remains almost entirely undocumented. Furthermore, ongoing
language shift threatens the Kula language with many children now learning the
local variety of Malay as their first language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
from will support both urgently needed documentation of Kula and related
research for Nicholas Williams's doctoral dissertation on place reference in
Kula. This research promotes a new model of language documentation which takes
as its central focus the use of language in everyday conversation. The primary
goal of the documentation project will be to produce an extensive corpus of
video recorded spontaneous conversation in Kula. These recordings will be
transcribed, annotated, glossed and translated in preparation for archiving,
further research and use by the Kula community. Using the corpus, Nicholas will
explore Kula speakers' use of spatial language and other semiotic practices
(e.g. pointing) for achieving reference to places in the course of social
interaction. This research asks the important question of how grammatical
practices emerge in the course of social interaction, focusing on the domain of
reference. This research will introduce new methods to the field of language
documentation and new data and analyses to the field of interactional
linguistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The documentation materials will also become
an important resource for the Kula community in any future language maintenance
activities. As the first project of its kind, this work will have a positive
effect on local language attitudes, potentially increasing the relative prestige
of the language and mitigating the progress of language shift. By training
native speakers in the basic techniques of language documentation and archiving
materials locally, the project will ensure community access to the materials.