* 1159823
* Measurement of 2D receptor-ligand binding kinetics under flow
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Konstantinos Konstantopoulos, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 12/31/2015
* USD 330,000.00

1159823 &lt;br/&gt;Konstantopoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Cell
adhesion, mediated via highly specific and tightly controlled receptor-ligand
(R-L) interactions, plays a pivotal role in diverse biological events. The
kinetics of R-L binding imparts unique properties that allow cells to interact
with one another amidst the challenge of physiological stresses, such as fluid
shear in the vasculature. In the physiological setting, receptors and their
respective ligands are anchored to the surfaces of apposing cells; thus, R-L
binding is a two-dimensional (2D) process. Although sophisticated biophysical
techniques have recently been developed to measure the unstressed 2D affinity of
receptor-ligand pairs, they fail to disclose its dependence on applied force1,2.
This dependence must be elucidated, however, as forces associated with fluid
flow in the vasculature modulate the kinetics of R-L bonds mediating cell-cell
adhesion. An integrated experimental and mathematical approach will be developed
to determine the 2D kinetic constants of R-L interactions as a function of
hydrodynamic shear. This approach exploits the concept of encounter time for the
physicochemical reaction of R-L binding. In experiment, lithographic and
microfluidic methods will be used to create zones of length L functionalized
with proteins at controlled surface density and orientation. A flowing cell with
velocity U and a protein-coated zone L will interact with the protein for an
encounter time (Ã´=L/U), allowing the 2D receptor-ligand kinetic parameters to be
determined from mathematical modeling. The model will be fully informed by the
highly complex response of R-L bonds to applied shear force, with all parameters
measured from accompanying experiments. In proof of concept experiments and
analysis have identified key asymptotes that apply to the results of the
proposed work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2D kinetic and micromechanical
properties of critical R-L interactions pertinent to pancreatic cancer
metastasis will be studied herein. The proposed work is fundamental, addressing
basic science issues, with potential results that can be leveraged in
engineering devices and therapeutic interventions. The focus of this study is at
the level of R-L biophysical characterization in terms of transport kinetics.
Specifically, a mechanistic interpretation will be provided for two discrete
adhesion steps (i.e., rolling and arrest) mediated by distinct R-L pairs:
selectin binding to mucin 16 (MUC16) and podocalyxin-like protein (PCLP), and
fibrin (ogen) binding to the standard form of CD44 (CD44s), respectively. This
will be achieved by investigating the respective kinetic (e.g., 2D on- and off-
rates) and micromechanical (e.g., tensile strength) properties of the
aforementioned R-L pairs using single-molecule force-spectroscopy, microfluidics
and micropatterning along with mathematical modeling. Moreover, a quantitative
understanding of how selectin-ligand tethering facilitates CD44s-fibrin(ogen)
mediated firm adhesion at elevated levels of shear stress will be developed.
This study will determine the rate-limiting parameters in this cascade of
events, such as the lengths of selectin- or fibrin(ogen)-coated zones and their
site densities, necessary to support downstream firm adhesion by
CD44s-fibrin(ogen) binding at elevated shear stress levels. Finally, this
project will determine how these parameters are modulated by selective
individual knockdown of MUC16 and PCLP. Experiments will be guided by
computational modeling of cell rolling/adhesion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Scientific/ Technological: This work will advance the knowledge in the
field of cell biophysics. Specifically, this research will have broad impact in
the basic scientific understanding of R-L processes that permeate biology.
Knowledge of the kinetics of R-L-mediated cell adhesion in physiologically
relevant settings will provide design parameters needed to engineer sensors, to
target biological entities based on recognition, to design molecules to
interrupt adverse or pathological adhesion events, such as those in cancer, and,
generically, to interrogate biological events. These fundamental measurements
will be performed in the specific context of pancreatic cancer. While this study
focuses on a specific example, the experimental and mathematical framework
developed in this project will be broadly applicable to other
(patho)physiological processes occurring in the vasculature. Mentoring of Female
and Under-represented Students: Students from outreach initiatives will be
welcome to work on small research projects associated with this research. (PI's
and co-PI's personal contacts, via laison with Baltimore Polytechnic high-
school, Penn's ACS Project SEED, REU programs). Student Participation:
Undergraduate/high school students regularly perform research in the PI's/co-
PI's labs; often women or from underrepresented groups. Pre- and Post-doctoral
mentoring: Pre- and post-doctoral career development is a priority in the PIs'
laboratories.