* 1159552
* Multiparametric Optical Microbe Sensing with Engineered Photonic-Plasmonic Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2015
* USD 300,000.00

Reinhard&lt;br/&gt;CBET-1159552&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle assemblies generate new
properties that are different from those of the isolated particles and,
therefore, offer tremendous opportunities for creating new capabilities on the
nanoscale. This proposal seeks to take advantage of the fact that defined arrays
of gold nanoparticles have engineerable plasmon resonances whose spatial and
frequency distribution can be controlled through the morphology of the array.
Since the exact plasmon resonance wavelength of a noble metal nanoparticles
depend on the refractive index of the environment, nanostructured noble metal
surfaces are colorimetric sensors. Aperiodic metal nanostructures sustain
structural color patterns which enable entirely new sensing approaches based on
spatial correlation imaging. In addition, nanostructured surfaces assembled from
nanoparticle clusters as building blocks can efficiently localize incident
electromagnetic fields and generate high E-field enhancements. Consequently,
nanoparticle cluster arrays are also superb substrates for surface enhanced
Raman spectroscopy. This proposal seeks to combine the
advantageous&lt;br/&gt;photonic and plasmonic properties of nanostructured
surfaces to develop multiparametric responders that achieve enhanced optical
microbe detection and identification performance through combined analysis of
elastic and inelastic light scattering processes.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will develop a new class of
multiparametric optical microbe sensors, that can identify and detect a broad
range of microbes (viruses, bacteria, spores) with high fidelity due to two
subsequent sensing stages in real time. A first stage of specificity will be
achieved through antibody functionalization of the sensor surface. Binding of
microbes to these antibodies will be detected through a colorimetric shift in
the elastically scattered light. In the second analysis step in elastically
scattered light is analyzed to obtain a vibrational SERS spectrum of the microbe
surface. This spectrum serves as a fingerprint of the microbe and enables its
identification when combined with multivariate data analysis and appropriate
library spectra. We anticipate that the SERS based identification approach will
enable microbe classifications on the strain level. The proposed approach of two
subsequent identification stages achieves a significant improvement in the
identification reliability over conventional optical biosensors. Because SERS
allows an identification of organisms on the single cell level, the proposed
multiparametric sensors could pave the way to an optical analysis of ?real
world? samples that always contain a complex mixture of microbes. Besides these
important sensing advances, the research in this proposal will also improve
current capabilities to engineer photonic-plasmonic noble metal structures with
defined optical responses.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact&lt;br/&gt;Reliable and rapid
microbe detection is relevant in critical sensing areas such as environmental
monitoring, food quality control, and homeland security. The proposed sensor
could make optical microbe detection faster and more reliable and could thus
impact all of the above sensing areas. In addition to the outlined scientific
impacts, the research has clear educational and outreach components. The project
will offer high school, undergraduate, and graduate students the opportunity to
participate in a collaborative research and education program. It will form the
basis for at least two PhD theses. In synergy with the laboratory research, this
proposal will enable a substantial outreach program. The Principal Investigator
(PI) organizes an annual NanoCamp for students from local inner city high
schools, and both PI and Co-PI sponsor undergraduate students and interested
high school students to obtain hands-on research experience in this
interdisciplinary research effort. These outreach activities will help to
enthuse junior researchers and high school students for the field of biosensing
and science and technology in general.