* 1159369
* Surfactant Induced Post-Deposition Transport of Aerosols with Application to Pulmonary Drug Delivery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Stephen Garoff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2015
* USD 314,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;#1159369&lt;br/&gt;Garoff,
Stephen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by a new approach to enhance pulmonary
aerosol drug delivery, the project will establish the fundamental mechanisms
controlling surface tension gradient driven (Marangoni) flows to induce post-
deposition transport of aerosol across subphases that mimic the lung airway
surface liquid (ASL). While inhaled aerosol drugs can deliver substantial doses
of medication directly to the lungs, altered patterns of ventilation cause
inhaled drugs to deposit non-uniformly in diseased lungs. Some lung regions
receive very high local doses while other regions go untreated. This demands new
methods to cause post-deposition spreading in order to be effective. The
research under a current NSF grant has shown that surfactant induced Marangoni
stresses enhance spreading of millimeter scale drops across&lt;br/&gt;subphases
mimicking the ASL. In this renewal proposal, the PIs extend their research to
address how the aerosol droplet flux to the subphase couples with individual
droplet spreading dynamics to produce the maximum spreading on ASL mimic
subphases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Through the previous NSF
grant, the PIs have obtained a complete picture of how millimeter scale drops of
surfactant solutions spread across complex subphases and what properties control
the final spread area. These results present a clear set of material selection
and dosing criteria for developing successful therapies. They set the stage for
the present proposal where we will determine the conditions for optimizing the
final spread area from aerosol deposition of micron scale droplets. While
dispersion of aerosol in a branched system such as the lung is well studied, the
post-deposition spreading of the droplets is not. The research under the current
grant uses single droplets and has confirmed that surfactant greatly enhances
the post-deposition transport of aqueous droplet contents on aqueous polymeric
subphases. However, to determine the conditions that will optimize the spreading
of aerosol droplets, they address a number of fundamental issues. Do the same
spreading mechanisms determined to operate at the millimeter scale operate at
the 10 micron scale? How do adjacent aqueous surfactant solution drops on a
complex aqueous subphase coalesce after deposition? How do the timescales of
droplet deposition, spreading, and coalescence on an entangled aqueous polymeric
subphase compete to control the final spread area? The research addresses two
specific aims: 1) Determine the droplet scale processes and properties that
control the lateral interactions of aerosol droplets after deposition on complex
subphases. 2) Determine how aerosol deposition flux and total dose determine the
final extent of post-deposition spreading. The project will culminate this work
by developing empirical quantitative correlations for the extent of post-
deposition spreading with the critical parameters and time scales identified in
previous aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Just as the earlier work in
determining the fundamental spreading mechanisms of millimeter scale drops has
established the basis for materials selection for surfactant-enhanced pulmonary
drug delivery methods, the research here provides new options in not only the
composition of aerosol formulations but also the administration protocols such
as breathing patterns to optimize drug spreading to all regions of a diseased
lung. Thus, the proposed research will become a formulation design tool for
surfactants to be tested as self-dispersing carriers for aerosol drug delivery.
This technology will benefit the treatment of any number of obstructive lung
diseases, including cystic fibrosis, asthma,pneumonia and other acute or chronic
pulmonary infections. While this research focuses on
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;physical mechanisms of enhanced drug spreading, the team
collaborates with pulmonary medicine specialists in the University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine where our new fundamental findings will guide in vivo
studies. By regularly attending seminars and meetings with clinical
investigators, students will be trained in a highly interdisciplinary
environment. As part of the this grant, the investigators will plan a two to
three day workshop to bring together the clinical and the science and
engineering communities to exchange ideas on understanding and harnessing
mechanisms for exogenous fluid movement in the lung. The investigators will
mentor an undergraduate research student during each academic year and summer
and at least two middle school students each year in the Carnegie Mellon/Colfax
Physics Concepts Outreach Program.