* 1159830
* SAD-GLAD Nanorod Array Catalyst Electrodes for Next Generation Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Tansel Karabacak, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

CBET-1159830 Karabacak, Tansel

Intellectual merit:

Polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell technology stands unprecedented as
one of the most promising alternative energy systems for an environmentally
friendly, sustainable energy economy. PEM fuel cells can operate with various
types of energy carriers including hydrogen, ethanol, and methanol. However,
conventional PEM fuel cell electrodes, which are comprised of carbon supported
platinum catalyst nanoparticles, suffer from several key limitations that
include sluggish oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and high Pt loadings at the
cathode, agglomeration of Pt nanoparticles, oxidation of carbon support,
separation of carbon over time from the membrane, and poor catalyst-carbon
support stability. To overcome these limitations of the traditional cathode
catalyst, Prof. Tansel Karabacak of the University of Arkansas at Little Rock
proposes to employ a new nanostructured PEM fuel cell electrode design comprised
of single layer carbon-free catalyst nanorod arrays with extremely low Pt
loadings, controlled porosity, ideal alloy compositions, and with preferred
crystal orientations for enhanced ORR electrochemical activity. Karabacak will
use a combination of recently developed small angle deposition (SAD) and
glancing angle deposition (GLAD) techniques for the fabrication of the nanorod
PEM fuel cell electrodes.The proposal offers a method of material production
that is based on very specific catalyst preparation methodology. It combines
synthesis and fuel cell performance measurements in a useful manner.The electro-
catalysis experimentation will be done in conjunction with an expert at Argonne
National Labs.

Broader impacts: The area of fuel cell electro-catalysis is one of considerable
importance in the overall national energy endeavor. The proposed work can lead
to the development of new nanoscale electrode catalyst structures which enhance
ORR activity, have improved durability, can be utilized with ultra-low platinum
loadings, and can maximize the power/effective surface area of the catalyst,
thus reducing PEM fuel cell cost. This approach can avoid the issues associated
with conventional carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles, unsupported Pt-black, and
polycrystalline continuous Pt thin film approaches. Therefore, this work has the
potential to result in a significant advance in fuel cell catalysis and
electrode development.

The proposal also incorporates the plans for a mentoring and outreach
infrastructure for energy related research through UALR. This plan includes an
educational collaboration and interaction among the students, faculty, teachers,
and parents at UALR and the LISA Academy Charter School. It outlines an
organized system of student education and mentoring, equipment and knowledge
share, preparation towards science competitions, dissemination of research
activities, and channels of increasing the awareness of public in energy
research in the area of central Arkansas. In addition, UALR educates more
minority students than any other institution in Arkansas. Hence, the proposed
effort has a strong potential of benefiting the students coming from
underrepresented groups, where the project will employ minority and female
undergraduate students.