* 1159089
* IRFP: Scanless Two-Photon Voltage Imaging of Live Neuron Activity With Holographic Wavefront Shaping
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,12/31/2014
* Amanda Foust, Foust                   Amanda         J
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 12/31/2014
* USD 141,700.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four month research fellowship by Dr. Amanda J.
Foust to work with Dr. Valentina Emiliani at Universit√© Paris Descartes, Paris,
France.

Voltage imaging has the potential to revolutionize our understanding of how
neuronal cells and circuits process and store information through a mixture of
analog and digital electrical signaling in the living brain. However, low
signal-to-noise ratios and high background have prevented spatial and temporal
resolution adequate for tracking electrical activity on cellular and subcellular
length scales in-vivo. Light sculpturing techniques such as Gradient Phase
Contrast (GPC) and temporal focusing (TF) under development in Dr. Valentina
Emiliani's laboratory can improve the spatial resolution of voltage imaging
techniques by enabling targeted fluorescence excitation of specified cells and
substructures. To this end, we are developing, adapting, and optimizing
wavefront shaping technology for imaging the propagation of electrical activity
in the axons and dendrites of neurons with voltage-sensitive dyes and
fluorescent proteins.

Development of wavefront shaping technology for spatially targeted voltage
sensing will provide a powerful tool for investigating the electrical
underpinnings of sensation, perception, cognition, and behavior. Moreover, these
techniques can be used to determine what fundamental circuit alterations occur
with neurological diseases and disorders such as epilepsy and multiple
sclerosis, and inform development of more effective therapeutic strategies.