* 1159240
* GOALI:  Search for a Practical Perovskite-Based Three-Way Catalyst
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Xiaoqing Pan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 07/31/2016
* USD 320,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1159240&lt;br/&gt;Pan,
Xiaoqing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gradual coarsening of the catalytically-active
metal particles in a catalyst is one of the fundamental reasons for loss of
activity over time. For three-way automotive exhaust-gas catalysts, a recent
phenomenon, the redox-induced cyclical re-dispersion of the metal in novel
precious-metal-doped-perovskite formulations has been proposed as a possible
means of reducing this problem. Recent work showing that this phenomenon occurs
over distances of only a few nanometers in these systems suggests that a
practical perovskite-based catalyst will likely involve ultra-thin perovskite
films or coatings. In an effort to assess the viability of such a catalyst, this
GOALI award covers a carefully designed combination of electron microscopy and
catalytic measurements on model planar and high-surface-area powder catalysts to
be conducted at University of Michigan and Ford Research and Innovation Center
under the supervision of Profs. Xiaoqing Pan and George Graham and of Dr. Robert
McCabe, respectively. Specific objectives include the observation of self-
stabilizing or self-regenerative catalyst behavior in ultra-thin perovskite
films on planar supports, the production of perovskite-coated high-surface-area
powders, the measurement of kinetics and detailed chemical potential dependence
of structural transformations in model powder catalyst systems, the catalytic
characterization of perovskite-based precious-metal catalysts using simple
reactions to probe three-way catalytic activity, and ultimately the durability
assessment of perovskite-based precious-metal powder catalysts under realistic
conditions. An important aspect of the structure-property relationship testing
will be to clearly assign catalytic activity to either supported metal particles
or metal-doped perovskite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Significance and
Importance: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automotive exhaust-gas catalysts currently
account for 30-50% of the world-wide demand for Pt and Pd, and the corresponding
demand for Rh is even higher, ~80%. Since the utilization of these metals in
this application has historically never exceeded a few percent by end of life,
due primarily to particle coarsening, the attainment of even a modest increase
in efficiency would be of tremendous significance, both commercially as well as
scientifically. The proposed work affords the opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate students at University of Michigan to collaborate closely with
catalyst researchers at Ford Motor Company and their suppliers in the pursuit of
this goal, which is to improve metal utilization efficiency through the
development of a practical perovskite-based three-way catalyst.