* 1159513
* Into the Heart of an Epidemic: a US-Brazil Collaboration for Integrative Studies of the Amphibian-Killing Fungus in Brazil
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Joyce Longcore, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jessica Robin
* 12/31/2014
* USD 54,656.00

This award supports planning meetings between several US researchers
(representing the University of Michigan, Cornell University, and the University
of Maine) and Brazilian colleagues (from the Universidade de Campinas and the
Universidade Federal de Alagoas). The goal is to generate preliminary data for
studies of the ecology and evolution of the amphibian-killing fungus,
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd), in the Atlantic Coastal Forest of Brazil.
Amphibian diversity of Brazil is unparalleled at nearly 900 species, of which
more than 500 occur in the less than 10% of the original Atlantic Forest that
remains. Causes of species declines in the Atlantic Forest include habitat
destruction and invasive species, but the contribution of the fungal disease
(chytridiomycosis), which has caused global amphibian declines, is uncertain.
Multiple labs are independently researching the biology of chytridiomycosis in
Brazil, with initial results verifying that the disease is widespread and
evidence suggesting that the genetic diversity of the pathogen in Brazil is
greater than in any other country sampled to date. The Brazilian collaborators
bring varied experience on chytridiomycosis in Brazil, in particular, fungal
biology, amphibian evolution, amphibian ecology, and microbiology. This recently
emerging amphibian fungal disease is a modern problem with little precedent
(chytridiomycosis is the first vertebrate pathogen known from the phylum
Chytridiomycota), and therefore a successful research strategy must include
integrative approaches, combining sub-disciplines of biology that rarely
interact with each other. Two meetings, one in the US and one in Brazil, are
planned to bring together faculty and student researchers from the five
participating laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;Additional funding for this activity from
Brazil will permit the establishment of disease detection and quantification
tools, the first such capabilities in Brazil, where the awareness and response
to this invading pathogen is increasing. It will also permit seamless
collaborations between Bd researchers in the two countries, by equalizing
technical capabilities at US and Brazilian collaborating universities and
maintaining ties among collaborating students and faculty. Numerous early-career
scientists will participate in this collaborative effort. In particular, this
project will give US Ph.D. students the opportunity to receive interdisciplinary
training in disease ecology and be mentored by Brazilian colleagues with
expertise in tropical amphibian ecology, taxonomy, and microbiology. Students in
both countries will benefit from training in methods in genetics and disease
dynamics, and participate directly in the development of international
integrative collaborations.