* 1159581
* Reprogramming Escherichia coli with synthetic protein glycosylation pathways
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* Matthew DeLisa, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 04/30/2015
* USD 425,000.00

1159581/ DeLisa

Asparagine-linked (N-linked) protein glycosylation is the most common
modification made to proteins in eukaryotic cells. N-linked glycosylation
pathways are also known to exist in gram-negative bacteria. The bacterial
glycosylation system bears many functional similarities with the eukaryotic
process, but there are also several major differences between the systems. Most
notably, the structures of bacterial N-linked glycans are significantly
different from those produced in eukaryotes. Hence, glycoproteins derived from
current bacterial glycosylation systems are likely to be immunogenic in humans
and thus of limited therapeutic value. This project seeks to take bacterial
glycosylation to a previously unexplored level by bottom-up engineering of a
synthetic pathway for performing eukaryotic N-linked glycosylation reactions in
Escherichia coli. The proposed studies and research training activities are
expected to have a broad impact on society, ranging from the science of
glycobiology to the development of human glycotherapeutics.

This project will also cultivate the next generation of highly trained graduate
students who will be introduced to the broad, interdisciplinary nature of
biotechnology research. Moreover, this program will actively and aggressively
broaden participation in science and engineering. This will be accomplished by
collaborating with Cornell's Diversity Programs in Engineering and with the
Cornell Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program to
develop a hands-on learning experience entitled "How Sweet It Is" that will
introduce undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to molecular
biotechnology and the important role played by sugars in living systems.
Finally, the development of bacterial glycosylation for biotechnological
applications will be brought to a larger research community through partnership
with local biotechnology companies. Overall, these studies will provide
considerable fuel for new academic pursuits and industrial enterprises related
to bacterial glycoengineering.