* 1159736
* Collaborative Project: GOALI: Acrylic Resins Product and Process Design through Combined Use of Quantum Chemical Calculations and Spectroscopic Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Andrew Rappe, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2015
* USD 230,255.00

Abstract 1160169/1159736 Soroush / Rappe

Intellectual Merit. In our recent successful GOALI work, we have made
significant advances in understanding the spontaneous thermal polymerization of
acrylates in the absence of any conventional thermal initiators. By combining
efficient first-principles quantum-mechanical density functional theory (DFT)
calculations with spectroscopic measurements of polymer samples, we have
identified conclusively the mechanisms for monomer self-initiation and chain
transfer reactions, including the reaction intermediates and transition states.
We also calculated rate constants (frequency factors and activation energies)
for the reactions in the gas phase. Now, building on these results, we propose
to improve experimental control of the thermal spontaneous (without addition of
conventional thermal initiators) polymerization of alkyl acrylates through
coordinated and collaborative experimental and theoretical/computational
research. To deepen our theoretical understanding, calculations will be
performed with increasingly realistic solvent models, including multiple
explicit solvent molecules in the quantum region and recently-developed van der
Waals DFT functionals, to improve intermolecular potential energy surfaces.
Concurrently, batch reactor polymerization experiments will be designed on the
basis of the computational results and conducted to evaluate the influence of
solvent type, monomer and solvent concentrations, and temperature on polymer-
chain microstructural characteristics and polymerization rate.

The specific goals of this project are: (a) We will develop a computationally
efficient method of calculating reliable liquid-phase rate constants for
spontaneous thermal acrylate polymerization reactions such as monomer self-
initiation, co-initiation by monomer and solvent, and chain transfer. (b) We
will design and conduct batch polymerization experiments and, using
spectroscopic methods, measure the microstructural characteristics of the
produced polymer chains to validate and refine our theoretical predictions. (c)
Using the developed computational method and batch polymerization experiments,
we will study the structure-reactivity relationship for various solvents and
monomers with a ketone functional group. (d) We will use these theoretical and
experimental understandings to guide our computational screening and
experimental validation of novel thermal initiators (solvents that permit rapid
but controllable thermal polymerization of acrylates). Our ultimate goal is to
design high-performance acrylic resins and chemically self-regulated
polymerization processes for the production of acrylic resins at attractive
overall cost.

Broader Impacts. The potential impacts of this project are societal (through
improved safety), environmental, economic, and in human resource development,
among others. Spontaneous thermal polymerization allows for the production of
higher quality, environmentally friendlier solvent-borne paints and coatings at
lower operating costs. Low molecular weight polymer and oligomer solutions have
adequately low viscosity?even at high weight percent solids?thus requiring less
solvent to be sprayable and brushable. The reduction or elimination of thermal
initiators (e. g. azonitrile or organic peroxides, normally the most expensive
component of a resin formula) and the increase of reaction rate both lower the
operating costs. The elimination of residual groups due to the thermal
initiators in the final product (which adversely affect polymer properties such
as resistance to UV radiation) and the use of the quantitative understanding in
optimal control of the polymerization reactors improve the resin quality. The
PIs and Co-PI will train and mentor two doctoral research assistants as well as
six undergraduate (REU) students, who will participate in broad range of
research activities from quantum-level computations and supercomputing to
laboratory experiments and spectroscopic methods. The project results will be
released to the public at conferences and in journal and conference proceedings
papers. As in our past research activities, students from under-represented
groups will be selected, trained and mentored in this project.