* 1159189
* IRFP: Determination of Solvent Effects and Interactions of Silica-Polypeptide Colloidal Particles by Small-Angle Neutron Scattering
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2013,07/31/2015
* Javoris Hollingsworth, Hollingsworth           Javoris        V
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2015
* USD 168,200.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Javoris
V. Hollingsworth to work with Prof. Charles Han at the Institute of Chemistry,
Chinese Academy of Science in Beijing, China.

The aim of this research project is to investigate the solvent effects,
structural variations and the resulting shell interpenetration of silica-
polypeptide colloidal particles. These particles are composed of a silica core,
which may or may not possess a superparamagnetic inclusion (Co or Fe3O4). The
shell consists of polypeptides covalently bonded to the core. Depending on the
properties of the attached polymers, the particles can exhibit solubility in
water or organic solvents. Also, the polypeptide coil-helix transition is a
useful feature for modifying the surface configuration and particle
interactions. These particles are candidates for several potential applications
such as responsive materials, chiral separations, catalysis, colloidal
crystallization, biomimetic membrane supports and drug delivery systems. A
number of features about the particles have been described-for example, they can
form colloidal crystals'but very little is known about the dynamic response of
the particles under applied fields. An overall goal is to understand these
properties and concurrently the findings will have a positive impact on the
approach used to design novel responsive materials and devices. Small angle
neutron scattering (SANS) studies are performed at the Neutron Scattering
Laboratory, China Institute of Atomic Energy. This SANS device is one of the
most recently built neutron systems in the world. After gaining experience with
similar particles of interest developed by the host group, the general objective
is to investigate shell structural properties as the particles are brought
together under applied magnetic fields using SANS, coupled with dynamic light
scattering (DLS). The combination of SANS and DLS is ideal for this study
because both techniques permit real-time monitoring of structure variations.
Particle interactions are detectable by SANS using deuterated and hydrogenous
polypeptides covalently attached to silica cores.

In addition to the usual development of international partnerships, publications
and presentations, the PI will adapt his acquired skills to U.S. neutron
sources. This continued research endeavor will contribute to the advancement of
materials science by providing insight on microstructural and responsive
properties of versatile core-shell colloidal systems.