* 1159623
* Development of PZT Thin-Film Microactuators for Intracochlear Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* I-Yeu Shen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2016
* USD 318,604.00

PI: Shen&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1159623&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Background: Hearing
loss is a common disability in aging seniors and people who work long hours in
noisy environments. The majority of persons with hearing loss have sensorineural
impairments, due to dysfunction or loss of cochlear hair cells. For mild to
moderate hearing loss, conventional hearing aids amplify sounds delivered to the
ear. For more severe hearing loss, cochlear implants can directly stimulate
auditory neurons electrically via an electrode in the cochlea. Between these two
extremes, there is a group of patients who have lost considerable high-frequency
hearing but have some preserved low-frequency hearing. Many of these patients do
poorly with hearing aids but are not candidates for cochlear implants. Recently,
there is evidence that the most effective type of rehabilitation for this
growing group of patients is to combine electrical and acoustic stimulation
(CEAS) in the same ear. The CEAS strategy uses acoustic amplification (hearing
aid) and electrical stimulation (cochlear implant) simultaneously. Results show
that patients have better word recognition under noisy environments. To enable
CEAS in a single device, stimulating electrodes and acoustic actuators could
potentially be integrated and placed inside cochlea. While Intra-cochlear
electrodes are well studied, intra-cochlear acoustic actuators are novel and
have not been explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives &amp; Goals: The
proposed research is to develop Lead-Zirconium-Titanium Oxide (PZT) thin-film
acoustic micro-actuators for intra-cochlear use. There are two specific goals to
achieve. The first goal is to design and fabricate a micro-actuator probe, whose
tip has a PZT thin-film piezoelectric diaphragm serving as an acoustic actuator.
The actuator aims to deliver 200-nm displacement for a bandwidth from 15 Hz to 3
kHz with a size less than 0.8 mm x 0.8 mm. The tip of the probe, sealed with a
biocompatible material, is then implanted into the cochlea. The second goal is
to conduct acute animal tests to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed
micro-actuator probe by measuring auditory brainstem responses in guinea
pigs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: The proposed research has ample
intellectual merits. First, the proposed research is transformational. Results
of this research will enable a new class of cochlear implants that integrate
electric and acoustic stimulation in a single device. It will open a completely
new direction for the current cochlear implant technologies. Second, the
proposed research tremendously broadens the knowledge of the field. For example,
the proposed research has a well-planned animal study to test our hypothesis and
demonstrate the feasibility. This will be the first animal study on intra-
cochlear acoustic actuators. Third, this research is translational. The PZT
thin-film technology at the core of the proposed research forms a new research
paradigm. It complements traditional technology of micro-electric-mechanical-
systems (MEMS), which are not able to meet the challenges encountered in intra-
cochlear applications. The PZT thin-film technologies can also enable a wide
range of applications, such as scanning endoscopes, nano-positioners for DNA
manipulation, and viscosimeters for biofluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Currently, it is estimated that 278 million people have hearing
disability. A good population of these hearing-disabled patients can potentially
benefit from the proposed intra-cochlear actuators. Hearing rehabilitation
research will become progressively important, because US population is aging and
life expectancy is increasing. The proposed research will also broaden its
impact via development of new curriculum on PZT thin-film microdevices,
recruitment of underrepresented and undergraduate students, technology transfer
via patents and licensing, industrial and international collaboration, outreach,
and continuing education.