* 1159739
* Collaborative Research: Rational design of bifunctional catalysts for the conversion of Ievulinic acid to gamma-valerolactone
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jesse Bond, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 262,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1159739 / #1159863&lt;br/&gt;Bond, Jesse Q. /
Heyden, Andreas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern petrochemical industry has
achieved impressive efficiencies in meeting societal&lt;br/&gt;demands through
selective transformations of a few, key building block chemicals. A future self-
sustaining biorefining industry will similarly be based on a selected platform
of renewable building blocks which may yield transportation fuels or commodity
and specialty chemicals. A recent study has identified 10 promising biomass
derivatives that have the potential to serve as building blocks for future bio-
refineries. Of those, Levulinic Acid (LA) is particularly promising as it can be
produced inexpensively and in high yields by sulfuric acid hydrolysis of a
variety of lignocellulosic feedstocks. Conversion processes of LA to fuel
additives, chemicals, and monomers for plastics and textiles have been
demonstrated, but not commercialized. A derived chemical, ?×-valerolactone
(GVL), is a promising and extremely flexible intermediate, from which these same
numerous desirable end-products can be obtained. Despite a myriad of
applications for GVL, its large scale production is not yet established, owing
largely to difficulties associated with the purification of its immediate
precursor, LA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Andreas Heyden from the University
of South Carolina and Professor Jesse Q. Bond from Syracuse University believe
these issues have solutions, and have received this NSF award to establish the
underlying science that can make feasible the production of the lignocellulosic
biomass-derived platform chemical GVL on a commercial scale. In the present
state of the art, LA must undergo a costly purification scheme to remove
residual sulfuric acid from cellulose hydrolysis prior to conversion to GVL.
H2SO4 must be recovered and recycled, in line with a commitment to the long term
sustainability of biorefining processes. GVL is sufficiently hydrophobic to
allow an energy efficient separation from aqueous sulfuric acid by extraction
with a low-boiling acetate followed by facile distillation. A catalytic approach
to streamline this step has been proposed. However, the new challenge is the
inadequacy of presently available HDO catalysts for processing of unrefined LA.
Heyden and Bond propose to use a combined computational and experimental
approach to obtain fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanism of the
mild, heterogeneously catalyzed hydrodeoxygenation of LA to GVL over Ru/C and
RuRe/C catalysts in both aqueous and dilute sulfuric acid solutions, leading to
potential improved catalysts and thus making the entire strategy more
industrially relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental objective of this
project is to create a scientific basis for the rational design of novel
heterogeneous catalysts with superior activity, selectivity, and stability for
the HDO of LA to GVL in aqueous sulfuric acid. A successful outcome is broadly
relevant in aqueous phase processing of lignocellulosic biomass. Further,
success of the combined computational and experimental research approach
illustrates that such a strategy not only increases our understanding of
reaction mechanisms, but also reduces the time and financial resources needed
for the design of new heterogeneous catalysts tailored to meet the changing
needs of a world with limited resources. The PhD students involved in this
project will become experts in the practice and integration of computational and
experimental catalysis. Also, the research results will be incorporated into the
elective classes ¡§Multiscale Modeling: From Electrons to Chemical Reactors¡¨
being taught by Heyden at the University of South Carolina and ¡§Heterogeneous
Catalysis¡¨ being offered by Bond at Syracuse University.