* 1159448
* Selective Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Biorenewable Polyols over Bimetal Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Wenzhen Li, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* George J. Antos
* 11/30/2014
* USD 259,998.00

Biorenewable polyols such as glycerol, xylitol, and sorbitol are expected to
become abundant as a result of lignocellulosic biomass conversion and biofuel
production, and thus have great potential to serve as the primary building-
blocks for future production of valuable fine chemicals. One of the critical
challenges in current heterogeneous catalytic conversions of these polyols is
the unsatisfactory catalyst selectivity, which is mainly due to largely unknown
side reactions. In addition to the problems resulting from poor selectivity, the
rich chemical energy stored in these energetic organic compounds is not directly
utilized. Thus, there is a clear need to develop innovative strategies for
selective production of high-value chemicals and direct generation of energy
from these polyols.

Professor Wenzhen Li at Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI proposes
to investigate aqueous-phase selective electrocatalytic oxidation of polyols for
the controlled production of higher-valued chemicals and the simultaneous
generation of electricity using anion exchange membrane fuel cells based on
bimetallic catalysts. The research hypotheses are that controlled electric
potential applied on bimetallic catalysts with tuned electronic and geographic
structures (controlled size, shape and structure) at the anion exchange membrane
/water/metal interface will offer efficient cogeneration of chemicals and
electricity from biorenewable polyols at the anode. Initial target for
electricity is enough power density for portable electronics. Li sees the study
as one defining the relationships between electric potential, catalyst structure
and catalytic functions of selectivity and activity so as to better capitalize
on the systems.

Success of this research will advance understanding of selective catalytic
oxidation, and open a new avenue for controlled conversion of biorenewable
polyols to high-value chemicals through electrocatalysis processes. It will also
contribute to the development of efficient electrochemical energy devices that
can directly use biorenewable fuels. This project will provide graduate and
undergraduate students with a unique intellectual environment to learn
catalysis, electrochemistry, energy, and nanomaterials. The generated results
will be incorporated into the undergraduate ?Fuel Cell Fundamental? course, and
used in Michigan Tech?s existing outreach programs, especially the summer youth
program, in which the majority of students are from under-represented groups.