* 1159364
* Collaborative Research: Inter-Industry Differences in the Antecedents and Consequences of Industrial Scientists Mobility and Entrepreneurship Decisions
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2012,12/31/2015
* Martin Ganco, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 12/31/2015
* USD 209,981.00

This research examines inter-industry differences in the antecedents and
consequences of industrial scientists' mobility and entrepreneurship decisions.
Three questions are analyzed 1) Why do some high technology industries have
higher rates of scientist mobility and entrepreneurship than others? 2) What are
the innovation diffusion patterns across high technology industries due to
mobility and entrepreneurial entry of scientific personnel? 3) How do industry
characteristics interact with firm and individual attributes to impact
employment growth of new ventures created by industrial scientists?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project centers on the role of complementary assets
and posits that inter-industry differences in their importance play a critical
role in explaining industry heterogeneity in the rates and outcomes of
industrial scientist mobility and entrepreneurship decisions and thus serve as
the theoretical underpinnings for all three research questions. A particular
focus is on inter-industry differences in the importance and transportability of
complementary non-human assets, how they shape the career decisions of
individual scientists, and how they affect both the levels of scientist mobility
and entrepreneurship within industries and the direction of scientist mobility
and entrepreneurship that occurs across industry boundaries. The empirical
analysis of the data focuses on scientists working in high-tech industry
settings tracks scientists? entrepreneurship and mobility within and between
these high-tech sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: In contrast to
most of the prior literature that studied the antecedents and consequences of
the career choices of scientists at the firm level and within a single industry
context, this research examines the questions by focusing on individual level
decisions in a broad cross-industry setting. This thus examines multiple
important gaps that are of interest to both policy makers and academics. In
particular, by building the micro-foundations of the knowledge diffusion process
at the individual scientist unit of analysis, it helps to build a systematic
understanding of inter-industry differences in industrial scientist mobility and
entrepreneurship in high tech industries. Understanding industry heterogeneity
in the antecedents and consequences of the career choices of industrial
scientists is particularly important in the context of understanding and
promoting industry renewal as scientists are likely to play a key role in the
creation and commercialization of new technologies which can have important
growth effects at the firm-, industry-, and regional-
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The study informs science and
innovation policy makers about what industry conditions are most conducive to
employment growth via entrepreneurship by scientific personnel. In addition, it
examines the results of incentivizing a potentially crucial but heretofore
under-examined source of high tech entrepreneurship: scientists employed outside
of the focal industry. The results may also inform scientists' career decisions
about industry-level factors that may facilitate or create impediments to
successful start-up entry and subsequent growth.