* 1159158
* IRFP: Randomness Preservation and Randomness Extraction
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Christopher Porter, Porter                  Christopher    P
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 141,700.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a twenty-two-month research
fellowship by Dr. Christopher P. Porter to work with Dr. Laurent Bienvenu at
Université Paris Diderot - Paris 7 in Paris, France.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithmic randomness, a discipline that lies at the
intersection of computability theory, probability theory, and information
theory, among other disciplines, has received increased attention in recent
years. However, a number of important issues concerning the interaction between
randomness preservation and randomness extraction, as well as the subject of the
rate of randomness extraction, have not been studied adequately from the point
of view of algorithmic randomness. Porter and Bienvenu have previously
collaborated on the former topic, extending a classical result in Algorithmic
Randomness known as Demuth's Theorem and showing several ways that this theorem
cannot be extended. The techniques that Porter and Bienvenu have developed merit
further investigation, as there is promise for these techniques to have
consequences for the study of notions of randomness given in terms of biased
probability measures. Moreover, Porter and Bienvenu have a framework in place to
investigate the rate of randomness extraction, and they conjecture that they
will be able to establish strong connections between Martin-Löf randomness and
the average-case extraction rate of certain effectively computable
transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Not only will this research contribute to
a better understanding of the relationship between algorithmic randomness,
randomness extraction, and biased probability measures, but it will also help
foster new international collaborations between Porter and various members of
Bienvenu's research group (such as his doctoral students Antoine Taveneaux and
Benoit Monin), as well as members of other research groups in France with whom
Bienvenu is collaborating (most notably Dr. Mathieu Hoyrup in Nancy and Dr.
Grégory Lafitte and Dr. Alexander Shen in Montpellier).