* 1159397
* Experimental &amp; Computational Design of High-Performance Polymer Membranes for CO2 Capture
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Christoffer Turner, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 12/31/2016
* USD 348,996.00

1159397&lt;br/&gt;Bara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Chemical and
Biological Separations program supports work by Professors Jason E. Bara and
Christoffer H. Turner from the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
at the University of Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes potentially offer a
highly energy efficient technology by which CO2 can be captured from sources
such as coal-fired power plants. While the currently available membranes present
some desirable performance characteristics, only marginal gains can be made in
CO2 transport rates via structural modification of these polymers. However,
polymers containing hindered, basic groups offer unprecedented opportunities to
develop membranes with much higher transport rates via facilitated transport of
CO2. In the presence of water, these groups can promote the formation of
bicarbonate (HCO3-) anion, which can enable extremely high transport rates for
CO2, minimizing energy requirements and the cost of CO2 capture. Because of the
large number of possible membrane materials that can be developed around this
concept, as well as a crucial need for detailed, molecular-level simulation
efforts in the field of polymer gas separation membranes, a fundamental
understanding of the design, facilitated transport mechanisms and polymer
structures of these membranes for CO2 capture will be most readily achieved via
coordinated experimental and computational studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of this project will significantly advance the fundamental understanding
of polymer membranes and facilitated transport mechanisms for CO2 capture.
Additionally, the results generated will be of interest to other major research
areas, such as pharmaceuticals and biomaterials, where similar structures are
used for their therapeutic, antifungal and antibacterial
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides an excellent
educational platform for graduate, undergraduate students, as well as outreach
activities. The students involved with the project will benefit from an
excellent synergy and training opportunities within the combined experimental
and computational efforts. The PI and co-PI are directors of the NSF-REU Site
"Engineering Solutions for Clean Energy Generation, Storage, and Consumption"
and this research proposal can provide multiple synergies and opportunities for
students in that program. Additionally, our project will provide the basis for a
new Honors Forum class taught within the Chemical and Biological Engineering
Department at UA. This is an interactive, discussion-oriented class, which
focuses on a new (contemporary) topic each semester. Bara and Turner will co-
teach this class, focusing on emerging technologies for addressing CO2-related
issues. Funding provided through this proposal will enable additional short-term
research opportunities for undergraduate students. During the studies, students
will learn skills related to the use of polymer synthesis, membrane
characterization, NMR, instrument design using LabView, as well as develop
skills in molecular simulations and electronic structure calculations.