* 1159376
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Singularities, mixing and long time behavior in nonlinear evolution
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Vladimir Sverak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2016
* USD 240,269.00

The project seeks to advance knowledge in mathematics of fluids, a subjectwith
links to engineering, physics, chemistry and many other sciences. The major goal
of the project is the development of new techniques to achieve breakthroughs in
our understanding of fluid dynamics phenomena. The project research will address
fundamental properties of the classical equations of fluid dynamics, qualitative
properties of solutions, and modeling applications. The project focuses on three
main directions. The first set of problems concerns global regularity vs finite
time blow up that will be investigated for a range of fundamental equations of
fluid mechanics. Axi-symmetric solutions for 3D Euler and Navier-Stokes will be
considered, new potentially singular scenarios will be studied and new
regularity criteria will be sought. Active scalars, such as surface quasi-
geostrophic equation coming from atmospheric science, will also be analyzed --
here the effort will concentrate on studying properties of solutions, search for
new Lyapunov functionals and novel regularity estimates. In the second
direction, we will seek more detailed information on long time dynamics. This
will include research on some long-open conjectures for 2D Euler equation,
including possible mechanisms of inverse energy cascade, mixing and small scales
formation. We will also work on passive scalar models and mixing properties of
flows in this context. Biomixing by chemotaxis will be investigated as well,
with an eye towards applications in ecology and marine biology. The third
direction focuses on complex fluid models. In many applications - for instance,
in studies of particle suspensions or solutions - the microscopic structure of
particles in the fluid becomes important. The shape and interactions between the
particles can be taken into account by adding kinetic equations to the fluid
dynamics systems and introducing physically natural couplings. Analysis of
solutions to such systems, their regularity and qualitative properties will be a
part of the project work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluids are ubiquitous in nature,
science and engineering. Diverse phenomena involving fluids appear in
atmospheric and ocean science, astrophysics, chemistry and biology, and are
described by partial differential equations of fluid mechanics. These equations
are some of &lt;br/&gt;the most difficult partial differential equations to
analyze. They describe a wide range of complex phenomena, are nonlinear, and
usually nonlocal. Due to their complexity, even the classical equations such as
3D Euler and Navier-Stokes are far from well understood. The proposed research
lies at the interface of several central areas of mathematics - partial
differential equations, dynamical systems, functional analysis and Fourier
analysis. This FRG project brings together several researchers that have been at
the forefront of recent developments in mathematical fluid mechanics. Different
participants bring different strengths to the project. It is expected that
intensive collaboration within FRG framework will lead to development of new
ideas and approaches and result in a burst of activity in mathematics of fluids.
New techniques and tools developed are likely to have an impact in neighboring
areas of mathematics, biology, and atmospheric science. An important part of the
FRG activity will be training of junior researchers. Mathematics of fluid
mechanics covers a broad range of effective techniques, which are applicable
beyond fluids. The training activities will include a summer school, two
workshops, group meetings, course development, research seminars and research
projects for advanced undergraduate students. The principal investigators will
advertise all training activities broadly, and strive to recruit talented,
motivated, and diverse trainees. Special attention will be paid to recruitment
of groups under represented in mathematics.