* 1159886
* Next-Generation Affinity Chromatography with PEGylated Ligands
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Todd Przybycien, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,001.00

Przybycien&lt;br/&gt;CBET 1159886&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the
Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by Professor Todd M.
Przybycien to develop new separations technology for use in the biotechnology
industry and to develop a corresponding laboratory and teaching module for
secondary school chemistry students as an introduction both to separations
technology and to the biotechnology industry. The separations technology
development effort involves the modification of affinity chromatography media,
commonly used in the production of pharmaceutical proteins such as monoclonal
antibodies, so that it is more resistant to fouling by contaminant species,
thereby increasing manufacturing efficiency. The secondary education module
development effort involves the creation and deployment of a set of laboratory
experiments and supporting lecture materials in affinity partitioning technology
that can be used to augment current high school chemistry curricular materials
in the area of the separation of matter by demonstrating the ideas of affinity
and specificity in separation operations. These educational materials will also
be used to provide exposure to the biotechnology industry, a key domestic
industrial sector, as the experiments are motivated by and have applications to
bioprocessing and bioseparations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Affinity chromatography
is a premier bioseparations technology in which specific binding interactions
are exploited to achieve selective recovery of a target biological macromolecule
from a complex biological mixture. Monoclonal antibodies, or MAbs, are the
dominant class of biologic products from the biopharmaceutical industry.
Affinity chromatography using media with immobilized MAb-specific binding groups
such as Stapylococcal Protein A, or SPA, is typically the central unit operation
around which generic, or platform, MAb purification processes are developed. Our
specific research approach is to modify SPA-based affinity chromatography media
by chemically attaching poly(ethylene glycol), or "PEG", an inert polymer, to
the SPA binding group. This chemical modification, or PEGylation, will improve
media selectivity by decreasing non-specific binding interactions with SPA and
will improve media robustness by increasing the stability/degradation resistance
of SPA. That this approach should be successful is supported by the well-known
use of PEGylation to impart stealthy characteristics to protein-based drugs
without adversely affecting biological binding activity, to enhance the physical
stability of proteins, and to improve the fouling resistance of surfaces towards
proteins and other biologically-derived species. PEGylation strategies (size,
extent, structure of attached PEG chains; masking of MAb-specific binding sites
on SPA to preserve binding affinity) will be evaluated with respect to their
impact on important chromatographic performance metrics including MAb binding
capacity and MAb binding specificity in the presence of customary contaminants
(CHO host cell protein, DNA and virus) and during many cycles of repeated use.
If successful, a new class of high-performance affinity chromatography media
based on ligand PEGylation will result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims to invoke a step-change in the selectivity and robustness of
affinity chromatography media, and SPA-based media in particular, to enable a
corresponding step-change improvement in chromatographic performance. PEGylated
affinity chromatography media with increased specificity and robustness relative
to current media can reduce process development time for new biological
pharmaceuticals (improved specificity translates into fewer downstream
purification steps to develop and validate) and can increase process throughput
for new and existing biological pharmaceuticals (improved specificity translates
into shorter, less-stringent wash and clean-in-place cycles and fewer downstream
steps to operate; improved robustness translates into greater binding capacity
retention, less ligand leaching and ability to use ligands with preferred
specificity but decreased stability, and more operating cycles before media
replacement). Greater speed-to-market and process throughput, particularly for
the critical MAb class of biopharmaceuticals, can drive down treatment costs.
The proposed research will comprise the research training of a Ph.D. student and
several undergraduate engineering students, poising each for career
opportunities in the domestic biopharmaceutical industry.