* 1159425
* Precipitation and Self-Interaction of Viruses by Preferential Hydration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Caryn Heldt, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 08/31/2017
* USD 276,721.00

1159425&lt;br/&gt;Heldt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
use high-throughput methods to understand the principles behind selective
precipitation of viruses with osmolytes to create a universal purification
method for viruses that uses measured values of virus self-interaction based on
theoretical and not empirically derived correlations. Our hypothesis is that
osmolytes will preferentially precipitate viruses due to preferential hydration
(the selective partitioning of water around a solute molecule) and result in the
aggregation of viruses due to hydrophobic interactions. Both enveloped and non-
enveloped viruses will be examined to understand the differences in these
viruses classes. This is a transformative method to approach virus removal. Most
virus removal is done empirically, whereas in this proposal, we will quantify
selfinteraction parameters that will guide future methods for virus
purification, removal and detection. This will be accomplished through the
completion of the project goals. Goal 1: Use high-throughput screening to
discover precipitants that selectively precipitate an enveloped and non-
enveloped virus. High-throughput screening in 96-well plates will allow quick
evaluation of multiple precipitants and precipitation condition. Goal 2:
Quantify the thermodynamics of viruses in contact with precipitants. Close
examination of flocculent size and solubility of viruses with co-solvents will
allow an in depth evaluation of virus self-interaction and virus hydrophobicity.
Goal 3: Expand the virus range to determine if the precipitants can be used as a
platform approach to virus precipitation. Two additional viruses will be
examined to determine if precipitation conditions are universally applicable to
multiple viruses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will also
strengthen the research, education, and outreach at Michigan Tech, the local
Great Lakes region, and throughout the world. The need to develop a platform
approach to virus purification will increase the speed to market of new vaccines
and this purification can also be applied to viral gene therapy vectors. This
proposal will use osmolytes to probe the self-interaction of enveloped and non-
enveloped viruses. The implications of this knowledge will far extend from the
precipitation of viruses to expand the toolbox of any virus separation or
detection method to allow a more theoretically based approach to the design of
the technique. The included education plan will introduce students from primary
education up to graduate students to the STEM fields and the need to understand
virus interactions to create improved virus removal, purification, and sensing
technologies. Participation in Summer Youth Programs (SYP) and the Western U.P.
Science Fair will attract underrepresented and economically disadvantaged groups
and bring them to Michigan Tech to experience hands-on science and engineering
programs and encourage them to pursue a career in a STEM fields.