* 1159255
* "Multispectral Plasmonic Interferometry: A New Tool for High-throughput, Real-time Detection of Cytokines"
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* G. Tayhas Palmore, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 02/29/2016
* USD 593,999.00

Pacifici 1159255 Leveraging recent progress in plasmonics and nanophotonics, the
aim of the proposed research is to develop a dense, planar array of nanoscale
plasmonic interferometers for real-time, sensitive, multiplexed, and high-
throughput characterization of a variety of cytokines released, e.g., in
polytrauma patients. The novelty of the concept being proposed is a new design
for multi-wavelength plasmonic interferometry coupled to surface chemistries
that are specific to cytokines in order to provide the required selectivity. The
result will be a large, dense array of plasmonic interferometers that, while
retaining the ultimate sensitivity, could expand the capabilities of current SPR
techniques to include broad-band wavelength detection, for specific analyte
fingerprinting, and high-throughput characterization, via integration of more
than one million SPR-equivalent sensors per square centimeter in a single chip.
In addition to a better understanding of light-matter interaction at the
nanoscale, the proposed research will dramatically impact the throughput
capabilities of several analyses and assays relevant to human health and
currently used in the life sciences, and serve as an alternative high-throughput
scheme for faster drug discovery, as well as more efficient identification and
screening of novel therapies. The proposed research will also provide graduate-
level training of students in areas of national need, with particular attention
to attracting and retaining underrepresented minorities and women in science and
engineering. In addition to the education outreach to local schools, the PIs
will recruit a high school summer student to perform sensing experiments using
the proposed plasmonic interferometry approach.