* 1159689
* Microfluidic Tumor-on-a-Chip to Quantify Drug Transport and Efficacy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Neil Forbes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 06/30/2015
* USD 311,984.00

1159689/ Forbes

Microfluidic Tumor-on-a-Chip to Quantify Drug Transport and Efficacy The
proposed research plan describes the development of a microfluidic device to
mimic the delivery of chemotherapeutics to tumors. The goal of the project is to
develop a screen that can quickly identify drugs that are able to eliminate
tumors and that will be successful in preclinical animal trials. The device will
contain perfused three-dimensional tumor tissue and will be constructed using
soft lithographic techniques. The research plan is comprised of four Aims: 1)
use the tumor-tissue device to measure the diffusion, binding and cytotoxicity
of anticancer drugs, 2) optimize drug dosage regimens, 3) measure the effect of
liposome encapsulation, and 4) validate the device with a library of
chemotherapeutic drugs. For these experiments, chemotherapeutic molecules will
be administered to the tumor-tissue device, and time-lapse microscopy will be
used to quantify concentration and cell viability as functions of time and
positions. These measurements will be interpreted by a computational model that
calculates rates of diffusion, cell binding and cytotoxicity. The predictive
power of the device will be validated with a library of chemotherapeutic drugs
that have dramatically different behaviors in cell culture and in xenograft
tumors.

Intellectual merit The proposed research will change our understanding of why
cancer drugs fail. Currently, drug screens focus on identifying compounds that
kill cancer cells in culture and eliminate tumor in mice with minimal toxicity.
The proposed research will show that cancer drugs also fail because of limited
exposure of all cancer cells within tumors. Proposed experiments will show that
the two mechanisms that control exposure are diffusion and cell binding.
Counterintuitively, these mechanisms can both increase and decrease cellular
exposure to drugs. The proposed research has intellectual merit because it will
show that quantification of these mechanisms can be used to predict which drugs
will pass and fail preclinical animal studies. These experiments will also show
that if the causes of drug failure can be determined, the properties of a drug
can be modified to improve its transport behavior.

Broader Impacts The proposed research will have significant impact on the
scientific community and society. As a screen for experimental anticancer
therapeutics the device will increase the number of potential drugs and decrease
the time from discovery to clinical trials. Ultimately, an increase in
successful drug would have a positive effect on cancer mortality. The proposed
project will foster undergraduate participation in research by supporting a team
of undergraduate researchers and REU students, and encouraging authorship in top
journals. The project will also promote involvement of high school students from
Amherst Regional High School, who will receive academic credit for their
participation. These students will be exposed to bioengineering and medical
research by participating in programs at UMass and at Baystate Medical Center.
Involvement of women and underrepresented minorities will be encouraged at all
levels with targeted recruiting of high school students, undergraduate
researchers and graduate students. Graduates will be recruited as part of the
Northeast Alliance for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (NEAGEP).