* 1159990
* Self-assembly mediated by aqueous interfaces: A novel computational study of structure, thermodynamics, and dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Shekhar Garde, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2016
* USD 299,997.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;1159990&lt;br/&gt;Garde, Shekhar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-
assembly plays an important role in natural processes and technologies used to
make new materials. A key goal in studies of self-assembly is to better
understand how the interactions of the constituents lead to the self-assembled
structures, and their resulting properties. Aqueous interfaces are ubiquitous
and often play an important role in self-assembly, yet, a detailed understanding
of how the interfaces mediates the assembly is lacking. The PIs propose a new
computational approach using molecular (MD) and Brownian dynamics (BD)
simulations to shed light on interface-mediated assembly at aqueous interfaces.
Properties of water structure, dynamics, and fluctuations are fundamentally
altered near extended interfaces, especially near hydrophobic interfaces. They
hypothesize that the altered properties of water, in turn, affect the structure,
stability, and interactions of macromolecules. This hypothesis is supported by
significant preliminary work. They expect that assembly of macromolecules will
be significantly different at interfaces compared to that in bulk water.
Fundamental understanding of the processes leading to complex interface-mediated
assembly is the central focus of our proposal. Understanding of the molecular
behavior of water at interfaces is critical to understanding how interfaces
alter water-mediated interations near them. Therefore, modeling of phenomena at
a wide range of length scales from that of a single water molecule to large
self-assembled structures is required. To this end, the approach focuses on
modeling of hierarchically complex systems from small solutes to macromolecular
assemblies. Specific Aims of the work are to: (1) Quantify the binding to and
the behavior of single molecules from small model solutes to flexible homo and
heteropolymers, and peptides at aqueous interfaces using MD simulations. (2)
Quantify how interfaces modulate the interactions of pairs and larger numbers of
molecules in their vicinity. (3) Develop coarse-grained Brownian dynamics
simulations to examine many particle assembly at interfaces. Information about
the role of interfaces obtained from Aims 1 and 2 will serve as important input
to BD simulations. (4) Explore and quantify how fluid flow and deformation of
the interface impact the structures, the process of assembly, and the flow
properties of the assembled structures. Intellectual Merit: Although water at
interfaces is a highly active area of research both from experimental and
theoretical perspectives, understanding of how the altered properties of water
affect water-mediated interactions at interfaces is truly in its infancy. The
work promises to break new ground by providing such molecular level
understanding and uncovering its impact on interface-mediated assembly at larger
length and time scales. The significant preliminary work by our groups and
experimental data from a number of different groups focused on biological and
colloidal systems point to the important role of aqueous interfaces in diverse
fundamental problems and technological applications. The work has the potential
to provide a framework to interpret those experimental results, enable
technological applications and new materials development. Broader Impacts:
Interfaces are ubiquitous in biological and nanoscopic systems, and also play a
central role in numerous technological applications ranging from separations,
coatings, to new materials development. Recent work has highlighted the role of
interfaces in nucleating and accelerating fibril formation of alzheimers
peptides. The project will impact the understanding of many such natural
processes, and enhance our ability to design new technologies based on self
assembly at interfaces. The research is coupled with significant efforts in
education and outreach. This includes involvement of undergraduates in research
and motivation of underrepresented groups into science and engineering, achieved
through two different programs at Rensselaer, the New Visions Math, Engineering,
Technology, and Science Program, and the Molecularium. The PI is a co-leader of
the highly successful Molecularim Project (IMAX movie released last December).