* 1159088
* GOALI: Performance Monitoring Principles for Nonlinear and Linear Model Predictive Control
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2013,11/30/2016
* James Rawlings, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 11/30/2016
* USD 349,954.00

Current estimates of the economic impact in the process industries of model
predictive control (MPC) are in the billions of dollars per year. But the
process industries currently have no accepted methods tailored to the problem of
assessing the performance of the thousands of loops currently running under
model predictive control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
establish principles for performing such assessment for installed MPC
technology. Establishing these principles will enable the development of
software tools to automatically quantify the key performance index (KPI) for
each MPC control system under study. Rank ordering of the different loops' KPIs
enables comparison, prioritization, and pinpoints those systems requiring
further attention. Comparisons of each loop's actual KPI to three other
calculated KPIs allow further diagnosis including: impact of process
constraints, poor process models, inappropriate noise filtering, and large
disturbances. Longitudinal analysis allows the user to select appropriate time
periods for benchmarking performance and spotting seasonal trends and
variations. Feedback from this assessment analysis to the control system
technology vendors creates incentives and points to promising areas for further
improving the control technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is little
established theory for assessing performance of MPC based on nonlinear models,
so this part of the research ventures into a completely new area. The industrial
partner in this GOALI proposal, ExxonMobil, will provide the relevant industrial
data sets and supervise the supported Ph.D. student for two summers at
ExxonMobil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
problems to be addressed in this research are fundamental and far reaching. The
required theory draws upon: optimization; probability, statistics and
statistical inference; random variables and Markov chains; nonlinear control
theory; numerical simulation and time-averaging of numerical simulations to
determine statistical properties (Monte Carlo methods). The theory draws from
current techniques developed in these fundamental disciplines and will expose
new problems that cannot be addressed with the current&lt;br/&gt;tools provided
by these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advance technology has been acquired and
implemented, but users have no clearinghouse of objective data and information
telling them where these systems are working well, and perhaps more importantly,
where they are not working well. Developing new systems to provide this
information will enable: (i) users to systematically manage larger
installations, (ii) identify and prioritize the troublesome parts of their
systems, and (iii) spur development of new control theory tailored to addressing
the identified, unmet practical needs. The people responsible for implementing
and maintaining advanced technology require management tools to assess the
technology. This is true of almost any advanced
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systems theory and algorithms developed in
this research are completely general and can be applied to any class of dynamic
manufacturing processes for which a reasonable predictive model can be
developed.