* 1159206
* IRFP: Topological Representations of Matroids and the Geometry of Phylogenetic Trees
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2013,06/30/2015
* Matthew Stamps, Stamps                  Matthew        T
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 166,861.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Matthew
T. Stamps to work with Dr. Svante Linusson at the Royal Institute of Technology
(KTH) in Stockholm, Sweden.

A relatively new field of mathematics is topological combinatorics, which
concerns, as its name suggests, the interactions between combinatorics and
algebraic topology. The main idea is to translate a genuine combinatorial
question into a topological problem whose solution is both well studied and
answers the original question at hand. This approach has led to many significant
breakthroughs over the past several decades; in fact, there are a number of deep
theorems in combinatorics whose only known proofs require topological
techniques. This project considers several applications of those techniques to
matroid theory and evolutionary biology.

Matroids are (discrete) mathematical objects that capture the notion of
independence. They most frequently appear in combinatorics and optimization, but
they also arise from arrangements of circles on spheres (along with higher
dimensional analogs) that can be constructed from topological objects called
homotopy colimits of a diagram of spaces. The primary aim of the PI is to
establish an explicit role in which homotopy colimits can provide novel
solutions to a collection of problems in matroid theory and, more generally, in
algebraic combinatorics. A secondary component of the project explores the
geometry of the edge-product space of phylogenetic trees, a probabilistic model
from evolutionary biology aimed at allowing taxonomists to work with missing
information (an important feature given that, in some areas, new species are
discovered rather frequently).

This line of research incorporates techniques from several disciplines in
mathematics, including commutative algebra, combinatorics, discrete geometry,
algebraic topology, and probability theory, while developing collaboration
between the PI and research groups at the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) in
Stockholm, Sweden (Dr. Anders Björner and Dr. Svante Linusson), Aalto University
in Helsinki, Finland (Dr. Alexander Engström), and the Freie Universität -
Berlin in Germany (Dr. Günter Ziegler).