* 1159434
* Tailoring biocatalysts by combining protein and cofactor engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Stefan Lutz, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

#1159434&lt;br/&gt;Lutz, Stefan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes can be highly
effective, selective and sustainable alternatives to chemical catalysts.
Nevertheless, their application is often hampered by discrepancies between the
functional demands on these biocatalysts in nature versus requirements in
laboratory and industrial processes. Protein engineering by rational design and
laboratory evolution offers a powerful solution for tailoring enzymes to
overcome these differences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Principle investigators Stefan
Lutz and Dale Edmondson of Emory University are exploring new engineering
strategies for tailoring the catalytic function, substrate specificity and
enantioselectivity of flavin-dependent oxidoreductases, an important category of
enzymes for asymmetric reduction and oxidation chemistry in biotechnological and
pharmaceutical, as well as bioremediation applications. What makes this category
of enzymes particularly interesting from a standpoint of protein engineering is
their functional complementarity. The protein primarily serves as a scaffold to
bind and pre-orient cofactor and substrate(s) while the cofactor is responsible
for the chemistry in the active site. By simultaneously remodeling the protein
and cofactor, the PIs? approach to generating and assessing many variants offers
a unique opportunity to explore synergistic effects that can translate into
enzyme redesign and significant enhancements of the functional versatility,
catalytic performance and physicochemical properties of existing
biocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative research project
offers opportunity for a highly interdisciplinary training environment for
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as provides a framework for
outreach involving new curriculum development activities for Atlanta-area high
school teachers. Working with the Center for Science Education at Emory and the
Georgia Intern-Fellowship for Teachers (GIFT) program, new hands-on experiments
on green chemistry and biocatalysis will be developed. The PIs will also
continue to participate in Emory's summer undergraduate research experience
(SURE) program, working with young scholars from across the southeastern United
States, many of them representatives from minorities and underrepresented
groups, on new ideas to tweak biocatalysts.