* 1159682
* Band Offsets and Interface State Densities in Crystalline and Amorphous Oxide Systems for Photonics, Sensors and Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Stephen Pearton, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mahmoud Fallahi
* 04/30/2016
* USD 325,541.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electronics, Photonics, and Magnetic
Devices Program (EPMD) in the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) and the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program (EPM) in the
Division of Materials Research (DMR).

Technical Description: The research objective of this project aims to develop a
better understanding of the fundamental materials properties of the band offsets
and interfaces between dielectrics and semiconductors. It covers investigation
of the band offsets for different dielectrics (SiNX, Sc2O3 and (CeTb)MgAl11O19)
on crystalline ZnO, CdZnO, ZnMgO and also for the latter two on a-IGZO and
measurement of interface state densities and thermal stability of all these
dielectrics on a-IGZO. Optical and electrical techniques are used to
characterize the band offsets, bandgaps and interface state densities.

Non-technical Description: Crystalline and amorphous electronic oxides are
gaining interest for gas and chemical sensing, ultra violet light-emitting
diodes for solid state lighting, flat-panel, flexible and touch-screen displays
and solar cells. The importance of transparent conducting oxides in these
products has led to a surge of research in recent years to discover new
materials, lower the costs of manufacture and improve properties. Oxide-based
thin film transistors have great potential for realizing a roll-to-roll display.
If this can be realized, it may also create new applications in heads-up
displays, windshields, electronic books or light weight computers and eventually
change the entire display industry. This project is designed to develop a new
class of solid-state materials that can be made at low temperatures, allowing
their use on cheap substrates like paper and plastic. In addition, cross-
disciplinary education activities introduce the public to these exotic and
enabling materials. The PI engages in undergraduate and graduate mentoring, K-12
outreach, conference symposia organization, and writing a textbook.