* 1159123
* IRFP: Field Energetics and Diving Physiology of a Small Cetacean, the Harbor Porpoise
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2013,03/31/2015
* Birgitte McDonald, McDonald                Birgitte       I
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2015
* USD 151,500.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship to Dr. Birgitte
I. McDonald to work with Drs. Peter Madsen and Tobias Wang at Aarhus University
in Aarhus, Denmark.

Cetaceans (whales, dolphins and porpoises) are among the largest animals ever to
evolve, and as apex predators in marine ecosystems, they have a significant top-
down effect on prey targeted during long, deep breath-hold dives. It is
therefore essential to understand the energetic requirements and oxygen
management of cetaceans if we are to interpret and understand their role in the
trophic energy cascades, their foraging ecology, limits of dive performance and
ability to adapt to environmental change and disturbance. However, very little
is known about the field physiology of cetaceans due their size and hostile
habitats. Harbor porpoises are a unique model species to study the metabolic
rates and diving physiology in a wild cetacean because of their small size and
ability to be studied in captivity as well as in the wild

This research addresses the above knowledge gaps by determining the energetic
requirements and oxygen management strategy during diving in one of the smallest
cetaceans, the harbor porpoise. The three main objectives are 1) Determining the
field metabolic rate of harbor porpoises using a combination of field and
laboratory studies, 2) Measuring heart rate in freely diving harbor porpoises,
which for the first time document the level of bradycardia in a naturally diving
cetacean. In addition, accelerometers will be used to determine
workload/activity during dives. The relationship between heart rate and activity
will be used to assess the potential level of muscle perfusion during dives with
different activity levels, and 3) develop a self-contained biologger to measure
blood flow and heart rate that can be used to measure cardiac output in freely
diving marine mammals.

The project provides important information on the metabolic requirements of a
declining species that will aid in management and provides insight into the
diving physiology of cetaceans. Further, it provides high level scientific
training, fosters new domestic and international scientific collaborations, and
offers expansive outreach activities including: 1) The training of the principle
investigator in new research techniques and provides her with opportunities to
teach and mentor graduate and undergraduate students. 2) The development and
fostering of international and interdisciplinary collaborations. 3) Knowledge
exchange between the principle investigator and the host institution. 4) The
development of a blood flow data logger that can be used in a variety of diving
animals to improve our understanding of oxygen management during diving. And 5)
education outreach through the Fjord and BÃ¦lt Center (http://www.fjord-baelt.dk)
about the importance of physiological research in understanding the ecology and
biology of an organism and its role in the ecosystem.