* 1159279
* GOALI :  21st century Pd-based three-way catalysts: Controlling structure-activity relationships through the understanding of aging dynamics and in-situ regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Giovanni Cavataio, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 08/31/2015
* USD 319,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1159279&lt;br/&gt;Schwank,
Johannes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well-known that catalytic emission control
strategies for vehicles exact a toll on vehicle fuel economy. With the
requirements to drastically increase the corporate average fuel economy, such
fuel economy penalties will no longer be acceptable, and a new approach to
gasoline vehicle emission control catalysis is needed. This GOALI proposal
brings together a team of researchers from academia and industry in a quest to
arrive at a detailed understanding how new fuel economy-enabling powertrain
technologies such as gasoline-electric hybrids, engine start-stop features,
down-sized turbocharged engines with direct injection, and use of reformulated
gasoline or E-85 impacts the function and deactivation modes of existing three-
way Pd catalyst materials. The proposal will also address methods for curtailing
and, ideally even reversing catalyst deactivation on the vehicle during actual
operation. Traditionally, catalyst deactivation has only been looked at from a
post mortem perspective. There is a dearth of investigations of the time-
dependent changes occurring in emission control catalysts when exposed to
emissions from engines operating under various exhaust gas environments and
temperature regimes. Professor Johannes Schwank, Adjunct Professor Galen Fisher,
and Dr. Xiaoyin Chen at the University of Michigan will closely collaborate with
Dr. Robert McCabe at Ford Motor Company to utilize sophisticated probe reaction
analysis and characterization techniques to elucidate the complete evolution of
the Pd catalyst from its initial to final states, with the goal of identifying
opportunities to modify the engine operation in ways that either mitigate
catalyst deactivation or reverse deactivation processes. The hypothesis is that
different aging protocols lead to different outcomes in catalyst structure and
performance. This hypothesis will be tested by a comprehensive catalyst
characterization effort at different stages of aging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
terms of broader impact, this research will aid the design of future automotive
emission control technologies, while also improving the performance and
durability of existing automotive exhaust catalyst technologies. The results
will assist in developing methods to track the aging process on the vehicle and
either avoid severe aging modes or actively intervene at various points to
preserve or regenerate the catalyst. Given the close proximity of the two
institutions, the project will provide opportunities for Ford researchers to
participate in experiments at UM, and UM faculty and students to experience
working in an industrial research laboratory at Ford, thereby giving the
students an educational experience that goes beyond typical academic settings.