* 1159943
* Design of conformation-specific antibodies against unfolded and misfolded proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peter Tessier, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

1159943/ Tessier &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grand, unmet challenge in the protein
engineering community is to design antibodies that bind to target antigens with
high affinity and specificity. The goal of this proposal is elucidate general
principles for designing antibodies against unfolded and misfolded (aggregated)
proteins. Importantly, there are no previously reported antibodies specific for
diverse unfolded proteins, few reported conformation-specific antibodies against
misfolded proteins that recognize linear sequence epitopes, and no reported
strategies for designing antibodies against either protein conformation. This
proposal is based on two recent discoveries from the PIs laboratory. First, they
have discovered that a tyrosine-rich motif within a single antigen-binding loop
mediates antibody binding to unfolded proteins (but not to folded proteins).
Second, they have discovered that amyloidogenic motifs from the amyloid beta
peptide grafted into a single antibody loop mediate conformation-specific
antibody recognition of aggregated forms of amyloid beta (but not monomeric
amyloid beta).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Based on these
discoveries, the PI aims to test the following two hypotheses related to the
design of conformation-specific antibodies: i) antibodies displaying aromatic
peptide motifs (including aromatic residues other than tyrosine) bind
selectively to unfolded proteins, and such binding is mediated via pi-stacking
interactions involving solvent-exposed aromatic residues within unfolded
proteins (which are solvent-shielded within folded proteins); and ii) antibodies
displaying amyloid motifs from diverse proteins selectively recognize amyloid
fibrils (but not monomers) containing the cognate motifs, and such antibody
recognition is mediated via homotypic interactions between amyloid
motifs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The work has broad implications
for designing antibodies against diverse biomolecules (including several
disease-linked proteins), as well as for understanding and manipulating
biomolecular recognition. The investigator is committed to strong outreach to
underrepresented minorities and other disadvantaged peoples through two efforts:
i) a 4th grade science outreach program in an elementary school with a
significant fraction of reduced-cost lunch (~80%) and African American (~40%)
students focused on molecules using animated cartoons and hands-on activities to
interest these students in science at an early age; and ii) a 12th grade
outreach program to diverse students from rural towns in New York's Capital
District lacking advanced science courses that involves these students in the
process of discovery and development of a therapeutic antibody to encourage them
to pursue biomolecular aspects of science and engineering during their
undergraduate and graduate education.