* 1159052
* Travel support for engineering graduate students to attend the 86th ACS Colloid and Surface Science Symposium at Johns Hopkins University, June 10-13, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 12/31/2012
* USD 5,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1159052&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Michael
Bevan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides travel support to partially
cover costs associated with engineering graduate students and one overseas
speaker to attend the 86th ACS Colloid and Surface Science Symposium, June
10-13, 2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will have presentations on
topics, session organizers, keynote and plenary speakers. The travel grant will
be used for partial support of travel costs of one international speaker and to
support engineering graduate students, as well as other invited speakers who are
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The symposium will provide a
forum for communicating fundamentally new insights into colloidal and surface
science with relevance to existing complex fluids and advanced materials
applications as well as emerging nano- and bio- technologies. Due to the broad
scope, this meeting will attract diverse disciplines (e.g. Chemistry, Chemical
Engineering, Materials Science, Physics, etc.) and nearly all major US academic
institutions and many leading international institutions. The diversity of the
attendees and the talks is further represented by contributions from
theoretical, computational, and experimental groups and the participation of
scientists and engineers from all sectors including industry, government, and
academia.