* 1159353
* Measuring the Mass Flux and Magnetic Evolution of Jets in the Solar Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Peter Young, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 02/29/2016
* USD 419,808.00

The proposing team will carry out a comprehensive study of the structure and
evolution of coronal hole jets in order to discover the connections between the
solar wind and magnetic structures at the solar surface. The team will use data
from instruments on board the Hinode spacecraft to measure the parameters
relevant to the magnetic evolution that leads to explosive events (EEs) and
coronal hole jets (CHJs) on the Sun, as well as to measure the mass that is
ejected from such events. Explosive events and coronal hole jets are
particularly well suited to the spectroscopic analysis and magnetic field
studies that this team will perform. The team specifically intends to study how
the Sun's magnetic field evolution triggers EEs and CHJs, to determine how often
EEs promote a measurable response in the solar chromosphere and/or corona, and
to calculate the total mass flux of CHJs. This research will increase our
understanding of the variable flow of mass and energy through the lower solar
atmosphere.

The comprehensive statistics for CHJs collected by this team will provide
insight into the possible role of these jets in the mass and energy flux going
into the corona and solar wind, and thus aid in the development of improved
predictive space weather models that depend on coupling the lower solar
atmosphere to the corona. The team will provide a database of all analyzed CHJ
events to the public, so that the scientific results of this investigation can
be further exploited by the general solar physics community. The co-investigator
of this effort is a female scientist employed in industry, so this project will
advance the participation of underrepresented groups in science while enhancing
an ongoing academic-federal lab-industrial partnership.