* 1159882
* Atomic-scale alloys as energy- and cost-efficient catalysts for fuels and chemicals production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2016
* Maria Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 01/31/2016
* USD 349,999.00

Understanding the molecular-scale adsorption and dissociation behavior of a
number of small molecules on catalytically relevant surfaces is crucial for the
design of better working catalysts. More efficient, low-cost processes for the
production of fuels and chemicals may be developed as a result. Professors Maria
Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Georgios Kyriakou and Charles Sykes form a team at
Tufts University, Medford, MA which is receiving an award to utilize their
expertise in heterogeneous catalysis and surface science to identify the factors
that lead to enhanced catalytic activity and high selectivity of single-atom
alloys, particularly aimed at small molecule activations. Their aim is to
develop materials and methodologies that will enable wide ranging academic,
technical and industrial applications of these catalysts for heterogeneous
hydrogenations. The approach is to use a minority metal component such as Pd
present as isolated atoms in another metal like Cu, such that the former induces
different catalytic properties on the latter. In this example, the Pd atoms can
serve to dissociate H2 molecules, and spill over atomic hydrogen to the host
metal. Hence the Pd atoms serve as conduits of H atoms to the Cu surface which
can now facilitate hydrogenation reactions with gaseous H2, reactions which have
been impossible in the previous literature. This novel catalyst system not only
reduces the higher temperatures typically required to activate H2 on Cu
catalysts and hence reduces waste heat in products but also allows for more
selective hydrogenations to proceed at lower temperatures without decomposition
observed on the pure metals. In addition to these benefits, alloy particles in
which the expensive, active element is atomically dispersed should dramatically
reduce the cost of the catalyst materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary nature of the project will clearly impact the education of
graduate students and postgraduate fellows at Tufts. Extensive training of young
researchers at Brookhaven National Laboratory is planned in the project. A
significant number of women students comprise the PI and co-PIs groups, and they
will participate in some aspects of the project, while the Tufts summer scholars
program for undergraduates will be used to recruit other under- represented
groups. To increase dissemination, existing websites of the Nano Catalysis and
Energy lab and the Surface Science Sykes lab will add video clips and relevant
information material on this project to promote this work both as an educational
resource and a recruiting tool.