* 1159344
* Implantable biosensors for real-time in vivo interrogation of biological phenomena
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Gary Sayler, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,996.00

Sayler 1159344

This research effort is focused on the merging of light-emitting
(bioluminescent) human cell lines with integrated circuit microluminometers to
create miniaturized, implantable biosensing interfaces for internal monitoring
of animal physiology. Conventional imaging technology relies on external cameras
to penetrate and identify light-emitting cellular signatures embedded within
small animal subjects. Unfortunately, due to absorption, attenuation, and
scattering, even the most sensitive ultracooled cameras are unable to detect
light signals beyond depths of a few centimeters in living tissue. Without major
advances in imaging hardware sensitivity and/or light signal emission strength
of engineered implanted cells, bioimaging applications that promise real-time,
noninvasive visualization of health status in small animals may never achieve
the transformational leap towards imaging, tracking, and diagnosing diseases in
larger animals (i.e., humans). It is hypothesized that it may be more feasible
and practical to image internally rather than externally, and that the
bioengineering of an implantable optical chip capable of detecting light from
engineered human cells tuned to human disease states may be a solution for
effective whole-body human imaging. The intellectual merit of this research is a
transformative new imaging technology that brings us closer to biosensing
strategies evolved towards autonomous sense-and-respond human biotherapies where
disease states are automatically recognized and treated, the outcome of which
permits real-time and remote patient to doctor relationships and transformations
in personalized medicine and disease care management at greatly reduced costs.
Broader impacts include postdoctoral training and integration of undergraduate
students within the research project, multidisciplinary collaborations between
the life sciences and engineering disciplines, broad dissemination of research
results, and outreach efforts centered on K-12 Science, Technology, Engineering
& Mathematics (STEM) initiatives.