* 1159440
* Evaluating the Welfare and Forest Cover Impacts of Uganda's Forest Sector Governance Reform
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Pamela Jagger, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2014
* USD 24,999.00

This project is focused on developing research to evaluate the medium to long-
term social and environmental impacts of a major forest sector governance reform
implemented in Uganda in 2003. In addition to estimating social and
environmental impacts, the project will examine the role of both formal and
informal political institutions in determining social and environmental
outcomes. The 2003 reform, which changed the governance of 85 percent of
Uganda's forests, involved the creation of new organizations and institutions
following divergent models of devolution: democratic decentralization to local
government; and devolution to a for-profit parastatal. Specifically the project
is focused on the following three questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) Has the reform
achieved its stated objectives of forest-based poverty reduction and
environmental sustainability?;&lt;br/&gt;2) What are the determinants of
synergies and trade-offs with respect to the joint outcomes of poverty reduction
and environmental sustainability?; and,&lt;br/&gt;3) How do formal and informal
political institutions mediate governance reform outcomes?&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research builds on high quality baseline and early outcome data to
understand household-level welfare impacts of two models of devolution relative
to a case where forest management in Uganda has remained centralized. Remote
sensing data are used to estimate changes in the rate of deforestation before
and after the reform took place, and in study sites under different governance
regimes. To successfully develop the proposed research three major activities
will take place. First, the baseline socioeconomic data require pre-processing
to match villages in intervention sites (i.e., villages in areas affected by the
reform); and control sites (i.e., villages in areas that remain under
centralized forest management). Second, quantitative models that integrate
socioeconomic and spatial data will be developed with collaborators. Finally,
qualitative data on formal and informal political institutions from an
evaluation of early outcomes undertaken in 2007 will be analyzed to provide
solid grounding for core hypotheses related to the causal role of political
institutions in determining social and environmental
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: This research focuses on one of the most
mature forest sector governance reforms in sub-Saharan Africa. The ability to
analyze long-term impacts using high quality data on political institutions,
social welfare and forest cover change is entirely novel and provides a unique
contribution to the literature on natural resource governance reforms. This
study is also unique in that it gives equal attention to changes in welfare and
forest cover change; most studies of natural resource governance reform focus on
either socioeconomic OR biophysical outcomes. A primary objective is to
understand observed outcomes in the context of the governance and institutional
arrangements that mediate forest and land use decisions. The combination of
longitudinal socioeconomic data, detailed multi-scale data on institutions
(i.e., rules, incentives, constraints, heterogeneous actors), and spatial data
over an extended time frame provide a unique opportunity to understand how
governance reforms mature over time.&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: The project will
provide important information to policy makers in Uganda on the effectiveness of
forest sector decentralization. Uganda is at a critical juncture as it reaches
the 10-year anniversary of the forest sector reform. Early evaluation research
and anecdotal evidence suggests that the reform has not achieved the desired
outcomes. As other nations in the region (e.g., Kenya and Rwanda) embark upon
governance reforms in their natural resource sectors, understanding the role of
institutional choice and the factors that strengthen or mitigate desired policy
outcomes for local resource users is of critical importance. Further, empirical
analysis of the welfare and sustainability outcomes associated with
decentralization is critical for informing the design and implementation of
reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) projects
and policies. There is an emerging debate about the appropriate level of
governance for achieving carbon emission reductions, while doing no harm to the
local populations that rely on forests. Very few studies provide rigorous and
long-term empirical perspectives on the implications of decentralized regimes.