* 1159485
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Religion and Political Activism in Mexico
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Christopher Hale, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2013
* USD 11,995.00

Why do religious organizations facilitate secular political participation in
some settings and not in others? In addressing this question, this project
contributes to our understanding of political participation, the relationship
between religion and collective action, the relationship between ethnicity and
public goods, and the debate over the role of ideology and interests in
explaining secular political activism. Previous analyses of religion and
political participation have not assessed religious institutions' micro-level
impacts on laity political participation. By utilizing the insight from the
collective action literature that institutions structure individual incentives
for producing public goods, this study forms rationalist micro-level hypotheses
of religious institutions' effects on political activism. By focusing on the
relationship between civil society, participation, and democracy in Mexico, the
study will help the academic and policy-making communities better understand
fundamental building blocks of democratic governance and stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit is associated with its
examination of the relationship between religious organizations and political
participation in a democratic context. The research investigates three forms of
political participation and mobilization. Regional variation in political
participation across Mexico will be used to uncover the conditions under which
religious organizations mobilize political action. The project employs a multi-
method research design utilizing: 1) a quantitative analysis of 13,500 data
observations collected from the nationally representative National Survey of
Political Culture and Citizenship (ENCUP); 2) qualitative field research of
nearly 6 months in the Diocese of San Cristóbal de las Casas in the Mexican
State of Chiapas and the Archdiocese of Yucatán in the State of Yucatán; and 3)
an agent based model to pattern-match simulated empirical predictions against
empirical data. The main expectation is that where religious institutions
devolve decision-making, monitoring, and sanctioning authority to laity,
individuals develop capacities to overcome collective action problems related to
political activism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also makes important
contributions at a broader social level. The global "third wave of
democratization" involved nations whose citizenry generally score high on levels
of individual religiosity, yet whose citizens also generally score low on levels
of political engagement. A more precise understanding of how and when organized
religion plays a role in political mobilization can help us better gauge the
prospects of citizen participation in these countries. Additionally, the use of
agent-based modeling is novel in the field of religion and politics. This method
uses computers to simulate macro-level outcomes as the result of the
interactions of individuals constrained by institutional factors. Finally, the
project will incorporate training of native indigenous Spanish-speaking students
directly from the field research site in Yucatan to perform content analysis.
This will facilitate a cross-cultural exchange of research methods and provide a
unique opportunity for underrepresented indigenous students to engage in
scholarly research.