* 1159853
* Chemical Looping Beyond Combustion:  Syngas Production From Methane in a Periodically Operated Fixed-Bed Reactor
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Goetz Veser, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2016
* USD 340,000.00

Intellectual Merit: Periodically operated fixed-bed reactors are an emerging
type of catalytic reactors with increasing application in energy and
environmental applications. The present project aims to demonstrate the
application of chemical looping, an emerging combustion technology, to the
partial oxidation of methane to synthesis gas in a periodically operated fixed-
bed reactor configuration. The resulting process has significant practical
advantages (alleviating safety concerns in methane partial oxidation by avoiding
direct contact between methane and oxygen, and allowing direct utilization of
air without diluting the syngas with nitrogen), and will at the same time allow
the investigation of the dynamics of coupled endothermal/exothermal gas-solid
reactions in periodic fixed-bed reactors. The project team will furthermore
extend the chemical looping principle onto a fully multifunctional reactor
design by integrating desulfurization of the product stream, resulting in a
strongly intensified, highly scalable, and efficient syngas
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach builds on a combination of materials
synthesis, reactor design and experimentation, and reactor modeling, and
involves specifically the following steps:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Design and
construction of a fixed-bed reactor with high-resolution in-situ measurement of
kinetics and spatio-temporal reactor dynamics;&lt;br/&gt;- Synthesis,
characterization, and evaluation of high-performance nanostructured materials as
oxygen carriers and partial oxidation catalysts;&lt;br/&gt;- Detailed reactor
experimentation, including evaluation of key reactor operating parameters (co-
and counter-current flow pattern, periodicity, etc.) on reactor dynamics and
process efficiency;&lt;br/&gt;- Integration of S-capture and separation,
and&lt;br/&gt;- Reactor modeling and detailed reactor
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the main objectives of this research
are (1) to advance our understanding of the dynamics of periodically operated
fixed-bed reactors with heat-integration (specifically for gas-solid reactions)
through a combination of experiments and reactor modeling; (2) to demonstrate
the great potential of chemical looping (CL) beyond combustion (including
integrated contaminant separation) and further establish the advantages of
fixed-bed CL processes; and (3) to highlight the exciting possibilities of
state-of-the-art nanomaterials as ?enablers? for advanced reactor engineering
concepts .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance our knowledge and
current understanding of periodically operated of fixed-bed reactors,
specifically for gas-solid reactions, an area with importance well beyond
chemical looping. It will furthermore highlight the enabling role that emerging
nanomaterials can play in the realization of advanced reactor concepts. Finally,
it will help to further establish and broaden ?chemical looping? applications by
demonstrating the simultaneous use of chemical looping for a partial oxidation
reaction combined with contaminants removal, and, through thorough experimental
and model based analysis, lay the groundwork for extending the concept onto a
broad range of new applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact:
Demonstration of a novel, compact, efficient, and safe reactor concept for
natural gas utilization could have broad impact at a time where proven domestic
gas reserves in the US are seeing explosive growth. Furthermore, this technology
could enable the use of small-scale distributed sources, such as landfill gas
and agricultural waste gas, resulting in tangible environmental benefits. The
project will contribute to the education of graduate and undergraduate students,
and involve outreach to high school students from underrepresented groups.
Finally, active distribution of the developed methodologies and tools through
collaborations, publications and conference contributions will help to foster
partnerships and make the advances available to the scientific community at
large.