* 1159042
* CRIF:ID- Development of a Pulsed Nozzle, Fourier Transform Rotational Spectrometer Operable Below 1000 MHz for Chemistry Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2011,07/31/2012
* Stephen Cooke, SUNY College at Purchase
* Standard Grant
* Carlos Murillo
* 07/31/2012
* USD 44,086.00

This award from the CRIF-ID program will allow Stephen Cooke in the Department
of Chemistry at the University of North Texas to fully characterize and improve
a cavity based, time domain, Fourier transform rotational spectrometer capable
of recording spectral transitions below 1 GHz. It will also implement a low
frequency fast passage version of the experiment to enable rapid location of
spectral features. The availability of such an instrument is of considerable
interest in regard to: 1. The geometric and electronic structural
characterization of larger and/or heavier chemical species than can be routinely
studied with high resolution, time domain techniques. 2. Synchronizing
laboratory based measurements and radio-astronomy measurements in the region of
20 cm and above. The availability of a low frequency instrument will also aid in
the laboratory detection of large molecules that may exist in the interstellar
medium.

Fourier transform rotational (microwave) spectrometers measure transitions
between rotational energy levels of molecules in the gas phase. These spectra
can be analyzed to obtain insight on the arrangment of the atoms in the species
under study, in essence information on its structure. Structural information is
important for understanding chemical and biochemical properties and reactivity.
This instrument development project will be carried out by graduate and
undergraduate students who will gain skills in the design and construction of
sophisticated state-of-the-art instrumentation.