* 1159915
* 2012 Chemical Engineering Summer School:  Equipping Faculty to Teach the Next Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Jennifer Curtis, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2013
* USD 100,000.00

The Chemical Engineering Division of the American Society of Engineering
Education (ASEE) will hold its 15th Chemical Engineering Summer School on July
21-26, 2012 at the University of Maine. The Summer School, initiated in 1931 and
currently offered every five years, is the premier teaching training workshop
for new chemical engineering faculty. The Summer School is unique in its
emphasis on the development of new chemical engineering educators. There is no
other educational forum which is comparable in scope - targeted specifically
toward training new chemical engineering faculty. And no other engineering
discipline has a comparable forum offered on a consistent basis. By targeting
faculty at the beginning of their careers, professors can become more effective
educators ? more capable of producing better qualified undergraduate and
graduate chemical engineering professionals. In the Summer School, new faculty
learn how to integrate the latest developments in the field effectively and
seamlessly into the chemical engineering curriculum. The Summer School also aids
in the career development of new faculty by providing them extensive resources
and network opportunities. Historically, around 200 new chemical engineering
educators attend the Summer School each time it is offered. Thus, the Summer
School has enormous broad impact, as new faculty become much more effective at
educating the next generation of chemical engineers. And, the Summer School has
a proven track record of effectiveness with testimonials from previous attendees
confirming its value. The teaching abilities of new chemical engineering faculty
are improved significantly, and the breath and timeliness of new topics
incorporated by these faculty into courses taught at their home institutions is
enhanced. Student evaluations of the teaching capabilities of new faculty who
attend the Summer School increase significantly. The 2012 Summer School will
both capitalize on the many successful aspects of the previous Summer Schools
and include several novel aspects. Innovations include the addition of
international faculty participation (both faculty presenters and early-career
faculty), collaboration between industry and academic representatives in the
workshop presentations, and the industrial Q & A panel session. The 2012 Summer
School will also emphasize the linkage between research/teaching and engagement
with external constituent groups, including industry, K-12, and other
stakeholders. This linkage will be emphasized via an NSF session, a day-long
Teaching Institute, and through workshops in career development, K-12
engineering education, and combining research and educational scholarship.
Finally, an additional assessment instrument will be introduced which gathers
input from faculty participants approximately one year after their attendance at
the Summer School. This instrument will both help confirm the longer- term
impact the Summer School has on participants and provide useful feedback for
improving the School even more in the future.