* 1159038
* IRFP: Assessing the Role of Ecosystem Structure in Extinction Patterns During the Cretaceous-Paleocene Mass Extinction
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Cory Redman, Redman                  Cory           M
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/2014
* USD 122,952.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Cory M.
Redman to work with Dr. Craig Scott at the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology
in Alberta, Canada.

The magnitude of the problems threatening modern ecosystems resembles those
intervals of geological time associated with mass extinctions; for this reason
the fossil record provides a critical role in understanding the responses of
ecosystems to global-scale disruptions. However, most paleoecological mass
extinction studies have focused on measuring the magnitude of extinction among
various taxonomic groups or trying to identify the primary abiotic cause(s) of
the extinction. The role of ecosystem structure in the propagation of or
resistance to an extinction event has largely gone unstudied. The Cretaceous-
Paleogene (K-Pg) mass extinction is one of the most infamous mass extinctions in
Earth?s history, due to the demise of the dinosaurs. Despite the profusion of
publications, considerable controversy remains on the stability or health of
terrestrial ecosystems prior to the K-Pg event and the changes in ecosystem
caused by the extinction.

The objective of the research proposed here is to quantitatively characterize
changes in terrestrial ecosystems' structure before and after the K-Pg
extinction event, using whole assemblage, rank abundance curves (RACs) of
vertebrates and pollen. RACs are an ecological technique used to visually and
quantitatively describe how taxa in an ecosystem partition resources and convert
these resources into abundances. Any change in abundance structure across the
K-Pg boundary would indicate change(s) in the processes that are influencing the
ecosystems. Ecological studies utilizing modern and fossil organisms have shown
that species abundance distributions change as a result of the frequency and
magnitude of perturbations. Ecosystems that have experienced frequent
perturbations are typically dominated by a few species that have a wide habitat
range or food preference (i.e., generalists). In contrast, ecosystems that have
not experienced frequent perturbations typically have resources apportioned more
evenly across a diverse array of species, each one having a very narrow habitat
range or food preference (i.e., specialists). The rationale for conducting this
study is to determine if latest Cretaceous terrestrial ecosystems were already
under ecological stress prior to the K-Pg boundary by directly analyzing pre-
and post- extinction ecosystems using organisms that occupy different trophic
levels (i.e., vertebrates = primary & secondary consumers; pollen= primary
producers).