* 1159885
* Design: Selective Inovative Technology and Engineering (SITE) - Senior Design Projects
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2018
* Sanford Meek, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2018
* USD 123,753.00

PI: Merryweather, Andrew S&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1159885&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SITE program will augment the current senior
design sequence at the University of Utah and will focus on new opportunities to
expand our efforts. This new emphasis area is to help bridge the gap between
technology, scientific contributions and the deaf and blind community's needs.
This effort includes providing assistive technology and devices that will
support the development and education of persons with vision and hearing
impairments. To accomplish this, we will meet the following six main objectives:
&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1: Engage senior engineering students and community
partners in design projects focused on solving challenges faced by persons with
disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 2: Cultivate a partnership between
engineering students and community organizations serving, educating and
rehabilitating persons with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 3: Support annual
senior design projects that enhance the quality of life of students who are deaf
and blind by providing technology and assistive devices that accelerate
learning, encourage physical activity and support additional independence at
home and work. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 4: Disseminate information and increase
awareness of the senior design course sequence in the community to gain support
for additional projects to address the needs of persons with limiting
conditions, disorders and disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 5: Evaluate and
improve the performance of prototype devices in the community through
partnerships with the Utah Schools for the Deaf and Blind, Department of Special
Education and other community partners. &lt;br/&gt;Objective 6: Produce
technology and devices that can be commercially manufactured and distributed to
a greater population through partnerships with the Technology and
Commercialization Office (TCO) at the University of Utah.
&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit &lt;br/&gt;The proposed plan will provide a
mechanism to further the development of an active collaboration between
undergraduate engineering students and community organizations who educate,
train and care for individuals with vision and hearing impairments. The
Engineering Design Capstone Course Series at the PI's institution has
demonstrated the ability to generate new technology and devices to address
challenging problems. SITE will support training of undergraduate mechanical
engineering students and provide technology for the deaf and blind community.
Partnership with, and support of the Utah Schools for the Deaf and Blind will
also serve to enhance the experience of students involved with SITE. Teams of
4-6 engineering undergraduates supported by faculty and community mentors will
be selected to solve specific problems and produce functioning prototypes after
two semesters. These projects will contribute towards innovation and technology
advancement in the field of disability research, specifically suited to aid
persons with vision and hearing impairments. The projects will further aid
community organizations and their efforts to enhance and accelerate learning to
provide children with special needs with new technologies that encourage
physical activity, improve life skills training, and enhance education efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;Both teaching and learning will be
advanced through establishing teams of engineering students and community
partners to practice solving real-life challenges for persons with disabilities.
All projects will be designed to teach teamwork and enhance cooperative learning
by interacting with other students and professionals working with persons living
with disabilities. SITE projects will be designed to improve quality of life and
promote the integration of persons living with disabilities into communities
where they live.