* 1159824
* CHAPS: CHarge-Assisted Protein Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Andre Sharon, Fraunhofer Center for Manufacturing Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

1159824 Sauer-Budge A.

This project aims to develop a technology based on nanopore biosensor arrays for
applications in single molecule analysis. Current single molecule techniques
have several limitations. They do not allow study of molecules in their native
environment, they are not high throughput, and they are expensive and labor-
intensive. Furthermore, these methods have been limited in both their throughput
capability and spatial resolution (e.g. their ability to distinguish features
within a single macromolecule). To address these technological shortcomings and
enable the high-throughput study of single molecule biophysics in solution, a
semiconductor nanopore sensor array technology will be developed. The basis of
the detection methodology is that sensitive charge sensors detect multiple
characteristics of individual molecules as they are driven through a nanopore by
an applied electric field. The nanopore sensors provide a unique opportunity for
label-free, ultra-fast, high spatial resolution, and highly parallel detection
of single macromolecules. This technology has applications in several fields by
providing a label-free method to sensitively identify and quantify biological
material, including proteins, DNA, viruses, and cells. Initial work will focus
on developing the technology for protein analysis. To date, single molecule
technologies have contributed detailed and quantitative information about
structure-function relationships, concentrations, and interaction kinetics of
biological molecules. Such knowledge has increased our understanding of
biochemical pathways while revealing mechanisms of normal and disease states.
This understanding is necessary for future medical advances. The proposed
technology will enable the rapid, low cost study of proteins in solution phase
at the single molecule level. This technology will speed the development of many
aspects of biomedical research, including diagnostic tools, drug discovery, and
proteomics.