* 1159252
* GSE/RES Collaborative Research: Addressing the STEM Gender Gap: Does Spatial Training Enhance Middle-School Girls'  STEM-Relevant Spatial Skills, Attitudes, Beliefs, and Interests?
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2011,01/31/2015
* Sheryl Sorby, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 01/31/2015
* USD 151,812.00

Intellectual Merit: Michigan Technological University and Pennsylvania State
University propose a collaborative project to test the hypothesis that an
educational intervention (earlier shown to increase retention of woman
engineering students) may also increase middle-school girls' STEM-relevant
spatial skills. The project will further test the hypothesis that increases in
cognitive spatial skill will also enhance girls' self-efficacy and valuing of
spatial skills, and decrease the stereotyping of such skills as masculine. The
intervention effects on STEM-related course choices and job interests will also
be examined, while testing whether effects of the spatial-skill intervention, if
observed, are (a) the direct result of enhanced spatial skills or (b) mediated
by girls' changed self-efficacy, values, and stereotypes. Approximately 400 7th
grade students in two diverse middle schools will be randomly assigned, by
classrooms, to receive the spatial skills curriculum or to receive their regular
instruction. Prior to and following the intervention, and again approximately a
year later, all students will complete an assessment battery to measure their
spatial skills and attitudes and beliefs about spatial skills (self-
confidence/efficacy, values, stereotyping). At the end of 8th grade, all
students will be assessed for their interests in and plans for spatially-
demanding STEM courses and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The
project PIs and Co-PIs will provide training on the curriculum to middle-school
teachers in the two cooperating school districts, monitor student success and
the fidelity of implementation. Dissemination efforts will reflect the
interdisciplinary nature of the team (collaborative PIs and Co-PIs represent the
fields of engineering, developmental and cognitive science, and gender studies),
the relevance of spatial thinking for a wide array of science and engineering
organizations, and the simultaneous theoretical and educational goals of the
study.