* 1159871
* RUI: Unlock the Potential of Three-Dimensional (3D) Cell Cultures as Sensing Elements in Label-free Impedance Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Liju Yang, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Chenzhong Li
* 08/31/2017
* USD 255,882.00

Yang 1159871

This project is to develop 3D cell culture-based impedance biosensors to provide
label?free, non-invasive and real-time analytical tools for cellular analysis
and drug discovery applications. This is based on the fact that 3D cell cultures
resemble more accurately the actual in vivo microenvironment than the
conventional 2D cell culture, thus 3D cell culture-based biosensors are expected
to provide more biologically relevant and predictive data for in vivo responses.
The project will design a microcavity array-based microchip for constructing the
impedance biosensor and testing two types of 3D cell cultures--spheroids and
cells embedded in 3D matrixes as the sensing element. The research tasks include
the following: (1) studying the feasibility of such 3D culture-based biosensors
for sensing drug-induced cell signaling pathways; (2) comparing the dose
response range and IC50 of the 2D and 3D cell?based biosensors to drugs with
different action mechanisms; (3) testing three different prostate cancer cell
lines with different adherence characteristics (adherent, poorly adherent, non-
adherent) for constructing 3D cultures as sensing elements and comparing their
responses to drugs in comparison with traditional 2D cell culture tests. The
project will evaluate the capability of the proposed 3D culture-based biosensors
in reflecting the difference between 3D and 2D cultures, and to determine the
potential of such 3D culture-based impedance biosensors in providing more
biologically relevant information. This project will particularly address the
research and training needs for students from underrepresented groups at North
Carolina Central University (NCCU). NCCU is one of the historic black college
and universities (HBCU). The education activities include (1) integrating
research into course development; (2) providing research opportunities for
undergraduate students through lab modules, summer internships, and external
training opportunities; (3) broadening students? research vision by inviting
external speakers to the interdisciplinary seminar series; (4) working with two
existing outreach programs, the BRITE Futures and the Summer venture program, to
educate k-12 students by exposure to research. The goal is to broaden students?
knowledge in the fast developing biosensor and biochip related analytical
technologies, and make students aware that real-life contemporary biological
problems can be addressed by engineered microdevices.