* 1159143
* Travel Grant for the sixth international workshop in interfacial fluid mechanics and transport processes-IMA 6. Haifa, Israel on June 18-21, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 10,000.00

1159143 Narayanan

Intellectual Merit:

This proposal requests for partial travel support for 10 participating U.S.
scientists to attend the sixth international workshop and conference on thermal,
fluid and interfacial phenomena in physico-chemical, materials and bio-
processes at the Technion campus in Haifa, Israel on June 18-21, 2012.
Participation in this conference is vital to the U.S. since scientists from
around the world will meet to exchange ideas and seek potential collaborations
for future work. This exchange of ideas will very likely develop new ideas to
tackle current research problems. Research problems in materials processing,
nanotechnologies and drug delivery as well as space technologies will be
addressed. The themes of this conference are two-fold:

1) industrial and practical applications (e.g., energy problems of heat pipes
and evaporation, two phase flows, materials processing of thin films, and in
micro-fluidics, fluid transport in novel processing involving interfaces and
measurement of thermo-physical properties.

2) fundamental transport phenomena (e.g., interfacial instabilities in liquid
bridges, Marangoni phenomena, two fluid problems, interfacial mass exchange and
more.

The participating scientists will represent research areas funded by NSF through
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
(CBET). The scientists will represent academia, industry and government
research.

Broader Impacts:

The wide range of participants will be expected to benefit the cooperative
science programs between the U.S. and other countries as well as
university/industrial collaborations. The proceedings of the conference will
also be published by a well-known journal, the European Journal of Physics. The
research ideas will be widely disseminated via libraries and the electronic
media making a broad impact on the community of scientists and engineers. The
published research ideas and discussions will encourage future novel research
and fresh perspectives on technological problems.