* 1159662
* Iridium-Based Alloys as Alternative Catalysts for Ethanol Oxidation Fuel Cell Reactions: Experimental   and First Principles-based Investigation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Anatoly Frenkel, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 572,802.00

CBET-1159662&lt;br/&gt;Teng, Xiaowei&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this investigation is to develop and
use fundamental understanding of the structure electroactivity relationship to
drive research in devising highly active and efficient anode catalysts for
direct ethanol fuel cell reactions. Ethanol is a promising fuel in power
technologies due to its high energy density, low toxicity, and availability from
sources including biomass. The current platinum-based catalysts offer slow
kinetics and inefficient electro-oxidation selectivity. The PIs propose to study
iridium-based anode catalysts to improve the efficiency of the oxidation of
ethanol to carbon dioxide. The impetus for iridium is some very preliminary
indications that iridium will offer superior activity and selectivity in
comparison to platinum. It is known that iridium will be more active than
platinum for carbon-carbon bond breaking, and may therefore lead to improved
activity for oxidation. Depending on the relative performance, the results will
feed the modeling work. This work then will perhaps offer an improved choice
relative to platinum and iridium, as these are rare and expensive elements. The
fundamental science to be developed is the key technical gain for this effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Replacing platinum
with an alternative, more efficient anode nanocatalyst is likely to have a
significant impact on direct ethanol fuel cell technology. This technology is
one of several that support the nation's effort to diversify its energy supply
portfolio. This is a cross-disciplinary effort which joins material science,
electrochemistry, and catalysis in the fuel cell studies. Students will have the
opportunity to learn something of each of these disciplines, and will also
receive direct training at national laboratory facilities. In addition to these
excellent training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, the PI
intends to utilize two programs available to him on the campus of University of
New Hampshire. These are the Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship and
Research Experience and Apprenticeship Program, and the University of New
Hampshire Science and Mathematics Achievement through Research Training Project.
Both emphasize exposure, training, and recruiting of under-represented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made to Professors Xiaowei Teng from
the University of New Hampshire, Nathaniel Deskins from Worcester Polytechnic
Institute, and Anatoly Frenkel from Yeshiva University, New York. The proposal
is of special interest from a technical point of view as it combines
computation, synthesis, and fuel cell performance measurements in a nice
package. The students will carry out electro-catalysis experimentation and then
use results combined with computational studies to direct their further
synthesis experiments. As such, it is a collaborative effort, requiring all
three investigators in order to offer the disciplinary breadth required by this
project. As further demonstration of the collaborative nature of this proposal,
the PI intends to employ beamline time at Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Students will thus learn these techniques in addition to the standard laboratory
procedures, and will understand how and where National Laboratory facilities fit
into their future research plans.