* 1159099
* IRFP: Characterizing the Function of Leptospiral Proteins in the Biology of the Genus Leptospira
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2013,04/30/2015
* Christopher Pappas, Manhattanville College
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 04/30/2015
* USD 159,222.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a 24-month fellowship for
Dr. Christopher Pappas from Manhattanville College located in Purchase, New
York, to work with Dr. Mathieu Picardeau within the Biology of Spirochetes Unit
at the Institut Pasteur located in Paris, France.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To aid in
the physiologic study of the genus Leptospira, the investigators are developing
an inducible system which will be used to engineer conditional mutants of
essential genes in Leptospira spp.. Further, the investigators are exploring in
detail the phenotypes of previously identified transposon mutants created using
the Himar1 mariner transposon system which has previously been developed within
the host laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;Leptospirosis is an emerging infectious disease
caused by the genus Leptospira. It is a zoonotic infection which is maintained
within a mammalian reservoir. Transmission to humans can lead to severe disease
manifestations, which results in fatality in over 10% of cases worldwide. The
proposed projects will aid in the characterization of the physiological aspects
of Leptospira spp. and thus allow greater understanding of the biology of
leptospires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further, this fellowship aids the study of
leptospires to transcend national borders. The fellowship creates an
international collaboration between Dr. Christopher Pappas of Manhattanville
College and Dr. Mathieu Picardeau and other colleagues at the Institut Pasteur;
a facility focused on the advancement of biological sciences and public health
comprised of researchers who collaborate at the international level.