* 1159540
* A Novel Bi-Enzyme System for Amperometric Biosensing of Plant Volatiles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Glen Rains, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 06/30/2016
* USD 320,000.00

1159540&lt;br/&gt;Ramasamy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop an electrochemical biosensing system to detect a
volatile&lt;br/&gt;compound released by plants. The volatile chemical signature
of plants carries unique&lt;br/&gt;information that can be helpful in the
identification of the state-of-heath of the plant. Detection of&lt;br/&gt;this
signature can advance our understanding of the ?plant language? and will
eventually help in&lt;br/&gt;the development of real-time health monitoring
systems for large-scale agriculture. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed work integrates
material science, biochemistry and electrochemistry to develop
a&lt;br/&gt;nanostructured platform for amperometric biosensing. Successful
completion of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;work will result in a novel bi-enzyme based
electrochemical biosensor with tunable properties.&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid
composite nanomaterial interfaces to be developed in this project will
provide&lt;br/&gt;multiple benefits and can be applied to other bio-
electrochemical systems. The proposed work&lt;br/&gt;will directly impact the
field of agriculture and forestry. The project will also have
broader&lt;br/&gt;influence in the development of enzyme-based biosensors. The
proposed project will provide&lt;br/&gt;education and training for graduate and
undergraduate students and post-docs. Results from&lt;br/&gt;the project will be
broadly disseminated through conference presentations, seminars
and&lt;br/&gt;scientific publications. The proposed outreach activities will
provide a social impact on the high&lt;br/&gt;school students in the state of
Georgia.