* 1159981
* Dissolution Processing of Nanostructured Polymers Tailored for Effective Utilization of Cellulosics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Paschalis Alexandridis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2017
* USD 398,017.00

Intellectual Merit: The proposed research addresses the outstanding need for an
integrated approach to dissolve cellulosics, an abundant and renewable resource,
as an essential step for their processing into functional polymers, specialty
chemicals, and biofuels. While several approaches have proven useful for
activation of crystalline cellulose, the search is still on for solvents that
can effectively dissolve cellulose. The few known solvents that are capable of
dissolving cellulose do so under strict and often conflicting composition and
temperature conditions, and fundamental understanding is lacking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team bases the proposed research program on
the premise that fundamental understanding of cellulose-solvent molecular
interactions (nanoscale), coupled with knowledge of the dissolution mechanism of
semicrystalline cellulosic (microscopic) particles, can lead to the rational
selection and (macroscopic) optimization of solvent processing conditions for
cellulosic biomass. To this end, the team aims to (1) advance fundamental
understanding of intermolecular interactions acting in select solvent systems
that appear promising for dissolving cellulose, and express these interactions
in terms of appropriate parameters, (2) identify and quantify the transport
phenomena and kinetics governing the dissolution of solid cellulose, e.g.,
solvent penetration, transformation from crystalline to amorphous domains,
specimen swelling, and polymer chain untangling, and (3) guide scale-up from the
lab to industrial production by modeling the dissolution of polydisperse
cellulose particulates (employing parameters determined in 1 and 2), exploring
synergisms in mixtures of solvents and additives, and testing the dissolution of
biomass specimens. In the above the team will target aqueous NaOH-based and
ionic liquid solvent systems that exhibit a potential for process integration
and are compatible with cellulose functionalization chemistry and biocatalysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main novelty of the proposed research resides in the
team's concerted effort to rationally integrate cellulose dissolution
information from the fundamental, (supra)molecular level to the practical,
large-scale. This would have a transformative effect on what is mostly an
empirical approach. Further novel aspects include (i) a unified approach for
understanding molecular interactions in different solvent systems, including
testing a recent hypothesis on the importance of hydrophobic effects which
defies current wisdom; (ii) quantification of the dissolution mechanism, based
on real-time monitoring of cellulose swelling and mass loss coupled with
phenomenological modeling; (iii) characterization of cellulosic biomass
structural evolution during dissolution; and (iv) experiments and population
balance modeling on dissolution of polydisperse cellulose particulates. Each of
these research topics will be new in the literature, and addressing all in
tandem should prove powerful. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In summary,
this research will have a positive and timely impact on efforts directed toward
the utilization of cellulosics as starting material for the synthesis of high
value-added functional polymers and chemicals and also for biofuel production.
The team's findings will be beneficial to nano/bio-applications where well-
defined cellulose surfaces or nanoparticles are desired, and for the analytical
characterization of cellulose and its derivatives; also to the solvent
processing of difficult-to-dissolve liquid crystalline polymers and carbon
nanotubes. Collaborations will be pursued with researchers in industry and in
Europe. This project will integrate research and education by incorporating
lectures and projects related to biomass, solvent selection, and dissolution
modeling in the various courses that the PIs teach at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels. Several students will contribute to this research, resulting in
U.S.-based scientists who have both advanced technical training and sensitivity
toward efficient resource utilization. The team will work with the AIChE student
club to develop and offer outreach activities geared toward middle-school and
1st year college students.