* 1159772
* Microbially-Active Functional Material Based Bioreactors for Continuous Production of Biofuels and Industrial Feedstock
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,09/30/2017
* Dev Chidambaram, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 09/30/2017
* USD 312,755.00

1159772&lt;br/&gt;Chidambaram&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader scientific
impacts of the proposed research involve developing a technology to increase the
efficiency in biofuel production. Biologically generated energy and chemical
feedstock hold immense potential in using sustainable resources to meet both our
energy, as well as industrial needs, while minimizing environmental impacts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most industrial processes currently use batch bioreactors
due to ease of operation and control. There is an unmet need to develop a cost-
effective continuous-flow, immobilized microbial bioreactor that has faster
reaction kinetics, high efficiency and productivity. Stable continuous-flow
bioreactors that have near constant cell densities do not require frequent
inoculation and startup, and allows for consistent production of metabolites of
interest, such as bioethanol. The most complex issue to be overcome in the
pursuit of this goal, which is also the one issue that was not overcome in
previous attempts, is to develop an immobilization material that maintains the
viability of the immobilized microbial cells without hindering the metabolic
pathways of the microbe. To this extent, the PI has developed a novel US Patent
Pending immobilization process to form MAF materials in which both cell
viability and metabolic pathways are preserved. MAF materials are thin polymeric
fibrous scaffold containing microorganisms within the fibers and are formed via
the process of electrospinning. These thin polymeric fibers have high rates of
diffusion of nutrients and metabolites to allow microbial survival. Further, the
fibers overlap each other in a completely random manner, giving rise to an open
pore structure that is ideal for use in a flow reactor. This proposal aims to
design, develop, characterize, and evaluate an IMBR in which the MAF material
forms the key component. The use of MAF materials in an IMBR will be
transformational. The central hypothesis is that such a system will be more
efficient and have high productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
objectives of the proposed research, in addition to the design and development
of MAF materials based laboratory-scale IMBRs, are to: (i) evaluate and compare
the efficiencies of the MAF material-based batch fermentors and IMBRs, (ii)
determine the longevity and stability of microbes in the IMBRs, and (iii)
optimize the MAF material characteristics such as porosity, fiber diameter, and
IMBR flow rate, to increase efficiency of IMBRs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has
recently developed the MAF materials via the process of electrospinning; a
process that is widely used in the polymeric fiber industry and therefore makes
it readily scalable for large-scale commercial use.