* 1159859
* Thrombospondin-1/calreticulin binding in regulating cell intermediate adhesion and collagen expression
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Aaron Lucius, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,997.00

1159859 Song

Intellectual Merit. The research objective is to elucidate the fundamental
structural and molecular mechanisms involved in formation of the ternary complex
of the matricellular protein thrombospondin-1 (TSP1), the cell surface protein
calreticulin (CRT), and LDL receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) which is induced
by TSP1 binding to cell surface CRT and which signals intermediate adhesion,
cell migration, anoikis resistance, and collagen production. Wound healing in
response to injury requires well-coordinated integration of the complex
biological and molecular events associated with cell adhesion, cell migration,
and extracellular matrix remodeling. Binding of TSP1 to cell surface CRT
promotes binding of CRT to LRP1 to form the TSP1-CRT-LRP1 ternary complex, which
is important for cellular events critical for wound healing and tissue repair.
Although the importance of TSP1 and CRT interactions for cell functions related
to tissue repair and remodeling are clear, the specific structural and molecular
mechanism by which TSP1 engagement of CRT initiates signaling complex formation
with LRP1 remains unclear. The PI will use the integration of computational
modeling and biochemical and biological experimental approaches to implement the
research objective.

Broader Impact. The educational objective is to educate and retain graduate,
undergraduate, high and middle school students, broadening the participation of
minority and female students in science and engineering in a sustainable
fashion, and to integrate the education, outreach and knowledge dissemination
with the research activities. Successful completion of the proposed project will
have a transformative impact on research, educational, and outreach activities.
Research discoveries regarding structural and molecular mechanisms of the role
of the TSP1-CRT interactions in regulation of CRT-induced TSP1-CRT-LRP1 ternary
complex formation and subsequent regulation of intermediate adhesion and
collagen expression and deposition could lead to the identification of novel
strategies and drug targets for modifying aberrant tissue repair responses that
occur in scarring or the foreign body response or conversely in wound healing
deficiencies. The educational efforts will recruit and sustain talented and
diverse students at multiple levels (graduate, undergraduate, high and middle
school) who are excited about science and engineering and who possess a desire
to succeed, will help to promote diversity in the science and engineering
workforce, and will promote the knowledge dissemination.