* 1159032
* Doctoral Dissertation in Economics: The Negative Image Effect of Incentivizing Prosocial Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Christine Exley, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2014
* USD 20,850.00

This award funds doctoral dissertation research in Economics that uses
controlled decision-making experiments to determine whether and why financial
incentives for volunteering sometimes result in reduced volunteer
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous researchers have argued that receiving a
financial incentive for volunteering or donations could mar one?s social image.
If this is the case,then offering an incentive might actually reduce prosocial
volunteer effort; the financial incentive means that volunteering no longer
convinces society that you are a generous person. This idea has been
incorporated into behavioral theories, but these theories are not are not able
to forecast when one may expect incentives to encourage prosocial behavior.
Similarly, no study has been able to precisely identify the negative image
effect. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In carefully testing the mechanisms involved in
volunteer behavior, these laboratory experiments answer these questions. Study 1
implements a novel treatment that identifies and measures the negative image
effect as well as other main effects. Study 2 tests a new theory that can
explain the results of past research in a straightforward way. The associated
negative image effect of incentivizing volunteer behavior may well be smaller
for someone with an established, as opposed to unestablished, good volunteer
reputation, because those with established reputations are already known to
volunteer for good, not greedy, reasons. Study 3 investigates the role of
diminishing returns to incentives in the context of volunteer behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In achieving identification of the negative image effect
as well as proposing and testing novel mechanisms that may influence prosocial
behavior, the results of this research provide new insight into prosocial
behavior. The laboratory stands as an ideal tool for acquiring these results,
since the observability of one's actions and associated reputation as well as
the level of volunteer behavior and offered incentives can all be tightly
controlled and measured. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: In addition to
contributing to interdisciplinary research in economics, psychology, and
decision science, these experimental results will provide valuable information
to government and nonprofit organizations about the encouragement of volunteer
behavior. Expected follow-up field studies will engender partnerships between
academia and non-profit or government organizations.