* 1159163
* IRFP: How do Phytoplankton Produce the Globally Significant Molecule DMSP
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Barbara Lyon, Lyon                    Barbara        R
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2015
* USD 133,516.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Barbara
R. Lyon to work with Drs. Thomas Mock and Jonathan Todd at University of East
Anglia in Norwich, U.K.

Despite being one of the Earth's most abundant organo-sulfur molecules with
important roles in global climate, carbon and sulfur cycles, the enzymes that
synthesize dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) remain unknown. DMSP is produced
predominantly by algal species and has numerous proposed but debated
physiological functions. It is clear that environmental factors influence
production levels, but efforts to quantify and understand its regulation are
hindered by metabolic turnover and lack of knowledge on DMSP synthesis genes.
Through proteomics candidate genes have been identified for all four steps of
the proposed algal DMSP synthesis pathway (Lyon et al., 2011). This project uses
over-expression and knock-down systems to ratify the genes responsible for DMSP
synthesis and their subcellular localization. Measurements in basic enzyme
parameters will give insights into differences in activity between model DMSP
producing organisms with constitutively low (Thalassiosira pseudonana), moderate
(Fragilariopsis cylindrus), and high (Emiliana huxleyi) concentrations of DMSP.
Furthermore, diatom transformants with enhanced and suppressed DMSP production
will be used to understand DMSP physiological functions, regulation, and
contributions to environmental fitness.

This project will rapidly provide targeted insights into the mechanisms of DMSP
production in two globally significant DMSP producers, the diatoms and
coccolithophores. This work will be performed under the expertise of well-
equipped labs at the forefront of microbial molecular genetics and provide the
foundation for applications that span from the development of environmental
genetic probes to biochemical characterizations of enzyme catalytic
specificities. This work has immediate and far ranging implications across a
wide range of scientific disciplines. Once validated, the developed primers and
antibodies for DMSP pathway enzymes will be available to the research community
for further laboratory and field investigations. In addition to characterizing
novel genes and providing insight into physiological stress tolerance
mechanisms, information on the regulation and biodiversity of DMSP production
will greatly enhance efforts to model climate, such as the NSF supported,
multinational VAMOS Ocean Cloud Atmosphere Land Study. This proposal will
provide mentoring and training in cutting-edge molecular techniques to a recent,
female PhD graduate with long-term research and academic goals. It will build
collaborations between this US scientist and professionals in world-leading
research institutes in the UK.