* 1159048
* Self-Assembly in Multiferroic Nanocomposites
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Zhiqun Lin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2015
* USD 239,976.00

Abstract 1159048 Lin, Zhiqun

Multiferroics are multifunctional materials that exhibit both magnetic order and
electrical polarization in the same compound. In these materials, the electric
polarization can be induced by a magnetic field and conversely, and the
magnetization can be induced by an electric field for use in spintronic devices,
remote switchable devices, capacitors, sensors, and magnetic data storage.
Nanocomposites of polymer/nanoparticle, formed by incorporating nanoparticles
into a polymer matrix, have received a great deal of research interest because
of the potential performance enhancement relative to either of the non-hybrid
constituents. The use of block copolymers (BCPs) as the matrix offers
unprecedented opportunities for controlling the spatial and orientational
organization of nanoparticles in nanocomposites by constraining the
nanoparticles within desired block of copolymer. Crafting novel nanocomposites
with hierarchical order based on BCPs with nanoscopic multiferroic particles
preferentially segregated into the target BCP domains may offer new
opportunities for developing miniaturized multifunctional electromagnetic
materials and devices with controlled dielectric permittivity and magnetic
permeability as well as large magnetoelectric coupling. This has yet to be
explored.

The intellectual merit of the proposed research is to understand the self-
assembly in BCP/multiferroic nanoparticle nanocomposites that build on the
materials-by-design concept and the control of multiferroic properties through
engineering the nanometer-scale ordering of nanoparticles in the nanocomposites.
Three research objectives will be pursued through the proposed project: (1)
Synthesize monodispersed multiferroic nanoparticles intimately and permanently
decorated with well-defined ligands at the surface that afford chemical affinity
to one block in diblock copolymer (DBCP); (2) Assemble nanostructured composites
(i.e., nanocomposites) with hierarchical order based on DBCPs, incorporating
multiferroic nanoparticles within the target block of the DBCP; and (3) Evaluate
the ferroelectric and ferromagnetic properties and magnetoelectric coupling of
nanocomposites in terms of the electromagnetic parameters and spatial
arrangement of constituents.

The broader impacts of the proposed work include stronger nanoscience education
across several levels. Underrepresented female undergraduate students will be
recruited to participate in the research project. Summer research for high
school teachers in the PI's lab will provide a medium for transferring
nanomaterials science knowledge to high school classrooms. Web-based lesson
plans on polymeric nanomaterials and nanocrystals will be developed by high-
school female interns for 5th-8th graders nationwide. This activity will
ultimately expose elementary and middle school students to the nano-world. The
significance of employing multiferroic nanomaterials in DBCP nanocomposites is
manifested in gaining fundamental knowledge and expertise on the structure-
property relationships in these novel nanostructured materials. This new class
of materials may promise a wide diversity of applications in advanced
spintronics devices, capacitors, actuators, transducers, sensors, among other
areas that are anticipated to fill a critical need in civilian applications and
national security (i.e., potentially transformative research), thereby
transitioning fundamental scientific discoveries into useful technologies that
benefit society.