* 1159318
* Physiological underpinnings of sulfur isotope effects produced by sulfate reducing microbes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Shuhei Ono, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 04/30/2015
* USD 243,917.00

Biogeochemical cycling of sulfur plays a critical role in regulating the Earth's
surface redox budget and is tightly linked to the evolution of atmospheric
oxygen. Microbial sulfate reduction, a microbial process that remineralizes
about half of organic carbon in modern marine sediments, is the main process
that fractionates sulfur isotope ratios of surface sulfur reservoirs but
mechanisms that control the magnitude of sulfur isotope during microbial sulfate
reduction are still not well understood. This uncertainty particularly applies
to physiological conditions associated with high, greater than 50 per mil,
fractionations. Because sulfur isotope fractionations between sulfate and
sulfide exceeding 50 per mil become increasingly more common in the
Neoproterozoic, this trend was tentatively attributed to the increase of
atmospheric oxygen and oxidative recycling of sulfur. This proposal explores
physiological conditions that lead to similarly large fractionations during
microbial sulfate reduction alone by testing two main hypotheses: 1. Sulfate
reducing microbes can produce large sulfur isotope effects (greater than 50 per
mil) when growing slowly on recalcitrant organic substrates, either in pure
cultures or in consortia. These substrates are not commonly used to grow sulfate
reducers, but may include glucose, cellulose, lignin, and hydroxyhydroquinones.
2. The magnitude of sulfur isotope effects is a function of the intracellular
coupling of carbon and sulfur metabolisms, with large sulfur isotope effects
produced during non-stoichiometric sulfate reduction and in the absence of some
enzymes that transfer reducing equivalents from carbon to sulfur. These
hypotheses emerge from recent studies in the PIs' laboratories, in which a newly
isolated sulfate reducing bacterium (DMSS-1) produced a wide range of isotope
fractionation (7 to 66 permil) under electron donor-limited growth conditions in
pure culture grown on glucose. Notably, the maximum measured sulfur isotope
effect (66 permil) was ~20 permil larger than those observed previously in pure
culture studies, but were well within the range of observed high natural
fractionations. To test the first hypothesis, multiple sulfur isotope effects
will be measured in batch and continuous cultures of previously isolated
microbes that grow slowly and couple sulfate reduction with the oxidation of
various monosaccharides, disaccharides and other organic substrates. The second
hypothesis will be tested by characterizing the stoichiometry of growth of
DMSS-1 on glucose during the production of large sulfur isotope effects, and by
measuring multiple sulfur isotope effects produced in continuous cultures of
Desulfovibrio vulgaris wild type and different mutants that lack enzymes
involved in the transfer of reducing equivalents from lactate to sulfate. The
results of the proposed work will directly test and constrain models of present
and past sulfur cycles, oxygenation of the Earth, and the evolution of ocean
chemistry. It will also contribute to a wide variety of biogeochemical problems,
including the remediation and monitoring of mSR in contaminated aquifers, where
mSR is an important process for degrading organic contaminants in groundwater.
The proposed research will support two junior faculty members and one graduate
student for two years. The proposed project contains multiple subprojects that
will provide undergraduate research opportunities under the guidance of graduate
students and PIs. PIs have hosted over ten undergraduate students, high school
students, as well as K-12 science teachers from the Boston area as interns
during the summer. Funding is requested for a 6-week summer stipend for a K-12
science teacher intern. The teachers, high school students and undergraduates
will work on projects that provide a hands-on experience in various topics
related to microbial diversity, geochemistry, Earth history and modern methods
of linking genomic information to geochemical processes.