* 1159216
* Innovation in Education: Connecting How We Learn to Educational Practice and Policy - Research Evidence and Implications
* SBE,SMA
* 12/15/2011,11/30/2012
* Patricia Kuhl, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 11/30/2012
* USD 44,532.00

As societies become progressively knowledge-intensive, they increasingly rely on
human capabilities to learn and innovate. How each nation's education system
prepares or fails to prepare its citizenry to meet these challenges are topics
of global interest. A primary driver of educational innovation is basic research
focused on how humans learn. The challenge is how to more effectively use
research about how people learn to inform educational practice, and conversely,
how to use knowledge and experience gained from educational practice to raise
questions that test and refine research being conducted on
learning.&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable US researchers to participate in the
OECD conference on Innovation in Education: Connecting how we learn to
educational practice and policy research evidence and implications. In addition,
these researchers will be able to participate in a scientific symposium on
Neuroimaging and advances in Learning research, to be held just prior to the
OECD conference. &lt;br/&gt;The Intellectual merit and broader impacts of the
two separate, but related activities include the following: 1) it will bring
together an international group of researchers, practitioners and policymakers
for discussions about key scientific findings that have implications for
educational practice and policy creating an understanding of the value of
learning research and its impacts on social and economic priorities; 2) It will
foster the development of an international network of researchers, practitioners
and policy makers to continue the dialogue after the meeting. Continued
engagement will enable US researchers and educators to examine models of
learning and teaching that have proven successful in other countries. An
understanding of the essential elements that can be tested, developed and
adapted for use will be of benefit to US researchers and educators; 3) enable
the US researchers attending the scientific symposium to develop new
collaborations with European leaders in neuroimaging and learning research, and
to create international opportunities for training of US students.