* 1159225
* IRFP: Inactivation of Pathogens and Fate of Pharmaceuticals in Novel Treatment Processes for Source-Separated Urine in Durban, South Africa
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Heather Bischel, Bischel                 Heather        N
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2016
* USD 164,355.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and by
the Environmental Engineering Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems Division. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Heather N. Bischel
to work with Dr. Tamar Kohn at École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
in Lausanne, Switzerland and University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the inactivation of pathogens and removal
of select trace organic chemicals of concern (TrOCs) are assessed to evaluate
the safety and optimize design parameters of urine recycling systems. The
primary goals of urine recycling systems are to increase access to sanitation,
recover valuable nutrients for revenue generation, and protect human and
environmental health. Several technologies to collect and treat stored urine
from urine-diverting dry toilets (UDDTs) to produce fertilizers are under
development through the "VUNA" project, a collaborative effort between the Swiss
Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (Eawag) in Switzerland and
eThekwini Water and Sanitation (EWS) in Durban, South
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This International Research Fellowship Program
award will support Dr. Heather N. Bischel to work with Dr. Tamar Kohn at École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL). Research will be conducted at EPFL,
with field components in Durban in coordination with the University of KwaZulu-
Natal. The project leverages technological expertise from VUNA to develop an
understanding of pathogen inactivation and trace organic contaminant removal
processes and to model the fate of contaminants in urine recycling systems and
urine-derived fertilizers. Field analysis for pilot-scale urine recycling
reactors operating in Durban will be conducted for comparison to laboratory-
modeled contaminant removal processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an alternative to
an expanded centralized sewerage system, the municipality that serves Durban
installed approximately 90,000 UDDTs in the city's peri-urban areas. Currently
these UDDTs separate urine at the source for diversion to soak pits, and feces
are collected in vaults for drying following the addition of ash or sand. For
this system, however, separately collected urine could be processed, rather than
disposed, to recover nutrients and produce urine-derived fertilizers. In
addition to introducing a potential source of revenue, recovery of nutrients for
reuse also lowers phosphorous and nitrogen concentrations in the waste stream,
thus reducing environmental contamination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pathogens and
TrOCs in the urine-derived fertilizer and reactor effluent may impact the
quality, or perceived quality, of end products. Ultimately, this project will
contribute to the design of improved urine recycling technologies to achieve the
best possible hygiene standards.