* 1159298
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Sources of Extremism and Moderation in the Living Shariah
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Richard Nielsen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This project seeks to measure and explain the ideological stances of Islamic
clerics on Jihad, women's issues, and other critical topics. Pronouncements by
clerics can have substantial sway among lay Muslims, defining norms of
acceptability and permissibility for the entire range of human action. However,
we know relatively little about how these clerics formulate and adopt their
expressed ideologies. The project will significantly expand our knowledge of
political Islam and the measurement of ideology, and the results will be of
great value to the scholarly community and policy-makers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the study stems from its
extension of research on ideology and networking to a critical, but under-
studied, group. This study measures and explains cleric ideology by analyzing
their fatwas: non-binding but authoritative legal rulings issued by clerics on
virtually all aspects of life from foreign policy to daily activities. These
fatwas offer a window into the ideology of clerics and their influence on the
everyday lives of the more than one billion Muslims world-wide. Fatwas on
ordinary religious issues can help shed light on more charged topics, such as
why some clerics support militant Jihad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focuses on two mechanisms to explain most of the variation in the expressed
ideologies of clerics. First, clerics are deeply influenced by their teachers;
ideologies are spread through the social network of teacher-student
relationships. Second, clerics are influenced by incentives to strategically
adopt ideological positions to further their careers. These theoretical
arguments are tested using a new database of historical and contemporary Arabic-
language fatwas collected from a variety of archival and Internet resources. Due
to the scale of the data, over 200,000 fatwas in are included in the pilot
database, the research design incorporates close reading with statistical text
analysis methods to draw valid, general conclusions about the ideological
diversity of Islam, the reasons that clerics choose certain ideological
positions, and the effects of cleric ideologies on the beliefs and actions of
lay Muslims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts are particularly
associated with the value of this research to the policy community. This
research will substantially improve our understanding of the ideologies and
political stances of Islamic clerics in the Middle East. These clerics are
extremely influential, especially in the wake of the Arab Spring, but they are
not well understood. Discovering why some clerics moderate while others become
extreme will help policy-makers undertaking diplomacy, counter-terrorism, and
democracy promotion efforts in the Middle East.