* 1159735
* Computational Neuromechanics for Stroke Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2015
* Benjamin Fregly, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2015
* USD 337,000.00

1159735&lt;br/&gt;Fregly&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stroke is the leading cause of
serious long term disability in adults worldwide. Over 795,000 strokes occur in
the United States each year. Walking dysfunction is one of the greatest stroke-
related physical limitations. While approximately two-thirds of persons who
suffer a stroke regain ambulatory function, their gait is slow, asymmetrical,
and metabolically inefficient. Despite recognition of the problem, there is
limited evidence that rehabilitation produces meaningful changes in walking
function. These findings underscore a significant knowledge gap regarding the
capacity for locomotor recovery and represent an urgent unmet need obstructing
development of interventions to promote recovery and restoration of locomotor
function in persons post-stroke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal is to
improve walking function in persons post-stroke. The objective of this proposal
is to develop computational simulation technology that can predict best
achievable gait patterns by individuals who have had a stroke. The technology
will account for both subject-specific neural control limitations caused by the
stroke and remaining neural control capabilities, as well as subject-specific
musculoskeletal anatomy. The simulations will target two key aspects of normal
walking function - speed and bilateral symmetry - when seeking to predict the
gait patterns that a hemiparetic individual is theoretically capable of
achieving. Differences between current and predicted muscle excitation patterns,
joint kinematics, and joint kinetics will be used in a future project as the
basis for selecting, on an individual subject basis, the neurorehabilitation
treatment protocol most likely to restore normal gait speed and
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the
proposed project is development of novel neuromechanical modeling methods that
will permit the prediction of best achievable gait patterns by individuals who
have had a stroke. The novel technical aspects are three-fold. First, a new
technique called "statistical moment estimation" will be developed that allows
the transformation of measured muscle electrical activity signals directly into
joint moments. The method uses a statistical over-determined system of equations
rather than a geometric under-determined system of equations to calibrate the
necessary model parameter values. Second, existing muscle synergy analysis
techniques will be extended to quantify subject-specific neural control
limitations and constrain gait motion predictions. Third, statistical moment
estimation and muscle synergy analysis will be incorporated into an existing
computational framework for predictive gait optimization. Whereas existing
neuromechanical modeling methods are only descriptive of situations for which
experimental data exist, our enhanced computational framework will be predictive
of situations for which no experimental data yet
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The broader impact of the proposed
project is the development of computational simulation technology that can add
objectivity to the design and selection of neurorehabilitation treatments for
stroke. Current treatment design paradigms are highly subjective, being based
primarily on clinician experience. Thus, there is often no clear rationale for
selecting one treatment approach over another or for selecting the specific
quantities to target within a selected treatment approach. Objective prediction
of the gait patterns that a patient is theoretically capable of achieving could
provide clinicians with valuable new information to improve the efficacy of the
treatment design process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transformative Nature: The
proposed research is transformative in two ways. First, it would be the first
computational simulation technology capable of predicting gait patterns that an
individual is theoretically capable of achieving, given the neural control
limitations imposed on the individual by a stroke. Second, it could be a
paradigm shift in neurorehabilitation treatment design, since it would transform
a subjective, qualitative process into an objective, quantitative one.