* 1159326
* Engineering Complex, Spatially-patterned Tissue Structures from Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Krishnendu Roy, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Friedrich Srienc
* 02/28/2014
* USD 395,770.00

Roy/ 1159326 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past decade significant advances have
been made in stem cell differentiation to create engineered tissues. However,
most efforts to date have focused on regenerating a homogenous tissue structure
whose bulk properties are similar to that of native tissues. But, most human
tissues are complex, both structurally and functionally, and possess spatially-
varying compositions and mechanical properties. Directing stem cells into such
mature, three-dimensionally organized, complex tissues has not yet been
achieved. A model example is articular cartilage, which has been widely studied
in tissue engineering for several decades. Anatomically and functionally,
articular cartilage consists of four, spatially distinct regions; the
superficial, transitional, deep, and calcified zones. Each zone is characterized
by unique extra-cellular matrix compositions, mechanical properties and cellular
organization. Classical tissue engineering approaches for creating homogenous
tissue replacements for articular cartilage has failed to achieve widespread
clinical effectiveness because the engineered bulk properties do not mimic
native tissue function. Based on recent findings that unique material
compositions can be used to direct stem cells into specific types of
chondrocytes that correspond to those from the various zones of articular
cartilage, this project will explore a unique multi-layered hydrogel constructs
with spatially varying biomaterial-niches for simultaneously differentiating a
single stem cell population into a complex articular cartilage. The knowledge
gathered would provide new insights on the feasibility of engineering complex,
functionally-relevant tissues whose mechanical properties and composition can
vary spatially.