* 1159666
* Collaborative Proposal:Developing Engineer of 2020 Traits: How do Non-curricular Activities Impact African American Students?
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Stephanie Adams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 05/31/2016
* USD 85,110.00

This engineering education research project will focus on three organizations
outside of the formal engineering program that provide mentoring support for
African American engineering students to determine how participation in such
organizations impacts academic and career pathways. The project, building from a
successful pilot, will examine how such organizations provide positive support
to assist African American engineering students, the most effective aspects of
this support, and how this support aids in developing professional identities
that lead to long term success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance
and importance of this project arise from better understanding the mechanisms
which effectively support one group of under-represented engineering students.
Such understanding can potentially lead to educational practices which can
improve how engineering degree programs attract, retain, and support groups of
under-represented students, thus improving the national pipeline for STEM talent
and the STEM workforce. This project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of
transforming the frontiers through preparation of an engineering workforce with
new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for
society is enabled by creating results and research that are useful for society
by informing educational policy and practices.