* 1159622
* Multimodal Membranes for High-throughput Bioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Scott Husson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 08/31/2016
* USD 262,086.00

1159622 Husson

Multimodal ligands bind proteins by a combination of ionic interactions,
hydrophobic interactions and/or hydrogen bonding. Multimodal resin
chromatography is gaining popularity as a purification tool for biologics, as it
can accommodate purification needs for challenging feedstocks where single mode
methods fail. The novelty of the proposed concept is that multimodal ligands are
used to develop advanced membrane adsorbers. Using a membrane support is
appealing because dynamic protein binding capacities of these materials will not
depend on throughput. Thus, volumetric productivity can be very high compared to
more traditional chromatography materials. This will help to alleviate the
tradeoff that manufacturers must now make between load processing time and
dynamic binding capacity. Performance testing will demonstrate that the
multimodal functionality can expand the loading operating space for
chromatographic separations beyond what is possible with single mode materials.

The program will employ and further advance the strategies developed in our lab
to design membrane adsorbers with dynamic binding capacities that exceed
traditional materials. Specifically, the multimodal membrane adsorbers will be
prepared using an advancement called surface-initiated AGET (activators
generated by electron transfer) ATRP (atom transfer radical polymerization),
which simplifies the modification procedure and enhances membrane
manufacturability. This method of polymerization is unique for this application
because it gives us molecular-level control over the nanostructure of the
modification layer. Fundamental studies on multimodal polymer nanolayers will be
done in parallel to understand how the structural properties of these
modification layers impact protein binding capacities, adsorption isotherms, and
adsorption kinetics. Adsorption data will be used to build a predictive model
for protein breakthrough on multimodal membrane adsorbers and compare
predictions to experimental breakthrough curves for various proteins under a
range of operating conditions. Finally, performance parameters will be compared
to commercial products, which currently are limited to resin-based materials.

Development of efficient bioseparation processes is recognized as an urgent need
facing the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries, particularly for high
dose chronic therapies. The proposed use-inspired basic research program will
develop multimodal membranes for high productivity protein chromatography. The
integration of advanced multimodal functionality and a membrane adsorber
platform will provide a new class of chromatography materials to accomplish
selective separations with minimal load conditioning at high volumetric
throughput. Considering that a high percentage of the total cost of bioprocesses
is due to downstream recovery and purification, our membrane materials are a
potentially transformative new purification tool to help the pharmaceutical and
biotechnology industries provide lower cost therapeutic products for the US
consumer. Societal benefits from research require dissemination to potential
users in formats beyond the scholarly journal article. Thus, in addition to
disseminating findings through publications and presentations, our program will
test a new virtual platform for timely dissemination of research findings. The
virtual poster conference will allow face-to-face discussions among researchers
in the US and internationally without the associated time and cost for travel to
a common physical location.