* 1159695
* Collaborative Research: Using a Fully Autonomous Brain-Body Interface to Study the Cortical Dynamics of Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Emilio Bizzi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Athanassios Sambanis
* 06/30/2015
* USD 215,000.00

1159652/1159695 Brown/Bizzi

The brain controls movements of the body by means of neural signals transmitted
through the spinal cord. Researchers in the field of Motor Neural Prosthetics
attempt to tap into these neural signals and use them to control artificial
actuators, such as a robotic arm or computer cursor, or native limbs that have
been paralyzed. The long-term goal of such research is to help restore function
to a variety of patient populations for whom the normal spinal pathways of
movement control have been disrupted due to neurological disease, brain and or
spinal cord injury. At present, however, the movements generated by
neuroprosthetic devices lack the smoothness, and fluidity of natural movement.
Furthermore, although Brain-Machine Interfaces would appear to provide a unique
opportunity for studying brain function, the technology of neural prosthetics
has not yet made major contributions to an improved understanding of how the
circuits in the brain that control movement work.

This grant proposes the construction of a novel Brain-Body interface in animals
for which elbow function is reversibly paralyzed. By connecting the output of
recording electrodes placed in the brain to stimulating electrodes placed near
the paralyzed elbow muscles, a pathway is created to re-establish control of the
lost motor function. Unlike most research in the field, this research requires
that all of the learning takes place within the brain and none of the learning
takes place through a "Decoder" - that is, a computer-based machine-learning
algorithm that attempts to read the mind of the user and extract the desired
signals to control the movement. Thus, our Brain-Body interface is fully
autonomous and requires no outside intervention. Initially, performance may be
inadequate. Just as an infant requires considerable time to establish control
over motor pathways, so too will a subject require time to learn to control this
entirely new pathway. However, given adequate learning time, this architecture
is likely to lead to superior performance, because all of the control resides
within the brain and because the brain has a remarkable adapt and learn.

There are two key intellectual merits to the proposed research. The first is to
use this novel preparation to the study natural systems-level mechanisms of
learning present in the brain, so that how our brains self-organize during
development and how our brains adapt to injury or disease are better understood.
The second is to transform the fields of Brain-Machine and Brain-Body
Interfacing by exploring the level of control attainable when the native brain
does all of the learning rather than computer algorithms. The research has
additional broader significance. In particular, through this work it is hoped
that a better-performing Brain-Body interface can be developed to help restore
movement function in those suffering from neurological disorders or brain
injury. Moreover, this work further cultivates the methodology of Direct Brain
Control (a particular form of biofeedback) for the design of rehabilitative
devices. In so doing, it enhances the existing research infrastructure by
bringing together clinical anesthesiologists, neurophysiologists, and engineers
to forge a cross-disciplinary solution to this important problem.