* 1159327
* Surfactants at interfaces of aqueous solutions investigated by molecular simulation and experiment
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2019
* Daniel Lacks, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 03/31/2019
* USD 273,445.00

Abstract 1159327 Lacks, Daniel J.

The presence of the surfactants at interfaces reduces the free energy of the
interface, and thereby alters the properties of system in regard properties such
as wetting, emulsification, or foaming. Control of these properties is crucial
in many industries and products. It is particularly challenging to find suitable
surfactants in mixed solvent systems (water and a co-solvent such as an
alcohol), because the co-solvent reduces the (generalized) hydrophobic phobic
repulsion, which in turn reduces the effectiveness of a surfactant. The
understanding of what molecular features lead to hydrophobic interactions is
rudimentary. While there has been intense research activity in regard to
understanding hydrophobic effects associated with protein folding, there has not
been as strong an effort to understand hydrophobicity in systems of industrial
interest. The proposed research will address the hydrophobic interactions of
molecules of industrial relevance, with the aim of better understanding
surfactant behavior.

The novelty of this project stems from the investigation of surfactants that
have been largely overlooked from a theoretical chemistry perspective, but are
nonetheless very important industrially, and from the combined simulation-
experiment approach we will use. Note that the simple experiments we propose
would not be of such strong enough interest in-and-of-themselves, but when
combined with the simulations they will enhance our understanding of the
surfactant behavior as well as provide a test of the reliability of the
simulations.

Intellectual Merit: Molecular dynamics simulations will be carried out to
elucidate the molecular factors that control surfactant partitioning to surfaces
in mixed solvent systems. In addition, surface tension experiments will be
carried out on such systems to provide tests of simulation reliability as well
as further insights into the surfactant behavior. More specifically, the project
will address the following questions: a. Why are silicones so hydrophobic?
Despite the importance of silicone surfactants, we are not aware of even one
molecular simulation study that addresses why these surfactants are so
effective. b. Why do polyethers show unusual variations in hydrophobicity, such
that poly(ethylene oxide) is hydrophilic while polyethers with one more or one
less CH2 group along the backbone are hydrophobic? c. How do the answers to the
above questions change as a co-solvent such as an alcohol is added to water?

Broader Impacts

The project will have a variety of broader impacts: a. Strong efforts to mentor
undergraduate researchers. Evidence of our success in this regard is the
significant number of undergraduate students who are co-authors on our papers.
b. Connections to programs we are developing to educate students with a global
perspective in regard to sub-Saharan Africa. These programs are being held both
at the University of Botswana and our home institution, Case Western Reserve
University. c. The possibility of improved technology arising from a better
understanding of the factors that govern surfactant behavior in mixed solvent
systems.