* 1160797
* INT Summer School on Lattice QCD for Nuclear Physics on August 6-24, 2012 at the University of Washington in Seattle, WA
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2013
* Huey-Wen Lin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Marc Sher
* 07/31/2013
* USD 15,145.00

This award provides funds to support students attending the INT Summer School on
Lattice QCD for Nuclear Physics at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the three other known fundamental forces
in nature, the strong force is strong at relatively low energies, and
consequently it cannot be fully studied through traditional perturbative
methods. Lattice gauge theory is the field in which one therefore performs
calculations involving the strong force numerically by discretizing spacetime,
evaluating relevant amplitudes on this discretized spacetime, and then taking
the spacing associated with the spacetime lattice to zero (thereby hopefully
extracting results for the full "continuum" theory). Lattice gauge theory thus
not only provides us with a direct non-perturbative means of studying the strong
interaction, but also enables us to understand strong-interaction dynamics at
the level of precision needed in order to give meaning to upcoming collider
experiments. In recent years, the techniques of lattice gauge theory have even
extended beyond the strong interaction per se, becoming relevant for fields as
diverse as graphene, trapped atoms, technicolor, and even quantum
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the importance of this subject, however,
there is no systematic way for students or young researchers to learn about it.
Attending this event will therefore provide junior participants not only with an
overall understanding of lattice gauge theory, but also with an understanding of
how lattice gauge theory may be applied to the calculation of key quantities in
QCD. Students who attend will also be exposed to new trends in applying lattice
methods to fields such as nuclear physics, astrophysics, and Fermi gas systems.