* 1160301
* RAPID: Geomorphic Response and Recovery to Hurricane Irene Floods: Characterizing Reach-Scale and Regional Controls on Fluvial Adjustments
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2011,10/31/2013
* Francis Magilligan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2013
* USD 44,604.00

This rapid-response research project will examine the geomorphic signature of
the Hurricane Irene flooding in late August 2011 in central New England to
document the regional geomorphic response across an array of watersheds in
central Vermont and test the covariant ways that channels responded to Hurricane
Irene flooding and the way channels may potentially recover to establish pre-
flood equilibrium conditions. The floods of August 28-30, 2011, exceeded the
largest measured discharge at longstanding USGS gages on innumerable small (up
to 50 km-square in area) to large (up to 1,400 km-square) watersheds across New
England, but especially in east-central Vermont, where peak discharges in places
approached and even exceeded estimated 500-yr recurrence interval events. The
investigators will build on an intense 2011 summer (pre-storm) field campaign in
the flood-affected region that focused on differentiating reach-scale
adjustments of the critical Shields number to inputs of sediment at tributaries
in alluvial, bedrock, and mixed-channel reaches in regulated and unregulated
watersheds. The data from these locations provide a strong baseline dataset to
use in determining how extant boundary conditions in combination with flood
power, sediment flux, and watershed structure (including valley confinement and
tributary inputs) limit or enhance stream channel and floodplain responses to
large floods. These field data will be augmented with detailed image analysis
and analyses employing geographic information systems. The investigators also
will examine significant overbank deposits with distinct sediment packages. They
will use the fallout radionuclides lead-210 (with a half-life of 22.3 years) and
beryllium-7 (with a half-life of 53.4 days) as indicators of sediment sourcing
and test the hypothesis that overbank sediments with significant radionuclide
activities represent sediment delivered from hillslopes connected to adjacent
channels while overbank sediments lacking radionuclide activities come from
eroded streambanks (with these being "dead" sediment lacking fallout
activity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance basic understanding of
the magnitude and nature of geomorphic adjustments to large floods. The project
will capture geomorphic controls on channel responses across an array of
alluvial settings and evaluate the pattern and isotopic signature of overbank
deposits to potentially reveal the relative sourcing of sediment (hillslope vs.
channel banks). Results from this project will help guide state and federal
agencies in future flood mitigation efforts and will provide valuable new
insights for understanding natural processes that will impact on river-
restoration efforts.