* 1160917
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Combined Geodynamical and Seismological Modeling of the Inner Core Boundary Region
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Vernon Cormier, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2016
* USD 239,604.00

Earth's solid iron inner core grows about 1 mm every year as it freezes out of
the liquid outer core. Most of the liquid outer core is a convecting,
electrically conducting, metal fluid, whose churning motions are responsible for
maintaining Earth's magnetic field. Both the convective motions in the liquid
outer core, and freezing of the inner core, are driven by cooling of the core by
Earth?s mantle. Yet the complexity of the inner core, as witnessed by
seismological probing, is very surprising given the ultra-slow and nearly ideal
conditions for growing a pristine inner core. Such complexity includes
corrugation of the inner core boundary, the presence of strong small scatterers,
radial and hemispherical differences in elastic properties, and regions with
aligned fabric and/or crystalline structure. Our project aims to understand the
dynamical conditions during inner core growth that could give rise to such
enormous complexity in the inner core boundary region, and to compare the
seismic predictions generated by dynamical mechanisms with real data. Dynamical
mechanisms include formation of a mushy layer (in which liquid is interspersed
between solid particles) owing to formation of dendrites or slurry "snow" at the
base of the liquid outer core, and subsequent compaction of the solid iron
sediment under its own weight. A compacting mush may itself become unstable in a
manner that would amplify spatial variations in chemistry, physical properties,
and roughness of the inner core boundary. We also plan to see how the structure
of the inner core boundary region is sensitive to the rate of cooling of Earth's
core, which is in turn related to the the depth extent and rate of plate
tectonic circulation in the Earth's deep mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines analysis of seismic waves interacting with the solidifying
inner core boundary and mathematical/numerical modeling of the solidification
process to determine the chemical composition and the nature of fluids and
solids near the inner core boundary. The nature of the solidification process is
important to determining the extent to which release of incompatible elements
upon freezing can help drive convection currents in the liquid outer core, which
is also thought to be important in planets such as Mercury. Among the
fundamental questions to be answered in this solidification process are how
observed hemispherical differences in inner core structure may be created and
sustained, how are these spatial differences ultimately linked to cooling of the
deep Earth, and how might they be reconciled with observations that suggest the
inner core?s rotation can differ or fluctuate relative to the solid Earth
above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdisciplinary and computational work required by
the project will assist in the mentoring of graduate students and their
preparation for jobs in broad areas of materials and information science.
Results from this study will be important to understanding the chemical
composition of the Earth, the conditions for maintenance of the magnetic field
through time (which is important for life on Earth's surface), help quantify the
energy budget of the Earth, and help understand the natural dimensions of metal
solidification which is in turn liked to industrially important processes. There
are also important connections between freezing processes in Earth's core and
those in the cores of other planets, the generation of planetary magnetic fields
in terrestrial bodies in this and other solar systems, and the ability for a
planet to develop a habitable surface suitable for hosting life.