* 1160854
* Early Career: Acquisition of a High Sensitivity Superconducting Rock Magnetometer for Paleomagnetic and Paleointensity Research
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2013,02/28/2015
* Aleksey Smirnov, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2015
* USD 357,569.00

1160854 Smirnov

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant
supports acquisition of a 2G Enterprises 4K-755 high-resolution superconducting
rock magnetometer (SRM) with a small access bore (6 mm) at Michigan
Technological University. The small bore SRM allows for paleomagnetic
directional and paleointensity analysis of single crystals of ancient
(Precambrian) silicates hosting magnetic and paramagnetic fine grained mineral
inclusions. These igneous phase single crystals are likely to hold the most
pristine record of Earth?s early magnetic field and yet to date very few
reliable paleointensity measurements from Precambrian rocks have been made. The
analytical sensitivity now available with a small bore SRM makes proposed
measurements possible. The PI is in possession of numerous plagioclase separates
from Precambrian dikes sampled around the word (e.g., the ~2.45 Ga Burakovka
dikes (Russia), the ~2.9 Ga Munni-Munni intrusion and the ~2.42 Ga Widgiemooltha
dikes (Western Australia), the ~2.37 Ga Bangalore dikes and the ~2.2 Ga
Mahhubnagar dikes (India), and the ~1.1 Ga Portage Lake basalts (USA)) from
previous NSF/EAR research support. The PI is well poised to immediately make use
of the requested small bore SRM for NSF/EAR funded research on the nature of
Earth?s early magnetic field with implications for Precambrian tectonics and the
generation and early behavior of the geodynamo; the magnetic field which shields
the Earth surface from the highly energized solar wind and allowed for the
evolution of Earth?s biota. This instrument will be only the second of its kind
in a U.S. academic laboratory. The infrastructural impacts of this acquisition
are very significant for the U.S. paleomagnetic research community. The
instrument will complement existing paleomagnetic analysis equipment in the PI?s
lab and serve an active student research group including an active PI-
undergraduate mentoring program at MTU.

***