* 1160532
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Determinants and Measures of Ethnic Identity
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Kai Ostwald, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 07/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

How and to what extent can states shape the salience of their citizens' ethnic
identities? We know that states can change some aspects of their citizens'
identities, but we know surprisingly little about the bounds of this capacity,
in particular regarding the salience of ethnic identity in multiethnic states.
This dissertation project is an attempt to systematically analyze whether states
can make extensive and purposeful changes to the ethnic identities of their
citizens through orchestrated public policy programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is associated with its theoretical and
empirical contributions to the study of ethnic identity. A large number of
projects in multiethnic states require the state to reduce the salience of
divisive ethnic identities and foster unifying civil identities. Extensive
evidence demonstrates that this is necessary for such things as reducing the
potential for conflict, increasing the efficiency of public goods provision, and
improving the quality of governance. States clearly have the capacity to change
some superficial elements of ethnic identity, but can they effect deep and
substantive change, as may be necessary to execute many elements of their
development strategies? By employing a novel measurement strategy that captures
change at superficial and deep-seated levels of ethnic identity, this project
offers insights into the bounds of state capacity to meaningfully shape ethnic
identity. Furthermore, by analyzing the effects of coordinated public policy
programs as well as individual public policies, the research will determine
which mechanisms are most effective at shaping the different levels of salience.
This provides insights into the fundamental feasibility of many developmental
strategies being pursued in multiethnic states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examining
the effects of the state actions on the salience of ethnic identity requires 1)
an effective and theoretically grounded measure of ethnic identity and 2) an
ability to isolate the effects of state actions. Ethnic identity is dynamic and
multi-layered, requiring that the measurement strategy captures its multiple
facets. Social desirability bias, however, prevents asking direct questions on
ethnic identity, as responses may reflect social norms rather than actual
preferences. Thus the project relies on indirect measures that capture
observable behavioral and attitudinal manifestations of different elements of
ethnic identity. The research integrates several innovative techniques developed
in social psychology and behavioral economics into the measurement strategy. The
primary instrument is a survey with embedded experiments. The project also
includes interviews, experimental games to measure how conditional trust is on
ethnic identity, and social networking data to capture the network
manifestations of ethnic preferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of state
actions on ethnic identity is assessed at two levels. The first captures the
aggregate effects of state actions at the macro level by exploiting a natural
experiment between Singapore and the Malaysian Island of Penang. These two
territories are highly similar demographically, were ruled as a joint political
entity for over one century, and had highly similar early post-independence
developmental dynamics. Yet their political environments fundamentally diverged
starting in 1970 following significant ethnic conflict in both territories.
Ethnic identity in Singapore was consistently demobilized through concerted
public policy efforts and the absence of an ethnic component in political
competition. As a territory of Malaysia, Penang had an extensive federal-level
public policy program that consistently mobilized and politicized ethnic
identity exogenously imposed on it. Thus these two ethnically heterogeneous
territories with nearly identical starting positions have been subject to vastly
different state actions for over forty years. By examining how ethnic identity
has diverged between the two countries and - more importantly - how it has
remained the same despite the differential treatment, we generate important
insights into the nature of ethnic identity and its broad responsiveness to
state actions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second treatment level examines the
effect of individual public policies, focusing on education policy and national
service. Regarding education policy, the project examines the effect of school
type on ethnic identity. The effect of national service is measured via
differences in ethnic identity between Malaysian youth who were selected by
lottery to complete a three month integrated national service and those of the
same age cohort who were not selected. These tests provide insight into the
contact hypothesis and the general feasibility of altering the salience and
nature of ethnic identity through fostering constructive contact between
constituent groups. By collecting individual level data, the research will
capture the heterogeneous treatment effects of state actions, and thus permit
inferences on the interaction between policy and individual attributes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the project is associated with its
importance to the foreign policy and development communities. Ethnic diversity
provides challenges not only to post-colonial and post-conflict states, but to
developed states as well. Significant resources are spent on public policy
programs designed to reduce the salience of ethnic identities and shape their
expressions. However, little systematic research exists to demonstrate that
these are fundamentally feasible projects. By examining the effect of different
state actions on multiple elements of ethnic identity, this project provides
insight into the possibilities and limitations of the state's ability to shape
ethnic identity.