* 1160906
* Collaborative Research:  Incentives for Researcher Profile Maintenance and Access, and Their Value in Science and Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Tuhin Sinha, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Maryann Feldman
* 07/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

The increasing complexity of science means that it is increasingly important to
pull together teams in order to produce high quality research. This means that
it is important to develop technologies that identify researchers with the right
set of skills so that such teams can be expeditiously formed. This is
particularly true in biomedical science, where the translation of research into
clinical care often requires the expeditious convening of the right group of
researchers, clinicians, and consumers. A variety of different technologies have
evolved so that scientists can profile their skills; however it has been
extremely difficult to incentivize researchers to adopt and use these
technologies. This research explores the specific value that academic profiles
may provide, how that value may be maximized in these larger research
coordination networks, and what motivates researcher adoption and use.

Intellectual Merit: This research advances understanding of what features of
profiling tools can be used to incentivize the scientific community to generate
social capital in the sciences. Many examples of features are prevalent on the
social networking sites that are currently popular on the Web. For instance,
Facebook's initial success was attributed to incentivizing features such as
exclusivity, relationship status, poking mechanisms, and directory services. For
Twitter, the incentivizing feature is the availability of diverse usage channels
(professional/private) and multi-client applications. The incentivizing feature
for LinkedIn has been the development of professional networks and discourse
only. Almost nothing is known on what incentivizes scientists. This research
fills the gap by collecting an unprecedented set of data in both a biomedical
and a multidisciplinary environment on what incentivizes profile adoption,
influences self-curation, and increases the social capital of profiles through
research networking tools. It assesses and disseminates the impact of using the
data sources on the accuracy and comprehensiveness of data matched to
investigators. It assesses the impact of auto-population, new data sources, and
value-added features on usage and engagement. It also assesses the impact of
tools on industry-academic alliances through the assessment by survey and focus
groups of those actively engaged by the University of San Francisco's Office of
Innovation, Technology and Alliances

Broader Impacts: Findings from this experiment can have direct impact on the
progress and development of partnership methods and systems. The broad
availability of wellcurated profiles should advance the quality of both science
and innovation. The research advances understanding in all areas of science
where collaborative efforts are required to maintain and progress the capacity
for innovation.