* 1160377
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Environmental Dynamics and Cultural Processes at Cajamarquilla, Central Coast of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Izumi Shimada, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2015
* USD 19,996.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Izumi Shimada, Rafael Segura will collect and
analyze data from archaeological excavations at the major pre-Hispanic urban
site of Cajamarquilla on the Peruvian central coast. Specifically, the project
will investigate the role of inferred major hydrological disturbances during a
time span of ca. 800 years in local and regional cultural processes from an
interdisciplinary perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous paleonvironmental
reconstructions in the central Andes indicate the occurrence of extraordinary
and prolonged droughts and floods during the Middle Horizon (MH, ca. AD
550-1000) and Late Intermediate Period (LIP, ca. 1000-1470). These phenomena
would have compelled people to develop appropriate adaptive responses and, in
some cases, differentially accelerated cultural change. Thus, it has been
hypothesized that rapid population nucleation and/or site abandonment episodes
on the central coast would reflect crucial accommodations to hydrologic
upheavals. However, serious voids still undermine understanding of the referred
natural-cultural processes. Particularly, the region lacks reliable relative and
absolute chronologies; systematic studies of local paleoenvironmental history
and processes have barely started. In addition, excessive focus on one culture-
one period impedes an assessment of links between paleoenvironmental variation
and short and long-term human responses. Cajamarquilla provides an excellent
setting to address these concerns because of its economically strategic but
hazardous location and relatively well preserved multicultural occupation over
MH and LIP, including associated canals and inferred reservoirs and storage
facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test the primary hypothesis that severe
environmental fluctuations conditioned the foundation, abandonment, and
reoccupation of Cajamarquilla during the MH and LIP, Mr. Segura will conduct the
following: (1) collection of radiocarbon samples to refine occupational history
vis-à-vis the postulated natural phenomena; (2) analysis of sedimentary deposits
(including thin section microscopy analysis) and microbotanic remains (pollen
grains, starch grains and phytoliths) from natural and cultural features, such
as bank exposures of a nearby dry water course, abandoned canals and reservoirs,
and house floors; (3) assessment of the structural and functional
characteristics of selected canals, reservoirs and storage pits; and (4)
characterization of abandonment and architectural reconstruction events vis-à-
vis signatures of destructive flooding or severe water shortage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will have a broader impact beyond the
research topics presented. Firstly, it will improve knowledge and appreciation
of potential risk in an area historically impacted by floods and droughts,
especially in the context of global warming. This will be relevant for
preventive measures and urban planning as modern populations live on ancient
channels around the site and elsewhere in the world. Second, because of its
focus on combined cultural and natural data, the project will foster synergetic
international collaboration of professionals and students representing different
disciplines that will enhance their skills as well as their own disciplinary and
cross-disciplinary knowledge and appreciation. Finally, the research will enrich
and disseminate our knowledge of Cajamarquilla, one of the only two still-
preserved large urban sites on the central coast. This will enhance future
protection of the site against uncontrolled modern urban growth.