* 1160069
* Collaborative Research: Modified Reverse Osmosis Membranes for Forward and Pressure Retarded Osmosis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Benny Freeman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2017
* USD 215,595.00

McCutcheon/Freeman&lt;br/&gt;1160098/110069&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award
by the Chemical and Biological Separations program supports work by Professors
Jeffrey McCutcheon and Benny Freeman to develop a new method for chemically
modifying commercial reverse osmosis membranes for use in forward osmosis and
pressure retarded osmosis applications. Forward osmosis (FO) and pressure
retarded osmosis (PRO) are sibling technologies that fall under the broader
distinction of engineered osmosis (EO). This platform relies on osmotic flow
induced by concentration differences across a membrane to purify water, dewater
solutions and generate electricity. FO has recently been considered for seawater
desalination, wastewater reuse, and food processing and is considered a low cost
alternative to reverse osmosis (RO) and evaporative approaches. PRO has been
considered for harvesting osmotic potential at river deltas and within "osmotic
engine" systems to generate electricity with a hydroturbine.&lt;br/&gt;Any EO
technology requires a tailored membrane that not only is highly selective, but
also exhibits properties that promote osmotic flow. Today's commercial desalting
membranes are designed specifically for reverse osmosis. These membranes exhibit
excellent selectivity and permeability, but also employ thick porous support
layers. These layers provide little resistance to hydraulic flow in RO. However,
they dramatically impact mass transfer in forward osmosis, causing what is
commonly referred to as internal concentration polarization. Early work has
shown that RO membranes have very poor flux performance when evaluated in FO or
PRO. A significant amount of this resistance is caused by poor wetting of the
support layers, which are comprised of hydrophobic polymers.&lt;br/&gt;This work
will demonstrate that a chemical modification of reverse osmosis membrane
support layers with polydopamine and its analogs will enhance osmotic flux by
increasing the hydrophilicity of the support layers. Once hydrophilized, the
layers will saturate, thereby providing the necessary continuity of the water
phase to reduce mass transfer resistances. Early work has already shown that in
some cases, water flux can be increased by a factor of 10 or more when compared
to an unmodified membrane. This solution may provide an alternative to building
new membranes using techniques that may be difficult to scale or will require
years of development to achieve similar performance to today's RO
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a world of ever increasing demand for scarce
water and energy resources, new technology platforms, like EO, offer new
possibilities. Desalination and power production using EO will be enabled
through the development of new, tailored membranes. However, if we are able to
use existing membrane technology with a simple modification, we do not need to
develop an entirely new membrane platform. In fact, the proposed modification
method is scalable and therefore easily implemented into existing membrane
productions lines. Membrane manufacturers are more likely to implement changes
to their production scheme if it doesn't require rebuilding their entire
manufacturing infrastructure. Furthermore, this investigation will represent the
first time that modification of a RO membrane support layer has been considered
to increase flux performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve our goals, a
better understanding of how the coating occurs within a porous material (the RO
membrane support layer) will be necessary. The University of Connecticut will
evaluate the coating procedure to maximize performance improvements while the
University of Texas will develop analog chemistries to polydopamine that may be
more appropriate for deposition within a porous structure. Ultimately, we will
develop an understanding of how chemistry and modification technique impact
osmotic flux performance across modified RO
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the National Academy of
Engineering, one of the Grand Challenges for Engineering is providing access to
clean water for mankind. The development of emerging water treatment
technologies like forward osmosis could reinvigorate interest in desalination
and wastewater reuse due to its promised benefits of low cost. As such, both PIs
will use this work to stimulate interest in water within their educational and
outreach programs. At the University of Texas, Professor Freeman will provide
research opportunities for high school students and teachers, giving invaluable
experience to help promote engineering education in Texas high schools. At the
University of Connecticut, Professor McCutcheon will be an active participant in
Universitas 21, an organization that promotes undergraduate research across
disciplines and oceans. Twenty three member universities provide programming for
undergraduates to present their research, and UCONN is one of two American
university participants. Professor McCutcheon will help develop programming for
a summer school to be held at UCONN as well as mentor the UCONN undergraduates
who plan on attending the annual conference and other meetings. The PIs will
collaborate in establishing an REU exchange program, called UCONNect2Texas,
which will involve undergraduate students from each school visiting the other
for a period of 10 weeks during the summer.