* 1160104
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: How Identities Affect Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Samara Klar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The expression of citizens' preferences is a fundamental component of democracy.
We know from existing research that preferences are strongly influenced by
individuals' identities (i.e., the groups with which they identify). As
demographics change, underlying preference distributions may also change,
underscoring the importance of the research for academic and policy-making
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study's major intellectual merit is to
investigate how the presence of multiple identities influences preferences.
Because identities are increasingly overlapping at the individual level,
Americans are more likely than ever to identify with more than one social and
political group. These groups may feature complementary or competing interests.
How do citizens reconcile these differences when forming policy preferences?
Attachments to multiple identities can create internal conflict when two
opposing sides of a debate line up with two of an individual's identities. The
project includes three distinct studies that address identity and preferences,
each seeking to answer an unresolved question about how individuals reconcile
competing identity claims. The first study involves survey analyses of how
identity influences engagement among Americans of varying identities. The second
and third studies involve experimental designs that vary conditions to measure
the influence of competing identities on mobilization and the mitigation of
biased decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is poised to produce
several broad impacts. The insight drawn from this research will inform what we
know about individuals with diverse identities and their political engagement.
If people with multiple competing identities are engaged with politics, the
project will enhance our understanding of political representation. If they are
disengaged from politics, the project will identify potential challenges to
political participation and representation. The project will provide a deeper
understanding of the changing role of identity on political behavior, and lay
the foundation for future work in this increasingly important area.