* 1160932
* CSEDI: Understanding the structure of the continental upper  mantle through the use of magnetotelluric and seismic observations
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 02/28/2014
* USD 120,000.00

In this project, we will use geophysically inferred electrical conductivity
distribution of the Earth's upper mantle to infer the physical and chemical
conditions of the upper mantle. The distribution of water in the mantle reflects
the processes by which the upper mantle has evolved. Unlike the oceanic upper
mantle, evolution of the continental upper mantle is poorly understood.
Consequently, we will focus our attention to the distribution of water in the
continental upper mantle from which we infer the evolution of continents. Based
on the series of experimental (and theoretical) studies, Karato and his co-
workers have shown that water (hydrogen) enhances electrical conductivity of
upper mantle minerals dramatically. These experimental studies established the
functional relationship between electrical conductivity, water content,
temperature, oxygen fugacity etc. These relationships are well established and
show that the influence of water is much stronger than other parameters. 'Other
parameters' that affect electrical conductivity modestly (major element
composition, temperature, oxygen fugacity etc.) can be inferred from other
observations (temperature and major element composition from mantle samples, for
example). Consequently, we can infer the water distribution from the inferred
electrical conductivity distribution through the integration of these
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kate Selway has extensive experience in
analyzing the MT data to construct three-dimensional conductivity distributions
from the observations of electromagnetic induction. She has recently obtained
new data set from Tanzania, but we will also use the data from other regions
including South Africa and North America. Given the knowledge of 'other factors'
listed above, we will establish the methodology to map out water distribution by
comparison to MT data. Both forward and inverse modeling approaches will be used
in this study. For this study, we will have a better understanding of water
distribution in the continental upper mantle that will shed important insights
into how continents might have grown.