* 1160665
* Chiwere (ISO 639-3: iow) Audio Archive Project (CAAP)
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Saul Schwartz, Goodtracks              Jimm
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,309.00

Chiwere is a critically endangered Native American language belonging to the
Siouan family. While missionaries, anthropologists, and linguists have recorded
valuable information about Chiwere over the past 150 years, Chiwere lacks
essential documentation, and no fluent speakers remain to contribute new data.
The Chiwere Audio Archive Project (CAAP) will give linguists, Indian
communities, and the general public access to audio recordings and texts from a
collection of Chiwere oral literature told by the last fluent speakers. Since
the collection was made during the 1960s-1990s using fragile cassette tapes and
reel-to-reels, the project will convert these analogue recordings to digital
files. Project personnel will then transcribe the recordings in Chiwere,
translate them into English, and annotate them with linguistic, historical, and
cultural information. Finally, the recordings and texts will be made available
online and distributed to archives and stakeholder tribes.

Chiwere is a heritage language for three federally recognized Indian tribes in
Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska. CAAP benefits these communities by providing
resources to support their language revitalization goals. While no fluent
speakers remain, a few individuals learned to speak and understand Chiwere from
their relatives, and the language is still used in certain settings today. Many
tribal members want to learn more of their traditional language from the voices
of their elders, but there are few audio-based pedagogical materials to meet
this need. CAAP will remedy this situation by giving Native communities access
to recordings and texts of traditional stories, oral histories, and songs. CAAP
will also employ tribal members as project assistants and train them to become
language curators in their communities. In addition to benefiting tribal
members, CAAP also benefits linguists. Chiwere is less understood than many
Siouan languages, especially others in the Mississippi Valley subfamily. CAAP
facilitates further research on Chiwere grammar and comparative Siouan topics
and will be of broad interest to linguists. Overall, CAAP will meet the needs of
linguists, tribal stakeholders, and the general public by preserving and making
available Chiwere recordings and texts with irreplaceable linguistic and
cultural significance.