* 1160891
* E3   -  An Engineering Education Expansion Project
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Vincent Holtmann, Ranken Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 09/30/2017
* USD 430,580.00

The Engineering Education Expansion Project at Ranken Technical College is
increasing enrollment and graduation in electrical engineering and mechanical
engineering design programs that are closely linked to workforce opportunities
in the St. Louis area. The project strengthens collaborative efforts among
Ranken, the St. Louis Public School System, College Summit St. Louis and Better
Family Life to recruit high-school students into educational pathways that lead
to technical careers and to support their persistence and degree attainment.
Project elements include 1) enhanced recruiting that informs high-school
students, as well as their teachers and guidance counselors, about meaningful
and well-paying technical careers, 2) accelerated pathways into college through
dual enrollment programs and a summer bridge academy, 3) implementation of a new
program in Mechanical Engineering Design Technology, 4) enhanced student support
services, and 5) opportunities for financial support through internships,
including an innovative micro-enterprise program in collaboration with local
industry. The project is leveraging collaborative relationships with schools,
non-profit organizations and industry in the St. Louis region and using well-
established practices to increase engineering degree attainment. In addition to
serving local workforce and educational needs, the program is serving students
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds, including first-generation college
students and groups underrepresented in engineering and other STEM fields.