* 1160046
* Senior Design Program on Assistive Technology to Aid Visually Impaired People
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Zhigang Zhu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 08/31/2017
* USD 124,998.00

PI: Xiao, Jixhong&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1160046&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to create a two-semester joint senior design
program on assistive technology for CCNY undergraduate seniors in electrical
engineering (EE), computer science (CS), and computer engineering (CpE),
providing them with major engineering design opportunities to experience real-
world entrepreneurial challenges. The proposal seeks funding for 6 senior design
projects per year for a period of 5 years. The proposed senior design program
builds on our existing capstone design course structure, but with a new
concentration on assistive technology for visually impaired people. It will also
fully utilize the opportunities provided by the CCNY Entrepreneurship program.
In the first semester of the year-long senior design program, the course
instructor will offer general lectures on project management which will
introduce Total Design methodology, market analysis, IP issues,
entrepreneurship, etc. In parallel, the PIs will offer technical lectures to
introduce state-of-the-art of assistive technology and empower students with
necessary technical skills to perform design. Under the guidance of the PIs, the
students will work in teams in a multidisciplinary environment to analyze the
real needs of blind/visually impaired people, propose design concept and custom
design assistive devices throughout the year to directly help the blind users.
In addition, the student teams are encouraged to attend the seminars offered by
CCNY entrepreneurship program and to compete for the Kaylie Prize for
Entrepreneurship. The winning teams will receive additional financial support
and on-campus housing to work over summers to turn their ideas into successful
business start-ups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: Leveraging Prof.
Xiao's expertise in robotic navigation and Prof. Zhu's expertise in computer
vision and scene understanding, the two PIs have been working on the development
of human centric assistive navigation systems for the blind people to achieve
independent travel in unfamiliar environments. The senior design program creates
a great opportunity for students to work on the latest technology and custom
design assistive devices and software tools to aid visually impaired people
using multimodal sensing techniques and simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) methods. The pieces of work produced in the senior design projects will
directly help the blind people, and when put together, will constitute a more
sophisticated assistive navigation system which will outperform the existing
travel aids in the market. The senior design program provides an ideal platform
to involve students from multiple disciplines (EE, CS, CpE) in transformative
research to contribute their knowledge and skills learned from their 4-year
undergraduate training in circuit design, computer programming and human-
computer interaction. This cross-disciplinary design experience on assistive
devices will prepare the students to be competent in their engineering careers.
The students will be guided by the PIs to exercise Total Design practice in
every stages of the design effort: user needs and market analysis, product
design specification, design ideas, detail design, prototyping, usability
testing, and business planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The
research results and assistive device prototypes produced in the senior design
projects have great potential for commercialization, which will directly benefit
blind/visually impaired people and assist them to access unfamiliar
environments. The team will work closely with the New York State Commission for
the Blind and Visually Handicapped (CBVH) next door to City College on usability
testing. The senior design program on assistive technology inspires innovation
and supports the training of the future work force from our traditionally under-
represented students at CCNY (1/3 Black, 1/3 Hispanic, many women, as well as
disabled students) to meet the critical national need for smart healthcare that
promoting the wellbeing for all. The results produced in the senior projects
will be disseminated through technical publications, outreach to the visual-aid
communities (CCVIP, CBVH, etc.), and design studio wiki pages.