* 1160633
* Banach Spaces: Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Thomas Schlumprecht, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 04/30/2016
* USD 216,133.00

Banach spaces, their geometric and topological structure, provide a natural
framework for studying dynamical systems, differential equations, physics, and
signal analysis. A main theme of this proposal is the investigation of certain
"coordinate systems" for Banach spaces, e.g. bases, frames, and dictionaries.
One of the problems considered is an old one from harmonic analysis, which asks
whether the space of p-integrable functions on the real line has a basis formed
by translates of the same element. It is intended to attack this problem with
tools from the theory of Banach spaces. Another prominent problem is the
embedding of Banach spaces into Banach spaces with an additional structure, for
example into Banach spaces with very few operators. The principal investigator
intends to bring to bear here the method of infinite asymptotic games, which he
developed in collaboration with E. Odell. A particularly important problem,
especially in the context of the famous invariant subspace problem, is the
question whether there are reflexive spaces with very few operators.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator intends to work on longstanding problems
in the structure theory of Banach spaces, many of them either originating from,
or being related to other area of mathematics such as applied areas like signal
processing and data compression or rather theroretical areas like set theory,
harmonic analysis, and approximation theory. The techniques to be employed will
involve a combination of analysis, geometry, infinite combinatorics, and logic.
The proposed work could also spur further development in these latter areas.
Several parts of this proposal deal with issues originating in signal processing
and data compression. Here one looks for bases, frames, or, more generally
dictionaries of spaces, in which (certain) vectors can be approximated by
vectors with few non zero coordinates, using easily implementable algorithms, so
that the representation satisfies certain stability conditions. Recent work on
band limited functions by the investigator generated an interesting and
potentially fruitful line of investigation in the interface between convex
geometry and harmonic analysis.