* 1160843
* Metamorphic Antimonides for Infrared Photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2016
* Leon Shterengas, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 11/30/2016
* USD 455,289.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The goal of this project is to develop
the epitaxial technology to grow metamorphic antimonide-based materials and
study their structural, optical and electrical properties. The fundamental
absorption edge of these semiconductors can vary within a wide spectral range
from near to far infrared. Currently the full technological potential of
antimonide-based semiconductors cannot be utilized since the direct growth of
epitaxial layers is limited by the availability of the binary substrates. The
large lattice mismatch between the epitaxial layers and substrate leads to high
densities of crystalline defects. The approach of compositionally graded buffer
layers can address this issue based on understanding of the dislocation
formation and dislocation motion in soft antimonide materials. The critical
factor is strain relief in the compositionally graded buffer layer confining the
network of misfit dislocations in the transitional region near the substrate.
The lattice constant becomes truly a design parameter unveiling fundamental
advantages offered by antimonide semiconductors. The experimental studies of the
optical and electrical properties of narrow bandgap bulk materials and
heterostructures grown on top of metamorphic buffers are necessary to develop
the fundamental knowledge of the properties of this new class of semiconductors.
&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description: Antimonide-based narrow bandgap
semiconductors are important materials for development of the efficient photonic
and electronic devices which are suitable for a variety of industrial and
military applications. The potential of this class of semiconductors can be
fully utilized when the lattice constant of the device heterostructure becomes
one of the design parameters. The projected studies are directly related to the
problem of integration of electronics and photonics devices. The societal impact
of the research is amplified by outreach activities. Undergraduate and graduate
students working on development and implementation of various optical sensors
will be able to utilize novel materials with rare optical and electrical
properties for their original designs.