* 1160264
* Inclusive Excellence to Bolster Diversity: A System of Capacity-Building Pathways To and Through Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jacquelyn Sullivan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 535,510.00

This engineering education research project seeks to further explore the results
from a pilot project that indicated that students who come to college under-
prepared academically but who develop an engineering professional identity early
in the curriculum perform better and are more likely to be retained. By
understanding the role of identity on retention and academic success, more
effective curricula can be created. A second aspect of the study is to examine,
using the national MIDFIELD data set, the potential pool of students from under-
represented groups, who can benefit from similar programs, and how identifying
such students can expand the pool of qualified students to draw from.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and importance of this project
arises from the potential to dramatically increase the pool of students who have
the ability to succeed in undergraduate engineering programs. If the project
succeeds in verifying the hypothesis that there is a large pool of students from
under-represented groups capable of success, this can significantly increase the
STEM pipeline for these groups, and address pressing workforce issues. This
project overlaps with NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers
through preparation of an engineering workforce with new capabilities and
expertise. Additionally NSF's goal of innovating for society is enabled by
creating results and research that are useful for society by informing
educational policy and practices.