* 1160502
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Internet, Race, and Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Richard Lau, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 04/30/2014
* USD 10,950.00

This study examines whether Internet use improves the diffusion of political
information among minorities, and if Internet use translates into more political
participation by members of marginalized groups. Research has shown that the web
enables individuals to engage with information selectively. Selective engagement
occurs when individuals retrieve news that speaks their political preferences,
and ignore information that clashes with already existing opinions. Using panel
survey data and an experimental design, the study examines whether the same
underlying mechanism that allows citizens to sort themselves into highly
partisan information worlds online (via selective exposure to information) also
enables members of historically disadvantaged groups to efficiently access
information that pertains specifically to them and to their groups' political
goals. Moreover, the project addresses whether selective exposure to online news
could provide political knowledge gains among minority populations that may
translate into better representation by the political system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is associated with
its three main objectives: (1) to examine how partisanship, ideology, race and
ethnicity, as well as group consciousness, influence selective exposure to
political information online; (2) to research how selective exposure affects the
quality, quantity and strength of political attitudes; (3) to test the impact of
selective exposure on political participation and the quality of vote choice.
The project employs a multi-method approach to address these objectives. In the
first and completed phase of the research, panel data were analyzed to test the
role of race/ethnicity in moderating the effects of online news consumption and
subsequent attitude change using generalized linear mixed models. Phase II of
the research will add an experiment to test what news African-American,
Caucasian and Latino subjects select when they are exposed to different
information environments, and how news selection impacts the quality, quantity
and strength of political attitudes, as well as various forms of participation.
The experiment tracks what news sources subjects select, how much time they
spend with each news source, how much information they recall, and how news
selection impacts opinion and the quality of their
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this research are related
to representation and citizenship. Access to information is a critical
prerequisite for the realization of full citizenship, and marginalized groups
have historically been served poorly by mainstream media. Minorities may
therefore stand to gain the most from the vast information found on the web. By
examining the role of ethnicity, race and partisanship in the selection of
information, and by researching the subsequent development of political
knowledge and attitudes, as well as political participation, this research
speaks to scholarship in political communications, political psychology, and
race and politics. The data generated in this experiment will also be made
available to other researchers. The data and findings will be of interest to
scholars who are researching information, participation and representation.