* 1160916
* Retrospective Cost Adaptive Control of Nonlinear Systems Using Ersatz Nonlinear Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Dennis Bernstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2016
* USD 250,001.00

The goal of this project is to investigate adaptive control techniques for
nonlinear systems under minimal modeling information. The basis of this work is
retrospective cost adaptive control (RCAC), which is applicable to linear
systems under extremely limited modeling information. The goal is to extend this
approach to nonlinear systems. A prototypical case is a linear system preceded
by an uncertain input nonlinearity, such as a deadzone or saturation. The novel
component of this project is the use of ersatz nonlinear models, which capture
key features of the otherwise uncertain nonlinearity in order to ensure correct
adaptation. For example, the only reliable information about the true
nonlinearity may be its monotonicity, that is, intervals within which it is
increasing or decreasing. The ersatz nonlinearity then captures this behavior,
but may be otherwise incorrect in all other details. The research goal is thus
to determine the features of the nonlinearities whose knowledge is essential to
RCAC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control systems that affect humans must be extremely
reliable since their failure can endanger lives and property. Unfortunately,
control systems are often unable to operate under emergency conditions, which
is, ironically, the times when they are often most needed. Humans control
vehicles and machines without using computers, but rather by learning from
experience as the system operates. Our goal is thus to extend this ability to
computers, which lack the intuition about the real world that humans possess.
The ability of computers to adaptively control a vehicle or machine will
increase the reliability of the control system, which may be crucial in an
emergency situation, such as when an automobile brakes on an icy road or an
airplane experiences a failure. An additional benefit of this research is the
reduced time and cost needed to implement reliable control systems.