* 1160639
* Language Preservation 2.0: Crowdsourcing Oral Language Documentation using Mobile Devices
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Steven Bird, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 12/31/2014
* USD 101,501.00

Language Preservation 2.0&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this pilot project
is to demonstrate the feasibility of a new approach to documenting endangered
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To allow wide-ranging investigation of a
language even after it is no longer spoken, we need the equivalent of the
million words of extant biblical Hebrew texts, or the five million words of
extant classical Latin. But for endangered languages without a significant
culture of literacy, diverse text collections on this scale seem out of reach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given typical speaking rates of about 10,000 word-
equivalents per hour, a hundred hours of recorded speech -- conversations,
narratives, or oral histories -- would give us the equivalent of a million words
of text. With community involvement, hundreds of hours of such recordings are
easily within reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However, transcribing such large audio
collections is a daunting task, given the small number of literate native
speakers and the time-consuming nature of such transcription, which can take 200
hours of work for every hour of audio. We propose to solve this problem by
substituting re-speaking and verbal translation: one or more native speakers
repeats each phrase of a recording, speaking slowly and carefully, and then
translates it into a better-documented language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
utility of translated passages as a way to analyze otherwise-unknown languages
has been demonstrated many times, starting with the Rosetta Stone. This aspect
of our task is easier, since at least a grammatical sketch will in general be
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our goal in this project is to demonstrate the
utility of re-speaking. We believe that linguists, starting out with relatively
little knowledge of a language, can produce phonetic transcriptions that will be
good enough to support subsequent analysis resulting in coherent texts, in a
process analogous to (but easier than) the process that allowed previous
generations of scholars to learn to read ancient Egyptian or Sumerian.