* 1160040
* Surface-level investigations of adsorbate-adsorbate interactions on thiolate-modified surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,01/31/2017
* Will Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2017
* USD 314,519.00

The objective of designing catalyst sites to achieve high selectivity to desired
products is one of the central goals of current research in heterogeneous
catalysis. This objective can be particularly challenging in reactions of
molecules which possess multiple functional groups, and where each functional
group can interact with the catalytic surface and undergo reaction. A good
example is the conversion of biomass to fuels and chemicals. Biomass-derived
carbohydrates and lipids are highly oxygenated compounds that generally contain
multiple functional groups (e.g., alcohols, carboxylic acids, esters, olefins,
ethers, aldehydes, and ketones) on each molecule. The ability to selectively
drive a specific reaction of a single functional group in such molecules is
important, particularly for generating high value coproducts to fuels.
Unfortunately, achieving this high selectivity on conventional supported metal
catalysts is greatly complicated, as all of the key functional groups can adsorb
and react on the Pt-group metals in many catalysts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor J. William Medlin at the University of Colorado
at Boulder proposes a different approach. He seeks to design novel catalysts for
high selectivity with biological catalysts (enzymes) in mind. Enzyme catalysts
exploit non-covalent interactions within binding pockets to control chemical
transformations, resulting in unsurpassed selectivity, even with multifunctional
reactant molecules. One approach therefore for improving the selectivity of
metal surfaces is to create a near-surface environment (NSE) that fosters
selective interactions of reagents with surfaces, mimicing an enzyme pocket.
These NSEs can be created through attachment of organic ligands to the surface.
Variations on this concept have been used in generating chiral binding pockets
on Pt-group surfaces in other research. These efforts to modify catalytic
surfaces sought to exploit interaction between reactants and isolated
covalently-attached surface ligands. The PI proposes to use well-organized
molecular surface layers to create uniform and/or stratified NSEs, much like in
biomembranes. Medlin has proven the concept with highly selective Pd catalysts
involving the deposition of n-alkanethiol self-assembled monolayer (SAM)
coatings with dramatic improvement of the selectivity (11 to 94%) of
1-epoxybutane formation from hydrogenation of 1-epoxy-3-butene.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medlin's proposal extends the investigation of how
interactions between adsorbates and other molecules in the NSE alter the
reactivity of metal surfaces, with the hypothesis being that by controlling
interactions between adsorbates and the NSE, it is possible to control the
adsorption geometry and subsequent reactivity of important reagents. To control
the NSE, deposition on metal surfaces of organic thiol SAMs selected from a rich
catalog of molecules and chemistries will be employed. Many possible
demonstration reactions will be considered to evaluate the
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PhD student conducting the research will
benefit from a proposed international research component including beam time at
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich. Undergraduate students will
conduct independent research on small-scale projects that build on the research
of PhD student. Outreach activities will be organized through existing programs
in which Medlin is active, including those promoted by the Renewable Energy
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center, the Colorado Center for
Biorefining and Biofuels, and the Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute.