* 1160699
* US-Korea Workshop: International Cooperation in Particle, Nuclear and Astrophysics Research
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Chueng-Ryong Ji, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 02/28/2013
* USD 29,232.00

We propose to hold a US-Korea joint workshop on Particle, Nuclear and
Astrophysics Research in Seoul, Korea on April 16-17, 2012. This workshop will
immediately precede the Korean Physical Society (KPS) Spring meeting. This
workshop would bring together over 40 leading researchers, postdocs and graduate
students in particle physics, nuclear physics and astrophysics from across the
U.S. and Korea. It would provide an opportunity for these communities to
initiate long-term collaborations regarding the Korean plan to construct a heavy
ion accelerator, KoRIA (Korea Rare Isotope Accelerator) and a Basic Science
Institute (BSI) as part of the International Science &amp; Business Belt
(ISBB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will serve as a timely event to bring
together U.S. and Korean researchers from academia, laboratories, and industries
for discussion of future collaborations in Particle, Nuclear and Astrophysics
research. It can help develop a near and long-term plan for KoRIA to serve as a
world-class facility that would benefit scientists world-wide. Participating
graduate students and post-docs will benefit from exposure to internationally
recognized leaders in the field, which will help their career development. The
resulting collaborations would involve students in both countries and promote
their active exchanges. Other areas such as medical imaging and radiation
detection technology will undoubtedly benefit from advancement in the
accelerator and detector development. Under-represented groups such as women in
science will be actively involved in this workshop.