* 1160391
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Dynamics of Radicalization and De-radicalization in Egypt and Indonesia
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2012,10/31/2013
* Ioana Matesan, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 10/31/2013
* USD 11,825.00

This project seeks to understand the dynamics of radicalization and de-
radicalization of Islamist movements, and to offer a nuanced analysis that can
answer why violence is legitimized in some contexts and denounced or abandoned
in others. The central question that drives this study is: why do some Islamist
opposition groups remain non-violent, whereas others adopt violence when
confronted with similar pressures? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This question will be
answered by analyzing four groups: the Muslim Brotherhood (Egypt), the Gama'a
Islamiyya (Egypt), the Nahdlatul Ulama (Indonesia) and the Jama'a Islamiyya
(Indonesia). The Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood and the Nahdlatul Ulama are both
crucial cases to examine in-depth on their on terms, and excellent cases for a
structured focused comparison of why Islamist groups react differently in
response to similar state and international constraints. The Egyptian Gama'a
Islamiyya and the Indonesian Jama'a offer relevant comparisons to their national
counterparts and to each other, facilitating a better understanding of why
groups adopt different strategies in the same national context, and why some
processes of de-radicalization succeed whereas others
fail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon work already conducted, this project
will pursue archival research in Cairo and Jakarta and individual interviews
with experts and members of the Islamist groups. These sources can provide
essential yet otherwise unavailable information about organizational decision-
making processes and governmental policies towards Islamist groups. These pieces
of data are necessary in order to accurately trace the process of organizational
change and examine how domestic, international and organizational factors
interact to spur the adoption of either violent or non-violent
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is
connected with its deep assessment of Islamist groups through a direct
investigation of four important groups. The research will provide the first
systematic cross-regional analysis of both radicalization and de-radicalization
of Islamist groups. Methodologically, this study will bring a unique
contribution to the study of Islamist movements by combining process-tracing and
structured focused comparisons to explore not only why particular tactics are
adopted, but also why the outcomes we expect don't always occur. This project
will also open new lines of inquiry in the field of terrorism studies, by
shifting the focus away from solely examining violent outcomes and offering new
ways to examine the causes of organizational, tactical, and ideological change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts are especially connected to
its importance for policy-makers. As an increasing number of Islamist groups are
vying for power in the Muslim world, understanding what factors influence their
choice of strategies and why their beliefs change is crucial for both American
foreign policy in general and for devising policies that promote nonviolence in
particular. The project will offer a more in-depth understanding of Islamist
groups as both religious and strategic actors, and will contribute towards a
better understanding of political Islam in its various manifestations.