* 1160130
* Biomechanical Rehabilitation Engineering Advancement in Kansas (BREAK)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Kenneth Fischer, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 125,000.00

PI: Fischer, Kenneth J.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1160130&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary: Biomechanical Rehabilitation
Engineering Advancement in Kansas &lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
Biomechanical Rehabilitation Engineering Advancement in Kansas (BREAK) program
is to give Kansans with disabilities a BREAK and offer custom devices to improve
their quality of life. Additional objectives are to educate students about the
needs of those with disabilities, and offer them a real world, service learning,
design experience to address those needs. Projects will focus on rehabilitation
technology, assistive devices and recreational opportunities within with the
engineering Capstone Design experience. Each year we expect to facilitate 3-5
rehabilitation engineering design projects as part of the BREAK program
&lt;br/&gt;The BREAK program will be a multidisciplinary collaboration between
engineering capstone programs in three departments at KU and a consortium of
community organizations that will help identify and propose projects. The
program will provide custom equipment to benefit organization rehabilitation
programs (and their many clients) or to meet the needs of individuals. While
projects will often address the needs of individuals, the design process will
include universal design, whenever possible, so that developments are more
likely to be commercialized. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit Summary: BREAK
program will contribute towards discovery and innovation in rehabilitation and
assistive devices of a broad nature, and will lead to advancement in fundamental
engineering knowledge in some cases. The program will also serve as a model for
multidisciplinary engineering education while inspiring and training students in
the engineering of designs for assistive and rehabilitation technology. Each
student project addressed a unique need for technology, and seeks to meet that
need (which is not satisfied by existing commercial products). In the process of
conducting the research, design, fabrication and testing work, students develop
a variety of skills, including technical, project management, and communication
skills. They will gain experience interfacing with clinical personnel and their
client throughout the semester. Invention disclosure will be required of all
projects funded through the program. All students will be required to attend
symposia on commercialization, including topic such as licensing vs.
entrepreneurship, business planning, and marketing. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
Summary: The BREAK program will provide visibility KU engineering students of
the needs of people living with disabilities. Even those students who do not
choose to participate in the BREAK program will be exposed to the concepts and
needs of those with disabilities. Students should receive great satisfaction at
having immediately met a need in someone's life, as well as creating technology
which may be commercialized. We expect the BREAK program will encourage students
to consider employment in rehabilitation engineering. &lt;br/&gt;Promotion of
the BREAK program to prospective high school students may help increase
participation in STEM disciplines. Recruiters can promote the BREAK program
webpage, especially for women (who historically gravitated to bioengineering
applications) and minorities. &lt;br/&gt;We are certain the BREAK program will
increase the quality of capstone design experiences. The project also will help
students build their multidisciplinary teamwork skills, as they work among
engineering students from different engineering disciplines. Some students will
also have the opportunity and learning experience of presenting their design at
a national conference. &lt;br/&gt;Not the least of the broader impacts is that
individuals in Kansas will be served by providing needed technology to improve
their quality of life! Further, we expect many of these innovations will be
marketable and commercializable, thus benefiting thousands more individuals and
providing an enduring benefit to society. If possible, commercialization may
include new start-up businesses in Kansas, thus stimulating the Kansas economy.