* 1160053
* Fundamental processes influencing environmentally benign aqueous microemulsion-based methods for bio-oil extraction
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Tohren Kibbey, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 09/30/2016
* USD 261,242.00

CBET 1160053&lt;br/&gt;Sabatini&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vegetable oil
extraction industry is the primary contributor of volatile organic compound
emissions in the food industry. The annual hexane loss in the soybean oil
extraction process alone in the US could be as high as 210 - 430 million liters.
There are growing health concerns and increased environmental regulations
regarding the use of hexane in vegetable oil extraction. Exposure to hexane at
15 ppm/day for three months has been shown to cause peripheral nerve damage, and
hexane is also a potential hazardous explosive material. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) established regulations on hexane emission due to
growing environmental concerns. There is a pressing need for more sustainable
extraction method as an alternative to hexane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this research is to identify the fundamental processes that will allow
us to develop a robust surfactant-based bio-oil extraction process, including a
fundamentally-based model for design of microemulsion extraction processes for a
range of bio-oils. &lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here would, for the first time,
provide a quantitative understanding of fundamental processes influencing the
bio-oil extraction by the aqueous surfactant-based method, and further would
provide a new quantitative model which can be used for making a priori
predictions of extraction performance under realistic conditions. The resulting
model could be used to design surfactant-based extraction systems for a wide
range of plants and oilseeds, which is not available at present. The results of
this work have the potential to be transformative, in that they will
significantly advance the way in which bio-oils are extracted, resulting in an
industry-wide replacement of environmentally-hazardous solvent-based methods
with more environmentally-benign aqueous surfactant-based methods. Aqueous
processing of oilseed extraction is preferred over hexane because it is
environmentally friendly, safe and produces oil with superior quality. While
enzyme-based extraction of soybean oil can achieve greater than 90% oil
extraction efficiency, the enzyme-assisted extraction process requires long
incubation time, high temperature and produces stable emulsions, which are not
desirable in industrial scale. To address these challenges, this project will
utilize bio-compatible extended-surfactant systems to achieve high oil
extraction efficiency while avoiding stable emulsion formation. The work will
then be extended to test micro-algae oil extraction to validate the versatility
of the surfactant-assisted aqueous extraction method and process model. This
project will study the mixture of a branched surfactant with a novel
extendedsurfactant (surfactants with an intermediate polarity groups inserted
between the head and the tail of the surfactant molecule). Extended-surfactants
consistently showed ultralow interfacial tension with a wide range of vegetable
oils, but they require very high salt concentration to achieve optimum
performance. By mixing extended-surfactants with a hydrophobic and branched
surfactant, the requires salinity will be reduced while the branching will
decrease the surfactant tail-tail interaction, allowing better oil penetration,
thereby improving the extraction efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results
of this innovative research potentially benefit to the society, as well as
education initiatives designed to enhance the learning experience of
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Oklahoma. The new
application of surfactant in oilseed extraction and understanding the
fundamental science of this approach will be integrated into a colloids and
surface science course at the University of Oklahoma, which has attracted a
number of undergraduate and graduate students from multi engineering disciplines
(i.e. chemical engineer, chemistry, environmental engineer and science). In
addition, the developed aqueous surfactantbased oil extraction prediction model
resulting from this research will be submitted to the K-Gray Engineering Pathway
Digital Library, allowing course shareware among universities. The developed
model will provide an interactive educational module where students can explore
the fundamental mechanisms involved in oilseed extraction as well as applying
the model in advanced chemical process design.