* 1160504
* NSF Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Translational Applications of Nanoscale Multiferroic Systems TANMS
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2023
* Jane Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2023
* USD 37,454,541.00

NSF Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Translational Applications
ofNanoscale&lt;br/&gt;Multiferroic Systems (T ANMS),&lt;br/&gt;Greg P.
Carman,&lt;br/&gt;University of California Los Angeles (Lead), University of
California Berkeley, Cornell&lt;br/&gt;University, California State University
Northridge, and ETH Zurich Switzerland
(Foreign)&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Translational Applications of
Nanoscale Multiferroic Systems (TANMS) has three primary goals. The first goal
is to transition the unique discoveries that the TANMS team has made on
nanoscale multiferroic materials, i.e. control of magnetic spin structures with
electric fields, into three applications: memory devices, miniaturized antenna
systems, and nanoscale motors. The second goal is to uncover fundamentally new
understandings of the physics governing the unique intrinsic coupling present in
multiferroic materials at the nanoscale. This is accomplished through a
combination of novel multi-scale modeling efforts and innovative multiferroic
material development/testing processes. The third major goal is to develop an
inclusive educational environment to guide the next generation of engineers
through engineering research, project management, and entrepreneurial endeavors.
The first two goals address a barrier that prevents further miniaturization of
electronic devices. Eliminating this barrier has a significant impact on our
society's reliance on conventional magnetic generation systems that are
intrinsically energy inefficient in the small scale. TANMS premise is that
electric field induced magnetic spin reorientation present in nanoscale
multiferroics overcomes this efficiency problem and produces a wide range of
miniaturization opportunities previously considered implausible. For the third
goal, T ANMS focuses on transforming the engineering educational system by
integrating students and teachers at all levels to promote diversity,
participate in transitional research, and engender the notion that engineering
and business careers are closely intertwined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: For the last several decades engineering has made significant progress
toward miniaturizing electromagnetic devices, e.g. cell phones, computers, and
wireless communication devices. However, the field is quickly reaching an
impasse to further miniaturization mainly due to a reliance on inefficient
electrical currents to produce and control magnetism in the small scale. TANMS
seeks to establish a radically different approach relying on intrinsic magnetic
property manipulation, i.e. magnetic spin reorientation, in a multiferroic. If
properly designed, this magnetoelectric coupling is extremely large in the small
scale where exchange coupling tightly binds adjacent atomic level spins creating
single magnetic domains. The introduction of this new approach into applications
for electromagnetic control provides a revolutionary advancement dramatically
different from inefficient current based methods used in a wide range of
electromagnetic devices including memory, antennas, and
motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: A major goal of the Center is to
construct an environment which provides an educational pathway from cradle to
career by relying on the unique I 0-year time horizon provided by an ERC. This
is achieved through two synergistic programs, one during the academic school
year and the other during the summer months, to introduce k-12 apd undergraduate
students to engineering research and business opportunities throughout their
educational career. Major consideration is also given to developing a
heterogeneous workforce, representative of the national population, to overcome
historical paradigms in engineering that limit diversity. T ANMS members
strongly believe that students with diverse backgrounds have not been adequately
educated regarding the benefits of being an engineer. While our society
continues to glorify athletes and celebrities, the wealth of fulfilling
opportunities available to engineers is not sufficiently articulated. TANMS
strives to achieve this by establishing a new approach intertwining engineering
research with business entrepreneurial endeavors.