* 1160666
* Collaborative Research:  Aftershock Imaging with Dense Arrays (AIDA) for the August 23, 2011, Mw 5.8, Virginia earthquake aftershock sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* John Hole, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2012
* USD 23,310.00

This RAPID supports post-seismic deployment of novel high density seismic arrays
using&lt;br/&gt;instruments from the Earthscope Flexible Array provided by
IRIS/PASSCAL to investigate the&lt;br/&gt;Mw 5.8 Virginia earthquake of August
23, 2011. This event had a NE-striking reverse faulting
focal&lt;br/&gt;mechanism, a hypocentral depth of 6 km (USGS), and occurred in a
previously recognized seismic&lt;br/&gt;region known as the ?Central Virginia
Seismic Zone?. This event passes with ca. 15 km of a NW-SE&lt;br/&gt;oriented
deep seismic reflection profile contracted in 1981 by the USGS, providing a rare
opportunity&lt;br/&gt;to link seismicity to deep structure in the eastern U.S.
The preliminary hypocentral estimate suggests&lt;br/&gt;that the earthquake
occurred within a complex zone of east-dipping reflections that define
an&lt;br/&gt;imbricated Paleozoic thrust sheet of the central Appalachian
Piedmont that is underlain by Grenville&lt;br/&gt;basement at a depth of ca. 9
km.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By merging the technologies of earthquake location with
high resolution structural imaging, this experiment seeks to demonstrate how
aftershocks can be exploited by both passive and active seismic techniques to
identify seismogenic structures at depth as well as energy propagation
characteristics for a region where both types of information are either rare or
non-existent. The recording experiment constitutes a prototype for imaging
earthquake processes and associated structures with unprecedented resolution by
exploiting a new generation recording technologies. If the data proves as rich
as expected, this experiment may well establish a new protocol for future
aftershocks studies.