* 1160966
* A Fundamental Study of Flow Processes in High-Pressure Torsion
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Terence Langdon, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processing of metals through the
application of severe plastic deformation provides an opportunity for achieving
exceptional grain refinement. In high-pressure torsion (HPT), where a disk is
subjected to a pressure and concurrent torsional straining, it is often feasible
to reduce the grain size of a metallic alloy to the nanometer range (&lt;100
nm). These ultrafine-grained materials exhibit very high strength and a
potential for use in superplastic forming processes. Experiments will be
conducted to address four major issues in HPT processing. First, experimental
parameters that are needed to achieve a fully homogeneous microstructure using
HPT will be evaluated. Second, both experimental and theoretical factors that
determine the equilibrium grain sizes achieved in HPT will be investigated.
Third, the origin of unusual flow patterns, including the presence of swirls and
vortices, that have been reported in materials processed by HPT will be
investigated. Fourth, HPT will be combined with a surface mechanical attrition
treatment (SMAT) to evaluate the opportunity for producing hardened disks that
will have considerable use in industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grain size of a polycrystalline metal
is a critical parameter because it determines fundamental properties such as
strength and flow characteristics. The processing of metals by high-pressure
torsion (HPT) is a relatively new procedure that provides an opportunity for
producing bulk metals with extremely small grain sizes. These metals have a very
high strength and also exhibit other attractive properties such as excellent
formability and good wear resistance. The proposed research is designed to
investigate some of the fundamental properties of the HPT processing technique
with the objective of optimizing the technique so that it can be used to produce
materials of interest for industrial applications. The research group will
contain one post-doctoral fellow and at least one student, and they will have an
opportunity to participate in a major and important research activity. We will
also collaborate with several international groups in Japan, Brazil and Europe,
and this will provide the students with an international experience.