* 1160202
* Methods for Detecting Nucleic Acid Hybridization Using Liquid Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Ryan Gill, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 03/31/2016
* USD 340,000.00

CBET-1160202&lt;br/&gt;Schwartz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of
this project involve the development of methods where liquid
crystals&lt;br/&gt;(LC) are used to detect nucleic acid hybridization. Also, to
obtain an improved understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the fundamental molecular-level
mechanisms by which the interfacial interactions of nucleic&lt;br/&gt;acids
affect LC orientation. The ultimate long-term goal of this research is to enable
LC-based&lt;br/&gt;detection in medical diagnostic applications, e.g.
multiplexed methods (i.e. DNA microarrays)&lt;br/&gt;based on the orientational
response of LCs to DNA hybridization, that use the transmission
of&lt;br/&gt;polarized light to detect the LC response.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;Two distinct approaches will be developed, and so the specific
aims and research strategies of&lt;br/&gt;this project fall into two groups. The
first approach involves a dynamic change of the LC polar tilt&lt;br/&gt;angle at
the LC/aqueous interface in the presence of a monolayer of cationic surfactant,
and the&lt;br/&gt;specific aims associated with this approach include the
development of a multiplexed platform,&lt;br/&gt;quantitative studies of
sensitivity and target generality, the development of
fluorescence&lt;br/&gt;microscopy methods that can be used to study the
LC/aqueous interface, and the application of&lt;br/&gt;these methods to
understand the molecular mechanisms of LC response to DNA
hybridization.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this method will be directly validated by
experiments that will discriminate between&lt;br/&gt;closely-related bacterial
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;The second approach involves a characteristic chiral
rotation of the azimuthal orientation of&lt;br/&gt;planar-anchored LC when the
LC is in contact with extended dsDNA. The associated specific&lt;br/&gt;aims
include quantitative studies of the macroscopic optical response, extension of
the method&lt;br/&gt;to the detection of single hybridized molecules,
development of methods that enable multiplexed&lt;br/&gt;detection using
covalently immobilized probes, and mechanistic studies aimed at
understanding&lt;br/&gt;the distinctive LC response to ssDNA and dsDNA. Similar
validation experiments (i.e.&lt;br/&gt;discrimination between related bacteria)
will be pursued for this method as for the first method.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed here have the long-term potential to be
used in new medical diagnostic&lt;br/&gt;technologies that are appropriate for
point-of-use applications including those in low
resource&lt;br/&gt;environments. Furthermore, the fundamental understandings
obtained about LC-biomolecule&lt;br/&gt;interactions will be broadly useful for
researchers pursuing LC-based biosensing approaches.&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the
optical characterization methods developed will be of use for studies of
the&lt;br/&gt;LC-liquid interface and for other liquid-liquid
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;The researchers involved in this project will gain
expertise in multidisciplinary areas projected to&lt;br/&gt;be at the forefront
of science and technology in the coming decades, including liquid
crystal&lt;br/&gt;devices, biodetection, single-molecule microscopy, and self-
assembled molecular systems.&lt;br/&gt;Also, through their participation in a
variety of educational and outreach programs (e.g. REU,&lt;br/&gt;RET, GAANN,
CU-Discovery Learning Center, Materials Science from CU K-12
outreach,&lt;br/&gt;Colorado High School Honors Institute), the researchers will
continue to share this project with&lt;br/&gt;students, teachers, and other
community members. As summarized in the proposal the PI and&lt;br/&gt;previous
students and post-docs involved in this project have demonstrated a sincere
and&lt;br/&gt;continuing commitment to the creative use of their research in the
pursuit of education and&lt;br/&gt;outreach; the integration of basic discovery
and cutting-edge microscopy methods in this project&lt;br/&gt;will provide an
ideal platform from which to communicate the excitement of research to
the&lt;br/&gt;general public.