* 1160195
* Nucleation and Growth of Thin Films and Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* John Ekerdt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 05/31/2016
* USD 305,407.00

This research program investigates the nucleation and growth of metal
nanoparticles and ultra thin metal films on amorphous substrates. Chemical
growth methods will be studied that include chemical vapor deposition and atomic
layer deposition. The research will focus on measuring the concentration and
elucidating the chemical nature of defect sites on amorphous substrates were
nucleation is initiated or where stable metal clusters are trapped. The program
will probe the chemical nature of inherent defects and defects that are
purposefully generated on the substrates. Fluorescent probe molecules designed
to chemically titrate different proposed defect sites will be used to measure
the concentration of the defects and possibly also their spatial distribution.
The way the different defects affect nucleation and metal adatom trapping will
be established. The research will also explore approaches to inhibit/block the
growth of established metal islands and force a higher nucleation density as a
route to smooth and ultra thin continuous films. The program will involve
ruthenium, cobalt and tungsten metals, and silicon dioxide, aluminum oxide, and
titanium dioxide as the supports. The overall objectives are to understand and
describe the surface chemistry that allows metal nucleation to occur, and to
determine if it is possible to control the growth of particles to maximize the
nucleation density on the oxide substrate. Bonding and reactions at the
substrate surface and at the film interface will be explored. Film composition
and chemical bonding will be followed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and
low energy ion scattering spectroscopy. A full complement of characterization
facilities will be used to study the films, including fluorimetry, atomic force
microscopy, X-ray scattering spectroscopy, and high resolution electron
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Metal films find
applications in sensors, optics and microelectronics, and as the critical
dimensions or size of the applications and systems decrease, the metal films
thickness also must decrease to tens of atomic diameters at most and must have a
specific microstructure. Nanoparticles are used in advanced computer memory
design, catalysis and quantum computing architectures; in all cases, there is a
need to maximize the particle density and uniformity. This research is expected
to develop a general understanding of how metal films and metal nanoparticles
nucleate on amorphous oxide surfaces and initiate island growth. Nucleation and
growth concepts are common to nanoparticles and polycrystalline films. The
nucleation and growth issues explored transcend the material systems selected
for this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This research is
motivated by the central role ultra thin metal films and nanoparticles on
amorphous substrates have in applications such as electrodes, sensors, optics,
thermal barriers, catalysts and diffusion barriers. There is an extensive
literature pointing to the possible role of defects in nucleation and growth,
however, there are few studies on amorphous surfaces that have measured and
characterized the nature of these defects. This program seeks to use chemical
probes designed to titrate the different defects. The fluorescence signal
intensity suggest a sensitivity to 0.001 and possibly 0.0001 monolayers with
these probes. If successful, the probes could be used to explore oxides more
generally. Further this program addresses and seeks to describe the interfacial
and surface reactions that affect the evolution of a film as it transforms from
adsorbed adatoms to nucleated islands to a coalesced, continuous film.