* 1160217
* RUI:  Quantifying Electron Donation in Metal-Support Interactions utilizing CO Adsorption Studies and Hammet Relationships for Catalyzed Organic Transformations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Christopher Pursell, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,000.00

Supported Au catalysts are now well established as extremely active catalysts
for low temperature CO oxidation and a number of other reactions. Further
advances in Au catalysis will require more detailed understanding of the
important factors that govern its high catalytic activity and developing methods
for tuning reaction selectivity. Many of these catalysts are comprised of Au
nanoparticles dispersed on high surface area oxide carriers. The nanoparticles
typically consist of tens to a few hundred atoms to maximize the number of
surface atoms that are accessible to the reacting molecules. Because these
particles are so small, they can be influenced by the underlying support.
Further, although the support may influence the electronic properties of the
nanoparticle, it is not clear how these changes affect the electronic structure
of the transition state(s) for the key step(s) in the catalytic cycle. This
project primarily involves developing new methods and approaches for
characterizing how the underlying support changes the electronic properties of
gold nanoparticles and determining how these electronic changes affect catalytic
behavior.

Professors Bert Chandler and Christopher Pursell at Trinity University, San
Antonio, TX are teaming with Professor Robert Rioux at Pennsylvania State
University to apply a known tool to aid in developing more understanding of this
problem. Hammett studies have long been employed to help understand reaction
mechanisms, and to evaluate charge build-up in the rate determining step. The
Hammett methodology has been applied to several Au catalyzed reactions, and
studies of benzyl alcohol oxidation by Au on different supports have shown
significant differences, suggesting that the degree of charge building up on the
organic fragment may be substantially influenced by the underlying support.
These studies will be correlated with CO adsorption studies and X-ray absorption
spectroscopy studies to characterize changes in the surface electronics as
particle size and supports change. The aim is to provide a complete picture of
how Au catalysts are affected by particle size and support effects.

This RUI proposal will have a substantial impact on undergraduate education at
Trinity University. Funds will be used to support several undergraduate
researchers, who will be integral participants in this study. Further, initial
research opportunities will be targeted to undergraduates early in their
academic careers (1st and 2nd year students). This offers increased
opportunities to capture students from underrepresented groups and capitalize on
their interests in science, and thereby developing important human resources for
our increasingly technical economy. Integrating the Trinity model that focuses
on undergraduate research with a classic graduate experience at Penn State will
provide a unique educational opportunity for all of the participants and will
help to maximize the impact of the research performed by the undergraduates.