* 1160361
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Public and Private Regulatory Interactions: EU Responses to Private Environmental Regulation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Benjamin Cashore, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation project aims to understand how different regulatory
institutions interact. It&lt;br/&gt;will examine the following research
question: "Why has the European Union (EU) responded to&lt;br/&gt;existing
private environmental regulation in different issue areas in diverse regulatory
ways?"&lt;br/&gt;Private environmental regulation in this project refers to
voluntary certification and eco-labeling&lt;br/&gt;programs developed by non-
state actors (industry organizations; firms; non-
governmental&lt;br/&gt;organizations) to induce corporate environmentally
friendly behavior. By examining EU&lt;br/&gt;responses to private regulation in
four issue areas (organic agriculture, biofuels, fisheries, and&lt;br/&gt;fair
trade) this research will explain why in some cases the EU has responded
strongly by&lt;br/&gt;developing its own public certification program, while in
other cases it has decided not to&lt;br/&gt;intervene at all, or only in a very
limited way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining the historical co-evolution of
public policy and private regulation in these issue&lt;br/&gt;areas, and by
analyzing the decision-making processes of the EU's regulatory responses,
this&lt;br/&gt;study will identify the causal mechanisms and processes that can
explain the observed&lt;br/&gt;variation. Through in-depth, semi-structured
interviews I will gather original data from EU&lt;br/&gt;officials and decision-
makers, EU-level and national interest and advocacy
groups,&lt;br/&gt;representatives from private environmental regulatory
programs, issue experts and academics.&lt;br/&gt;These data will be complemented
with data on the decision-making processes, which will be&lt;br/&gt;gathered
during desk research and from notes and documents obtained from
interviewees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation's main intellectual
contribution is its focus on an unexplored dependent&lt;br/&gt;variable, namely
the regulatory responses of public authorities to private
environmental&lt;br/&gt;regulation. This study will contribute to the nascent
research on the interaction between public&lt;br/&gt;and private regulation and
on the role of non-state actors in politics more broadly. Even
though&lt;br/&gt;this dissertation will be limited to environmental issue areas,
it is expected that the conclusions&lt;br/&gt;are generalizable to other issue
areas as well. It is not expected, in other words, that the&lt;br/&gt;particular
characteristics of the environmental issues determine public responses to
private&lt;br/&gt;regulation, but rather that more general factors, such as the
specific features of private&lt;br/&gt;regulatory programs and corporate
involvement in these programs, explain public
authorities'&lt;br/&gt;responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Private actors are
currently using certification and labeling programs to address
environmental&lt;br/&gt;and social problems in an increasingly diverse range of
issue areas. This research will contribute&lt;br/&gt;to generating policy
relevant knowledge on how public authorities can attain a
better&lt;br/&gt;integration of public and private policy instruments.
Furthermore, understanding the way&lt;br/&gt;public policy interacts with
private regulatory programs will generate useful information
for&lt;br/&gt;initiators of such programs regarding their design and
functioning.