* 1160597
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social and Economic Responses to Colonial Entanglements in Iron Age Western Sicily
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2012,12/31/2012
* William Balco, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2012
* USD 3,100.00

Under the direction of Dr. Bettina Arnold, William Balco will explore indigenous
responses to sophisticated colonial contact through an examination of pottery
fragments recovered from nine Late Iron Age (seventh to fourth century BC)
western Sicilian population centers. Western Sicily is particularly important
for the study of social entanglements because it is one of the few locations
where both Greeks and Phoenicians settled in close proximity to each other,
fostering multi-nodal social encounters between locals and foreigners. Such
Greek and Phoenician mercantile posts regularly interacted with the indigenous
Elymi, facilitating complex social entanglements which permanently changed the
Elymi and led to the development of hybrid cultures. This research combines
stylistic analysis with cutting-edge archaeological analyses, such as x-ray
fluorescence (XRF), x-ray diffraction (XRD), and petrography to study the
development and adoption of mixed-style pottery as a component of hybrid
culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs theories and methods
readily applied to contemporary social entanglement studies involving social
transformation as reflected in material culture. Understanding cultural
transformation processes more than two millennia ago remains relevant in parsing
social adaptive strategies in response to contemporary issues of global trade
and interaction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although other studies have attempted to
characterize indigenous Sicilian entanglement, they have often ignored
indigenous developments incorporating foreign lifestyles within local culture.
The project uses stylistic and compositional analyses to answer questions
regarding: 1) the scale of cultural hybridization in western Sicily; 2) the
spread of hybrid items in western Sicily; and 3) identifying the stimuli
responsible for indigenous Elymi cultural hybridization. What makes this
situation unusual is that three and not two cultural entities are involved. This
project builds upon traditional studies of western Sicilian pottery, yet still
represents a unique opportunity to evaluate social and economic changes to
indigenous Elymian communities incorporating local and foreign Greek and
Phoenician material culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research takes advantage
of previously established international research collaborations and will develop
new research initiatives among Italian, Swedish, and American scholars. The
results will contribute to the corpus of scholarly research through publication
in peer-reviewed archaeology journals. Upon degree completion, the project data
will be made available online via Open Access for use by other researchers. The
results of this study will be made public through both conference presentations
and public lectures, stimulating discussion of social entanglements and the
development of hybrid culture. Finally, this research will provide training in
laboratory analysis for undergraduate and graduate students.