* 1160494
* NSF Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Nanomanufacturing Systems for Mobile Computing and Energy Technologies (NASCENT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2023
* Roger Bonnecaze, University of Texas at Austin
* Cooperative Agreement
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2023
* USD 35,600,089.00

Nanomanufacturing Systems for Mobile Computing and Energy Technologies
(NASCENT)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ERC Director: S.V. Sreenivasan &lt;br/&gt;Lead
University: The University of Texas at Austin&lt;br/&gt;Domestic Universities:
University of New Mexico, University of California at Berkeley
&lt;br/&gt;Foreign Universities: Seoul National University, Indian Institute of
Science&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mobile computing revolution is a disruptive
paradigm that has up-ended the computing universe and promises to transform both
the developed and developing worlds. Ubiquitous mobile computing on a global
scale will demand low-cost, low-power computing devices delivering high data
rates and high density data storage, form factor versatility, and access to
long-lasting portable energy sources. The vision of the NASCENT Center is to
establish a research, innovation and education ecosystem that will create the
high-throughput, sustainable, reliable and versatile nanomanufacturing systems
to revolutionize future generations of mobile computing and energy devices. The
overall goals of the Center are to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Invent
nanomanufacturing systems for nanosculpting and for integrating abundantly
available nanomaterials, such as exfoliated silicon, graphene, carbon nanotubes
and organic semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;- Conceptualize and design these
nanomanufacturing systems to address the practical requirements of future
generation mobile computing and energy devices.&lt;br/&gt;- Foster a culture of
innovation that seeks to commercially deploy Center technologies through
industrial practitioner partners and start-up companies.&lt;br/&gt;- Educate
highly skilled and diverse leaders imbued with the Innovator's
DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will focus on five transformative high-
speed nanomanufacturing systems and processes: 1) Nanosculpting; 2) Sustainable
Semiconducting Material Processing; 3) Versatile Manufacturing for Mobile Device
Form Factors; 4) Ink Jet Nanomaterial Deposition; and 5) Inline Nanometrology
for Process Diagnostics and Control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The barriers the
Center will overcome include: (i) lack of machines and processable materials for
high-speed, large-area, low-defectivity nanomanufacturing and for nanometrology;
(ii) absence of device architectures that are tailored to exploit strengths of
promising nanomanufacturing processes; (iii) lack of validated models with
quantified uncertainty to extrapolate prototype system performance to commercial
scale, and reduced order models for real-time diagnostics, and control of
nanomanufacturing systems. The Center will marry advanced nanoscience research
with novel nanomanufacturing systems to overcome these barriers and accelerate
the design, development, and deployment of versatile and innovative mobile
computing devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the proposed
research are the creation of revolutionary manufacturing, devices, materials and
modeling, including: 1) machine system architectures based on nano-precision
mechanics, dynamics and control, in-line optical metrology, and integration of
novel nanomaterials for high-throughput, wafer-scale and roll-to-roll
nanomanufacturing; 2) design and demonstration of multi-bit STT-RAM, THz
transceivers, non-planar cameras and hybrid advanced displays; 3) synthesis and
integration of a wide array of novel nanomaterials and processes, from block co-
polymers for self-aligned memory to exfoliated films of Si nanowires for
flexible and high power density batteries; and 4) creation of predictive multi-
scale computational tools with quantified uncertainty for process modeling,
scale-up and real-time control of large area, high-speed nanomanufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the Center is the
development of critical nanomanufacturing infrastructure for mobile computing
technologies which will impact, on a world-wide scale, all aspects of
healthcare, education, commerce, communications, computing, and lifestyle. These
nanomanufacturing advances will help create sustainable high-paying jobs in the
US and will be supported by innovative human resource development and
entrepreneurship activities. The Center will create a pipeline of diverse
students to enter STEM fields and become creative global nanomanufacturing
leaders through an educational program that emphasizes development of the
Innovator's DNA, strong mentorship, focused technical and entrepreneurial
coursework, interdisciplinary research.