* 1160128
* Fundamental Water and Ion Transport Properties in Polymers for Membrane Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Benny Freeman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2017
* USD 307,357.00

Intellectual Merit: According to the National Academy of Engineering, one of the
?Grand Challenges for Engineering? is providing access to clean water for
mankind.1 The development of energy-efficient methods to provide adequate access
to clean water for a variety of agricultural, industrial and municipal
applications is an urgent and critical problem in many parts of the world.
Polymer membranes play a central role in water purification today, and because
they are often more energy-efficient than conventional technologies, their role
in water purification is increasing. A key challenge in purifying water from
brackish or seawater sources is removal of ions (i.e., desalination). While
reverse osmosis (RO) membranes are widely used for desalination, there are a
plethora of other membrane-based techniques (e.g., forward osmosis,
electrodialysis, reverse electrodialysis, and membrane-assisted capacitive
deionization) that could contribute significantly to water purification and
power generation in the future. However, much remains unknown about even basic
relationships between polymer structure and ion and water transport properties,
and such information is critical for rationally tailoring new membranes for such
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, the experimental research project
will investigate fundamental water and salt transport properties in a variety of
polymers to develop structure-property relationships to assist in designing and
optimizing next generation polymer membranes for water/ion separations. For
desalination membrane materials, one objective of the proposed program will be
to understand how polymer structures can be optimized to simultaneously increase
water permeability while maintaining or decreasing salt permeability. The
project will consider a variety of materials to span a wide polymer structure
spectrum. The influence of polymer charge, backbone rigidity, cross-linking, and
morphology/polymer architecture (e.g., block copolymers) on water and ion
transport properties will be studied. The investigators will also characterize
the impact of mono-/divalent ion concentration on water and ion transport
properties. Results from these studies will provide fundamental
structure/property relations to guide the rational tailoring of polymers for
desalination or other applications, such as those mentioned above.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When possible, experimental results will be compared with
existing models. In this regard, available models, such as free volume theory
(for water and ion diffusion properties) and Donnan equilibrium (for ion
partitioning), will be used in data analysis/interpretation to construct and
validate a systematic, fundamental framework for organizing experimental data
into structure/property correlations that can be used to guide selection of
next-generation structures with more favorable property profiles for a given
application. The proposed research program is well suited for developing
fundamental knowledge and understanding through systematic hypothesis-driven
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed study will include
STEM education programs for pre-K through undergraduate students, and students
from underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate in these
opportunities. For example, The investigators will organize separations modules
to be presented at Science Sundays at the Austin Children?s Museum, which
reaches a broad spectrum of children, including many children of Hispanic
origin. They will also partner with the Texas School for the Deaf to bring
hearing-impaired high school students to their laboratories for after-school and
summer research experiences. All students engaging in the proposed research
program or the outreach programs will gain critical research skills while
formulating, conducting, and analyzing data from hypothesis-driven experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;Results will be published in the peer-reviewed and, when appropriate,
patent literature so that the knowledge gained during the proposed program will
be available to guide and educate future researchers. We would also present the
work at scientific conferences. Society-at-large will benefit because improved
fundamental understanding of relationships between polymer structure and
water/ion transport properties will enable more rapid development of improved
polymers for desalination and other membrane-based processes involving water and
ion transport. In desalination, such membranes could provide populations in
water-stressed regions with critically needed water while reducing the energy
and environmental cost of desalination.