* 1160733
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:  Methods for the continuous lab culture and transgenesis of the amphioxus Branchiostoma floridae
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Daniel Medeiros, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 03/31/2014
* USD 155,637.00

During development, a single cell divides and differentiates to become a
complete multicellular organism. Understanding normal development is essential
to understanding both developmental defects and cancers, in which developmental
programs have been reactivated resulting in uncontrolled growth and metastasis.
Amphioxus (Branchiostoma floridae) is proving an excellent model for development
as it is closely related to vertebrates but much simpler both structurally and
genomically. The amphioxus genome is fully sequenced and there are extensive
libraries of clones of genes expressed in development. Thus, identifying
developmental genes and gene networks is proving to be easier in amphioxus than
in vertebrate model organisms. Despite these advantages, amphioxus is not widely
studied because embryos have only been available during a limited breeding
season. The present study builds upon recent breakthroughs in amphioxus
husbandry to establish protocols for the continuous culture of amphioxus in the
laboratory as well as methods for genetically manipulating amphioxus to
determine gene functions. Successful laboratory culture of amphioxus will allow
genetic lines of amphioxus to be established, as has been done for such
vertebrate models as the mouse and zebrafish, but at lower cost. Thus, the
project will open up new avenues for rapidly and economically solving basic
developmental processes. All methods and resources developed will be made
publically available. The results will be published in peer-reviewed journals
and presented at scientific meetings. The work will also provide unique
educational opportunities for a graduate student, two undergraduates, and 1-2
high school students per year. Finally, the project will strengthen
international collaborations between research laboratories in the U.S. and
Taiwan, establish a new web resource for the developmental biology community,
and be incorporated into educational outreach activities through the Birch
Aquarium in San Diego and the University of Colorado Museum of Natural History.
Information about the project will be accessible via
http://www.colorado.edu/eeb/facultysites/medeiros/Home.html.