* 1160656
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Application of siderophile elements to mantle geodynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* Linda Elkins-Tanton, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2014
* USD 34,422.00

We propose to conduct collaborative, synergistic research combining observations
of siderophile element compositions with geodynamic modeling to study the
evolution of elemental and isotopic heterogeneities in the mantle. Siderophile
elements are those with a preference to enter metal rather than silicates, and
are thus, elements that are largely concentrated in planetary cores. The
objectives of this study will be to develop a better understanding of the global
processes that led to the establishment of siderophile element abundances in the
mantle, assess the extent of and possible mechanisms for the long-term
preservation of the siderophile elemental and isotopic heterogeneities observed
in the terrestrial rock record, and combine this information with geodynamic
modeling to provide new insights to develop a better understanding of the
formation and early chemical evolution of the Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
part, this project will be accomplished via study of the petrologic and
chronologic extents of 182W isotopic anomalies in terrestrial systems using a
newly-developed, high precision mass spectrometry technique. Ancient rocks, such
as komatiites for which we have already identified isotopic anomalies, as well
as modern rocks, such as MORB, oceanic peridotites, and ocean island basalts,
will be examined as part of this task. Where necessary, complementary
concentration and isotopic data for other elements, such as Os and Nd, will be
generated. To better understand the causes and implications of the isotopic
systematics revealed, we will test, via different geodynamic models, mechanisms
for the formation and dispersal of the geochemical reservoirs with the
appropriate characteristics. By tracking hafnium and tungsten in models of a
range of possible early Earth states, then comparing model results with
observations, we will be able to rule out some early Earth formation models and
also better understand mantle mixing over the evolution of the Earth.