* 1160977
* I/UCRC Phase I:  Center for Tire Research
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2012,05/31/2019
* Tomonari Furukawa, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 2,220,692.00

/UCRC for Tire Research &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1160977 Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University; Saied Taheri &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1160982
University of Akron; Celal Batur &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Tire
Research (CenTiRe) will focus on supporting a research program in tire
materials, modeling, manufacturing, and testing combined with rubber material
prototyping and testing, and parallel computing and dynamic simulation
capabilities. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (VT) and the
University of Akron (UA) are collaborating to establish the proposed center,
with VT as the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of the
proposed center are to initiate formal partnerships with various industry
partners and national laboratories that have an interest in tire technologies,
and to discuss fundamental issues and topics for research. The Center will
fulfill the needs of the tire manufacturing companies by providing innovative
solutions in all four research thrust areas of materials, modeling,
manufacturing, and testing. The vehicle manufacturing companies are more
interested in the application of tire in their products. The Center is built
upon the knowledge and expertise of multi-disciplinary researchers in
Mechanical, Polymer, and Chemical Engineering at Virginia Tech (VT) and the
University of Akron (UA). CenTiRe intends to provide the industry with highly
trained undergraduate and graduate students who will contribute to this growing
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the proposed Center has the
potential to improve sustainability and profitability of US tire manufacturing
industry by developing new technologies that will reduce energy consumption,
pollution and increase driving safety. The Center plans to graduate a new
generation of specialists in tire engineering providing the industry with access
to potential employees. The members and the organizational structure of the
CenTiRe will promote precompetitive research that will allow the members to
rapidly and cost-effectively bring new products to market. Finally, the Center
will become a conduit for the professional training and education of not just
graduate students from underrepresented and women engineering groups, but also
representatives from industry through its outreach programs.