* 1160830
* Hawaii-Fiji collaboration: workshop on social-ecological resiliency to climate change, preliminary data collection, and methods training
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2012,12/31/2014
* John Lynham, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Ortega
* 12/31/2014
* USD 47,148.00

Hawaii-Fiji collaboration: workshop on social-ecological resiliency to climate
change, preliminary data collection, and methods
training&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People who live on small islands are involved in
tight feedback loops that make them acutely aware of how anthropogenic and
natural influences affect their resources. Pacific Islanders have developed
traditional ecological knowledge and resource management systems to deal with
high levels of environmental uncertainty and resource scarcity, and may be able
to teach us important lessons about adaptive capacity and resilience in coupled
human and natural systems. A cross-disciplinary team of researchers from the
University of Hawai?i&lt;br/&gt;(USA) and the University of the South Pacific
(Fiji) will hold a planning workshop, teach a short training course in social-
ecological methods and approaches to studying resilience in coupled human
natural systems, collect baseline data, and develop a collaboration that has the
capacity to test if and under what conditions traditional ecological knowledge
and traditional resource management can enhance adaptation and resilience to
climate change in the Pacific Islands.&lt;br/&gt; This project builds capacity
in research and education. It provides cross-disciplinary training for
undergraduate and graduate students and an international research experience
that can lead to longer term collaborations. By targeting Pacific Islanders in
recruitment, this initiative will broaden the participation of an under-
represented group. In establishing a collaboration among US researchers from
different disciplines (social and natural sciences, marine and terrestrial
spheres), and between US and Fijian researchers with complimentary expertise,
this project develops a network that has the capacity to address complex issues
that can contribute to policy for improving strategies for resilience and
adaptation to climate change.