* 1160669
* Kawaiisu Conversations and Landscapes:  Digital Documentation, Access, and Archiving
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2014
* Jocelyn Ahlers, Kawaiisu Language and Cultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 05/31/2014
* USD 124,980.00

Kawaiisu is a critically-endangered Uto-Aztecan language of the Kawaiisu people
of California; there are five remaining native speakers, three have been
actively engaged in documentation and revitalization projects. Prior
documentation of Kawaiisu has typically focused on lexical items and a basic
grammatical description of the language. The major gap in the documentation is
well-annotated text material, especially natural conversational and narrative
data that would shed light on Kawaiisu usage and discourse structure. Moreover,
with the exception of a few short videos produced by the Kawaiisu Language and
Culture Center, there is essentially no corpus of video footage for Kawaiisu
that would facilitate the study of topics such as the co-timing of speech and
gestures.

This is a critical issue, given the important of such exemplars for language
acquisition and for the development and maintenance of a vital linguistic
community; it is also time-sensitive, as the development of such a corpus relies
on the involvement of the language's elder speakers. This project seeks to
remedy this lack, and has four main goals. 1. Working with the elder speakers,
create a minimum of 54 hours of audiovisual recordings of conversational and
narrative Kawaiisu; 2. Train teams of transcriptionists including community
members and linguists in best practices in transcribing, glossing, and
translating Kawaiisu. This work will build on the previous successes community
members of the project team have had in learning to read and write Kawaiisu
using the practical orthography of the Kawaiisu language; 3. Produce high-
quality transcriptions, glosses, and translations of a selection of the
collected recordings. As the elders have expressed a desire to develop a set of
narratives focused on events and places in the Kawaiisu homeland, texts with
this focus will be given priority in the project; 4. Add 500 new entries with
example sentences to the existing dictionary.

This project will assist the Kawaiisu, and other speech communities, in their
goal to have second language learners achieve higher degree of fluency in their
language and create study resources for generations to come. The project
results, training program, and use of digital technologies can be duplicated by
other native communities with endangered languages.