* 1160097
* US-Vietnam Workshop on Multiple Natural Hazards  Assessment and Mitigation under the Impact of Climate Change
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2014
* John van de Lindt, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Akaysha Tang
* 04/30/2014
* USD 39,450.00

This project will support the participation of US scientists and engineers to
participate in a workshop on multiple natural hazards assessment and mitigation
under the impact of climate change to be held in the summer of 2012, on the
campus of the Hanoi Architecture University (HAU) in Hanoi, Vietnam. Asia is the
most populous region of the world; home to 58% of the worlds' population. Most
coastal areas in Asia are susceptible to one or more natural hazards, such as
typhoons, tsunamis, costal inundation or river flooding. In fact, more than 50%
of the world's major natural disasters occur in Asia. With the steady increase
in population and wealth in coastal areas of Asia, there is an evident increase
in risk of potential typhoon and flood damage, which is often exacerbated by the
lack of proper mitigation practices. In Vietnam, for example, 59% of the land
area is at risk to typhoons and floods. Between 1990 and 2009, economic losses
due to natural hazards averaged about 1.31% of GDP per year, while 13,000 lives
were lost. As a result, Vietnam ranks #5 among the countries most affected by
climate risk from 1990 to 2009. In the coming years, global climate change may
result in changes in the sea surface level as well as an increase in typhoon and
flood intensity and/or frequency. Vietnam is listed among five hardest-hit
countries by climate change. If sea level rises one meter, 5% of Vietnam?s land,
11% of its population and 7% of its agricultural land would be affected with the
losses estimated at 10% of GDP. How climate change will affect regional climates
and the built environment and sustainability is not well known, limiting the
ability to predict and adapt to consequential effects. Southeast Asia is
particularly vulnerable. The goal of the workshop is to facilitate the
initiation of long-term collaborative research activities focused on hazard
mitigation and graduate education supported by both the US and Vietnam. The
workshop will provide a venue for exchange of information, contribute to
developing professional collaborative relationships, and will strengthen
scientific and engineering research. The objectives are 1) to identify
challenges and barriers to more cost-effective hazard mitigation strategies in
developing countries, which are at risk of multiple natural hazards and
vulnerable to potential impacts from climate change; and 2) to facilitate and
encourage research and educational collaboration between researchers from
Vietnam and the US. The workshop will address a need to improve our
understanding and ability to predict and respond to the impacts of natural
hazards and climate change on the built environment, and to work toward more
sustainable and resilient coastal communities in Vietnam and similar regions. It
is envisioned that through the future collaborations fundamental methods for
multi-hazard mitigation practices will be developed and applied by graduate
students from both countries working together.