* 1160685
* Breath of Life Archival Institute for Indigenous Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Leanne Hinton, Endangered Language Fund, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 06/30/2014
* USD 172,824.00

Breath of Life (BoL) invigorates the study of endangered Native American
languages by connecting heritage communities with primary source material that
documents their languages, and with linguists who mentor their academic
research. The Institute provides much-needed training in linguistics and in
research methods in order to facilitate community-driven research and
revitalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BoL builds durable collaborative
relationships between linguists and heritage language learners. These
relationships stimulate language learning, teaching and research within heritage
communities, often leading to new insights based on previously under-utilized
documentation. BoL trains linguists to produce documentation that is more
relevant to and useful for community efforts through engagement in the process
of identifying, interpreting and using archival documentation. The use of
archival material exposes gaps in documentation, allowing future projects to
effectively focus their efforts on filling these gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BoL
has a direct and immediate impact on the training of linguists, both within the
academy and without, and on the use of linguistics in indigenous communities. It
greatly enhances the dissemination of previously-collected materials to those
most interested in it and, through them, to the larger academic domain. BoL
supports ongoing and future community-based language documentation efforts by
teaching Native American participants about the importance of language
documentation and its relevance to ongoing cultural initiatives. For both
mentors and researchers, BoL demonstrates the critical importance of archiving
materials that linguists or community members have collected. Activities that
highlight endangered language archives and their central role in language
documentation affirm the importance of archives to their larger institutions and
to the public in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Breath of Life Archival
Institute for Indigenous Languages will take place in Washington, D.C., in the
summer of 2013. The Institute will be co-hosted by the Smithsonian Institution's
National Anthropological Archives and National Museum for the American Indian,
and the Library of Congress.