* 1160604
* American Indian Sign Language Conference 2012 (August 31-September 2 in Browning, Montana)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2014
* Jeffrey Davis, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 09/30/2014
* USD 56,106.00

This project will organize and coordinate an American Indian Sign Language
(AISL) Conference and documentary linguistics workshops in Browning, Montana on
the Blackfeet [Amskapi Pikuni] Reservation, August 31 - September 2, 2012. All
phases of the Conference will involve collaboration with members of Native
American signing communities to document the geographic spread, domains of use,
and linguistic status of AISL, currently classified as an endangered language.
Sign language linguists, anthropologists, and scholars specializing in
documentary linguistic fieldwork will be invited to also participate. Linguistic
and anthropology students will assist the project with video recording and
photographing presentations, workshops, and main events. The Conference will be
widely publicized in academic venues and American Indian communities. A major
anticipated DEL research outcome is to identify and involve more individuals who
know AISL from Indian nations of the US and Canada. This will be the first
occasion since the early 1930s that American Indian signers from different
nations will have convened to share their knowledge of history, geography, and
culture through signed and spoken language. Following the Conference, the
project PI will apply annotation software for linguistic transcription and
analysis (e.g. ELAN). Short video clips and image collages will be produced for
the public with longer video samples for the AISL community and researchers. The
Conference will showcase efforts to document and describe AISL. The workshops
will demonstrate the linguistic transcription and translation processes to
produce documentary linguistic materials both accessible and analyzable by
people unfamiliar with the languages involved. Project outcomes will be
integrated into the research website/digital corpus, maintained at the
University of Tennessee. This offers dissemination to a broad audience and
contributes to AISL preservation, revitalization, and corpus linguistic
research. It is anticipated that these findings will advance our knowledge of
the cognitive, cultural, and linguistic underpinnings of indigenous sign
languages.