* 1160132
* GOALI: Physically Based Models of Atomic Layer Deposition for High-Throughput Reactor Design
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Raymond Adomaitis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 06/30/2017
* USD 296,477.00

With new energy, electronics, and consumer product applications, and the
emergence of highthroughput reactor designs, Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) is
set to become a major thin-film manufacturing tool. Deposited using an
alternating sequence of exposures to gas-phase precursors that would otherwise
spontaneously react, ALD allows for the controlled deposition of a wide range of
ultra-thin films at relatively low temperatures and potentially perfect
conformality. Despite the upsurge in ALD process and equipment development,
research on modeling deposition mechanisms and reaction kinetics in particular,
continues to lag efforts devoted to new precursor chemistries and reactor
designs. Because ALD is by its essential nature a completely dynamic process
with no equivalent to steady-state deposition, the objective and primary
intellectual merit of this proposal is to develop physically based models
describing both ALD reaction rates and the changes occurring on the growth
surface using transition-state (absolute rate) theory concepts. To achieve this
objective, we identify three distinct subprojects to be pursued in this
proposal: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Transition state rate model development for
both reference and industrially relevant ALD reactions, combined with efficient
numerical techniques to compute limit cycle solutions corresponding to
continuous ALD reactor operation enabling optimization of the cyclic
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Development of micro- and nano-scale precursor
transport models in the form of ballistic transport simulations coupled to the
new surface reaction models, and spatial discretization techniques to simulate
the time-evolution of the growth surface position.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Validation of the reaction kinetics and ballistic transport models using
reactors of the proposal industrial partner and dissemination of the rate
modeling methods to the ALD community. The basic surface science research,
numerical techniques, and reactor process research necessary to address the
research goals described will potentially have a broad impact by contributing
fundamentally to thin-film process engineering. Likewise, the physically based
modeling methods developed are intended to be distributed to the ALD research
and development community, further accelerating the range of applications of
this manufacturing technology. The proposed research program will offer a unique
educational opportunity for the engineering graduate students involved, giving
them exposure to the scientists and engineers developing the next generation of
ALD processes at Cambridge NanoTech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, with
support of this proposal, the PI will continue to develop hands-on
demonstrations of the products of thin film engineering which will be used for
middle- and high-school level outreach programs.