* 1160737
* Collaborative Research: Observing and Modeling Downslope-windstorm-type Flow in a Small-scale Crater Induced by Larger-scale Katabatic Winds
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Ronald Calhoun, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward L. Bensman
* 08/31/2014
* USD 154,594.00

This effort will investigate downslope windstorm-type flows (DWF) that have
important societal effects and are poorly understood scientifically. The program
includes a one-month field program at Arizona's Barringer Meteorite Crater and
simulations with a Large-Eddy-Simulation (LES) model. A serendipitous discovery
in a prior NSF-funded research program identified this location as being ideally
suited for such a study, as DWFs develop there regularly when thermally driven
drainage flows cascade over the crater's rim on clear, undisturbed nights. The
crater's rim and environs are on a scale that can be readily instrumented to
investigate these flows and the changing upstream conditions that cause them to
form. DWFs are produced intermittently on the upwind inner sidewall of the
small, circular crater basin as pulsations occur in the temperature and wind
profiles of the approaching flow. This effort will thus support a systematic
investigation of DWFs at a location where many replications can be expected over
a comparatively short period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An associated field effort
during Autumn 2013 will collect data uniquely suited to support analyses to
answer extant scientific questions about atmospheric DWFs produced by density-
stratified flow over topography. Detailed sampling of atmospheric boundary layer
conditions by multiple LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) and SoDAR (SOnic
Detection And Ranging) platforms, tethered balloon sounding systems, as well as
infrared time-lapse cameras and surface-based meteorological instrumentation,
will be utilized. The overarching goal of the coordinated field research,
analysis, and large-eddy simulation (LES) modeling to be conducted by this
collaborative team is to determine the characteristic atmospheric structure and
evolution associated with the DWFs, identify controlling parameters in the
katabatic winds that drive DWFs and, through the modeling studies, extend the
findings to basins and ridges of different size and shape to gain a more general
understanding of DWFs. The intellectual merit of this research rests in
application of novel and innovative concepts that will culminate in more
comprehensive analyses and modeling informed by field experience, a short
climatology, and initial analyses and simulations. These efforts will advance
understanding of the physical processes that affect atmospheric DWF development
in complex terrain, and are expected to lead to improvements in models and
understanding of this ubiquitous phenomenon, which occurs in mountainous regions
throughout the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of this effort will
include support of undergraduate and graduate student training, development of
modules for classroom teaching, and early-career development of a postdoctoral
researcher. Potential benefits to society will accrue through improved
understanding of atmospheric DWFs with potential applications for forecasting of
downslope windstorms, air pollution dispersion, general and fire weather
forecasting, and climate. Results will be widely disseminated through peer-
reviewed scientific publications, presentations at scientific meetings, and
related websites.