* 1160872
* I/UCRC Phase I:  Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2012,09/30/2016
* Robert Paaswell, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 220,000.00

I/UCRC for Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites (SIBS)

1161031 University of North Carolina at Charlotte; Robert Cox 1161017 Carnegie
Mellon University; Volker Hartkopf 1160872 CUNY City College; Robert Paaswell

The Center for Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites (SIBS) would bring
together a disparate set of stakeholders (i.e. building owners and operators,
component manufacturers, designers, utility providers, etc.) to develop a
research agenda focused on the interaction between buildings and their
environment. This is an interaction that involves several resource flows (i.e.
energy, water, materials, and air) and occurs at scales that affect individual
buildings and the community at large. Carnegie Mellon University and the CUNY
City College are collaborating to establish the proposed center, with the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC) as the lead institution.

The primary goal of this planning project is to initiate formal partnership with
various industry partners and government/non-governmental agencies that have an
interest in creating a more sustainable built environment. The research themes
at the proposed IUCRC are aimed at the industry need to respond to regulatory
and public demands for minimizing virgin material use, water use, non-renewable
energy use, and waste generation, and also at the societal need to protect the
natural systems that support human life. The proposed Center will be multi-
disciplinary in nature and independent of any one department, school or college.
SIBS plans to leverage opportunities and funding from technology
commercialization offices and business incubators in North Carolina, New York,
and Pennsylvania.

The Broader Impact includes the enhancement of R&D and technology transfer
infrastructure for the buildings industry, student training (including minority
students) in an area that is likely to grow over the next several decades, and
workforce training through an annual education and outreach programs for member
company employees. Additionally, long term economic impact is expected through
potential spin-off companies and increased revenue for existing companies. The
proposed center has a broad and deep education and outreach program that
includes graduate and undergraduate researchers on all projects. In addition,
the PIs intend to use various mechanisms to disseminate SIBS research results to
practitioners and students.