* 1160200
* Brain-Computer Interface Control of Ambulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* An Do, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 299,952.00

PI: Nenadic&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1160200&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problem
Statement: Individuals with paraplegia due to spinal cord injury (SCI) are
unable to ambulate. Functional electrical stimulation (FES) of the lower
extremities is one of the technologies with which ambulation can be partially
restored. Current FES technology requires manual operation by the user, which is
unintuitive, and monopolizes the upper extremities and interferes with their
motor function. Brain-computer interface (BCI), on the other hand, is a
technology that enables a direct cortical control of external devices, without
generating any motor output. &lt;br/&gt;Research Plan: The main goal of this
study is to integrate the technology of electro-encephalogram (EEG) based BCI
with noninvasive FES of the lower extremities to restore intuitive, hands-free
ambulation in individuals with complete paraplegia due to SCI. SCI subjects will
be trained to utilize gait-related kinesthetic motor imagery (i.e. imagination
of movement) to operate a BCI-controlled virtual reality gait simulator. The
subjects will also be trained to ambulate with a commercial FES system.
Subsequently, subjects' EEG data will be collected while they are engaged in
ambulation with the FES system and the parameters critical for integration of
BCI and FES systems will be determined. Finally, the two systems will be
integrated, and the effectiveness of the integrated BCI-FES system will be
tested in these subjects while they perform a goal-oriented ambulation task.
Novelty: 1) The integration of an EEG-based BCI with limb prostheses has
undergone limited research, and has not been achieved with lower extremity FES
systems for walking. 2) The study requires a novel neurophysiological
experimental paradigm, including novel signal processing and active-electrode
recording methods, to enable acquisition of artifact-free, ambulatory EEG data.
3) These data will provide novel information about the neurophysiological
processes underlying imagination and execution of ambulation in SCI. 4) A
successfully integrated BCI-FES system will shift the focus of neuro-
rehabilitation of this population from utilizing spared motor pathways to
functional restoration. 5) This concept can be extended to future studies with
much larger target domain, including subjects with stroke, multiple sclerosis,
and incomplete SCI, as a novel tool to promote plasticity and neural repair and
subsequent functional gains.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The proposed
experimental, engineering and scientific techniques will provide a blueprint for
future BCI-prosthesis integration studies. The proposed study will lead to the
deployment and development of novel signal processing and control algorithms for
BCI-prosthesis integration. Aside from BCI applications, the analysis of data
collected in this study will delineate the general cortical areas involved in
control of both executed and imagined gait, which will fundamentally advance our
knowledge of cortical control of ambulation and the changes it undergoes due to
SCI. The unique features of the integrated BCI-FES system and its long-term use
will be instrumental to addressing scientific questions such as the emergence of
the "BCI motor cortex," and may in the future facilitate development of novel
treatments that utilize neural repair and plasticity, such as cellular
therapies. Finally, the success of the proposed project may invigorate studies
to refine FES technology and may inspire integration of BCIs with other forms of
functional electrostimulation, such as spinal cord stimulation in rehabilitation
of the target population.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed activities
will enhance the education, scientific literacy, and lifelong learning in
engineering and medical students. Specifically, elements of this study will be
integrated into the teaching and mentoring curricula. Both undergraduate and
graduate students will participate in the proposed research and educational
plans and their findings will be broadly disseminated, including outreach to the
disabled community. These activities will help develop students' leadership and
interdisciplinary research skills. They will also broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering and science. The investigators will
promote college education and the pursuit of engineering/science careers in
minority K-12 and community-college students by developing educational
activities such as presentations, demonstrations and exhibits. Finally, the
investigators will partake in the professional development of K-12 math and
science teachers in high-need school districts in order to improve their
retention rates and leadership skills.