* 1160107
* Design: Biomedical Engineering Projects for People with General and Age Related Disabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Joel Bumgardner, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 111,490.00

PI: Bumgardner, Joel D.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1160107&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;The University of Memphis
(UoM) goal is to raise awareness among engineering students concerning the
issues facing individuals with limited/impaired mobility while providing both an
important community service and a real-world challenge around which students can
hone their engineering skills. The project will involve interdisciplinary
student teams (e.g. biomedical, mechanical and or electrical engineering,
clinician/health care providers, and clients/patients) who will design/augment
and construct custom devices that will improve quality of life and self-
sufficiency for persons with mobility disabilities. Special emphasis will be
placed on selecting clients who require solutions that may otherwise be cost
prohibitive or unavailable. Existing freshman and concurrent senior design
course sequences in UoM's Biomedical, Mechanical and Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering departments, coupled with existing, robust collaborative activities
with regional orthopaedic companies and clinical/health care provider groups,
provide a novel and unique environment for the proposed activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit of the Proposed Project
Activity:&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide custom, student-
designed/engineered devices to persons with mobility disabilities in order to
improve their quality of life and self-sufficiency. Activities will enhance
engineering student education through multi-disciplinary, meaningful real-world
and real-need design projects. The design projects and internships will provide
education and learning activities that are not normally part of the engineering
curriculum and promote careers in rehabilitation and assistive technology
disciplines to advance solutions to effectively address the needs of persons
with disabilities. There is an important and compelling need to assist
individuals with mobility disabilities to reach their maximum potential for
enjoyable and productive lives, both for their individual senses of well-being
and for well-being of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the
Proposed Activity:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed design projects will provide custom
devices to individuals suffering from loss of mobility due to disease or injury
that are cost-prohibitive for the client or otherwise unavailable. The project
will provide an important community service to persons with mobility
disabilities that will improve quality of life and self-sufficiency. We will
increase student and community awareness of issues facing individuals with
mobility disabilities through presentations and publication of papers regarding
developed designs at professional meetings and through university outreach and
promotional activities, so project ideas may be easily replicated elsewhere.
This project will also encourage students to pursue engineering and professional
careers related to rehabilitation and assistive technologies. In particular,
participation by students from traditionally under-represented groups, such as
women and African Americans, will be encouraged and promoted through MemphiSTEP
an NSF STEM Talent Expansion Program, Girls Experiencing Engineering summer
programs, and from among University's existing, high percentage of undergraduate
students from these underserved student populations.&amp;#56256;&amp;#56323;