* 1160696
* Documentation of the Vlashki/Zheyanski Language ('RUO')
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2012,09/30/2018
* John Singler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 09/30/2018
* USD 190,394.00

Vlashki/Zheyanski, a severely endangered Balkan Romance language, is spoken in
six mountain villages in the Istrian peninsula in Croatia. Speakers in the
southern villages call their language Vlashki, while those in a village further
north call it Zheyanski. At a point when Vlashki/Zheyanski appears to be no more
than a few decades away from losing most of its fluent speakers, this project
seeks to achieve a comprehensive documentation of the language by creating an
annotated digital linguistic corpus of audio and video recordings and older
written texts and a bidirectional trilingual dictionary (Vlashki/Zheyanski,
Croatian, and English), as well as a description of the syntax of the language,
and a study of the macro- and micro-sociolinguistic forces that have affected
its current endangerment.

The envisioned corpus is noteworthy for including audio and video data not only
from the home villages in Croatia, but also from the largest community of
Vlashki/Zheyanski speakers outside Croatia, that in New York City, as well as
data from the 1920s and 1930s. Hence, it will provide insight into variation in
the language, from the 1920s and 1930s until today, and in two homeland
communities and one diaspora community.

Documentation of this severely endangered language will be achieved while
simultaneously educating speakers of the language as to the value of the
language and the pressing need for its documentation. Project materials -- the
dictionary, a selection of audio and video materials, the syntactic and
sociolinguistic studies, the complete translated written texts from the 1920s
and 1930s -- will be accessible to community members. In some cases,
availability will be achieved via the existing language website (www.vlaski-
zejanski.com). The community-centered orientation of the project builds on and
reinforces ongoing work with community members.