* 1160138
* GOALI: SURFACTANT-MEDIATED ELECTROPHORETIC PROPERTIES OF APOLAR DISPERSIONS
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2012,09/30/2015
* Zhang-Lin Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2015
* USD 266,482.00

Abstract #1160138 Sven H. Behrens

Intellectual Merit

Mobile ions and electric surface charges are ubiquitous in water and other polar
liquids, but should play no role in apolar liquids, where the energetic cost of
charge dissociation is typically too large for thermal activation. Defying this
conventional wisdom, some surfactant additives can raise the conductivity of
apolar liquids by many orders of magnitude and promote electrical charging of
immersed solid surfaces or of suspended colloidal particles. The resulting
ability to direct particle motion with applied electric fields is crucial, e.g.
for liquid toners and electrophoretic displays but neither the mechanism of
particle charging nor the effect of the directing field are currently
understood. Building on the PI's experience in measuring and modeling
electrostatic interactions, and with strong support from the Hewlett-Packard
team developing the next generation of color electrophoretic displays, the
investigators propose to unravel the fundamental principles of particle charge
and field-driven motion in apolar surfactant solutions.

The working hypothesis in this project is that surfactants simultaneously
influence the electric behavior of apolar dispersions in at least three ways: by
promoting surface charging via acid-base interaction, by solubilizing surface
counterions inside of surfactant aggregates, and by forming micellar ions in the
solution bulk via charge disproportionation. They aim at disentangling these
mechanisms with an original suite of experimental techniques accessing
separately the charge contained in the bulk solution and on the particle
surface, the particle-particle and particle-field interaction, as well as the
amount of adsorbed surfactant and residual water. Using particles of different
surface characteristics and surfactants with systematically varied architecture
will allow the investigators to find the elusive answer to the question what
makes some surfactants more effective than others at imparting charge and
electrophoretic mobility on a given particle type. Thermodynamic models for the
charging reaction and surfactant adsorption will be tested against their
experiments.

Broader Impact

The proposed study should significantly expand the understanding of charging
processes in apolar liquids and on immersed solid surfaces. Applications range
from safety measures in fuel transportation and the design of electrophoretic
displays and electronic skins to the stabilization of emulsions with solid
particles relevant for food formulation and skin care creams as well as for oil
recovery and oil spill remediation. The research directly touches on our
understanding of surfactants surrounding us in everyday life, and can easily be
illustrated with examples accessible to non-experts.

Building on this educational potential, the PI works with pre-schoolers through
first graders in a predominantly (97%) African-American school via hands-on
science workshops designed to reinforce the natural curiosity in these young
children. An ongoing close collaboration with the classroom teachers makes these
workshops more impactful by enhancing classroom activities with related science
materials; and the most successful demonstrations are captured in science demo
kits with appropriate materials and instructions for the teachers to use in
later years independently of the PI. The PI also supports diversity at the
collegiate level by recruiting female students to his lab, which has had a
majority of women at any given time, and has a history of involving African
American undergraduates in its research.