* 1160764
* IRFP: Ultrafast Spectroscopy of Urbach Tail Excitations in Semiconductors: Unraveling Dynamics of the Anti-Stokes Cooling Cycle
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2014
* Denis Seletskiy, Seletskiy               Denis          V
* Fellowship Award
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/2014
* USD 143,900.00

The International Research Fellowship Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct nine to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and by
the Electronic and Photonic Materials Program in the Division of Materials
Research.

This award will support a twenty-four-month research fellowship by Dr. Denis V.
Seletskiy to work with Prof. Alfred Leitenstorfer at the University of Konstanz,
in Germany.

Optical refrigeration requires laser excitation of a solid below its mean
luminescence energy, naturally in the tail of its absorption spectrum (Urbach
tail). In this process, one quantum of lattice vibration is annihilated for
every emitted high energy photon, as required by energy conservation. If quantum
efficiency of this process is high, the laser light will cool the solid. While
rare-earth doped insulators have already been cooled to cryogenic temperatures,
no cooling of semiconductors has been observed to date, despite more than a
decade of extensive research progress.

This research for the first time investigates the dynamics of the excitations in
the Urbach tail of a semiconductor on an ultrafast time scale, providing insight
into how these excitations couple to the internal degrees of freedom of a solid.
More specifically, temporal evolution of both carrier density and crystal
lattice temperature is measured simultaneously by techniques of transient
absorption spectroscopy and coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy. Highly
sensitive experiments are required due to the small signals in the Urbach tail.
Unprecedented sensitivity is achieved by employing highly configurable ultra-
stable fiber-based femtosecond spectroscopy systems, pioneered by Prof.
Leitenstorfer's group at the University of Konstanz, in Germany. Together with
novel detection schemes, these high resolution experiments offer new insights
into the dynamics of the Urbach tail states and the subsequent laser cooling
cycle.

Better understanding of the Urbach tail states will advance our knowledge of the
principle interactions of low-energy excitations in condensed matter physics.
New knowledge of the ultrafast dynamics of UT states can have implications on
the telecommunication industry as well as possibly benefit the development of
energy efficient technologies such as photovoltaic elements, high quantum
efficiency light emitting diodes and ultra-low voltage transistors. Increased
understanding of the laser cooling cycle will propel research towards
miniaturized all-solid-state cryocoolers, with potential applications ranging
from fast and locally-addressable cooling of electronic and space-borne
components to brain imaging using novel medical devices with laser-cooled
superconducting quantum interference detectors. Continued development of these
technologies is essential to address the future of the growing health,
communication and energy demands of our society. Finally, state-of-the-art
experimental facilities and expertise in the group of Prof. Leitenstorfer at the
University of Konstanz are essential for success of this research as well as for
PI's professional development. This award will also help Dr. Seletskiy to
broaden his network of potential collaborators as well as his scientific scope,
proving invaluable for success of his future career.