* 1160787
* EAGER: Fate-commitment of neural progenitor cells is determined by their phagocytic activity
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2014
* Jonathan Kipnis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Asson-Batres
* 04/30/2014
* USD 200,000.00

Neural stem cells (NSCs) exist naturally in the adult human brain and have the
potential to become multiple different types of brain cells, including neurons,
astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. The process of a NSC becoming a neuron in a
mature brain is known as adult neurogenesis. Even before they have started to
differentiate into their terminal cell type, NSCs have the ability to clear away
cells that are dying from their surroundings by engulfment. Using cell culture
and biomolecular methods this study seeks to understand whether NSC engulfment
of dead cells affects their own differentiation. It is hypothesized here that
the engulfment of the dead or dying cell will dictate the fate assumed by NSC
when it differentiates into an adult cell. It is also important to know what
part of the dying cell the engulfing cell is sampling in order to understand the
identity of and effect of factors that are influencing its differentiation
potential. This will be investigated by feeding different parts of dead cells to
NSCs and then examining the differentiation outcomes. Understanding how a cell
adopts its mature form is fundamental to our understanding of how all
multicellular organisms develop from a single initial pluripotential stem cell
that has the ability to develop into multiple different cell types. The novel
ideas proposed in this study have the potential to shed new light on our
understanding of neurogenesis in a regenerating system. Findings uncovered here
could have wider application to differentiating progenitor cells in other
regenerating or developing organ systems. Thus, this study will further the
understanding of how all stem cells turn into their ultimate cell types. This
project will provide training opportunities for post-graduate, graduate, and
undergraduate students in a field that uses cutting-edge scientific tools and
intense scientific interactions. It will also offer mentoring opportunities for
high school students who participate in summer programs that seek to encourage
women to pursue careers in basic science, including physics, and engineering.