* 1160720
* Arithmetic of automorphic forms: cycles, periods and p-adic L-functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Kartik Prasanna, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2017
* USD 400,000.00

The PI will study various problems in the arithmetic theory of automorphic forms
suggested by conjectures on algebraic cycles, notably the Tate conjecture and
the Bloch-Beilinson conjecture. One of the problems involves proving integral
period relations for arithmetic automorphic forms on quaternionic Shimura
varieties. These relations are known up to algebraic factors, due to previous
work of Michael Harris. The PI proposes to prove much more precise relations
that identify more or less exactly the missing algebraic factors. Such relations
would have applications to the theory of special values of L-functions. In
addition, the methods used to study this problem are expected to yield new
constructions of algebraic cycles. Another project involves studying the
relations between cycles and p-adic L-functions, especially for unitary groups.
This develops and generalizes a theme studied in the PI's previous work with
Bertolini and Darmon. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The general area of this proposal
is algebraic number theory. More specifically, it deals with the study of
algebraic cycles over number fields which may be thought of as a higher
dimensional generalization of the solutions in rational numbers or integers to a
given polynomial equation. The study of integer solutions to polynomial
equations (also called Diophantine equations) is a problem that has interested
people for the last two thousand years. It is such a basic problem in
mathematics that finding new insights into it is likely to have many
applications, not just to other parts of mathematics but also practical in
nature. Some of the key objects that will be studied, namely elliptic curves,
have many practical applications to coding theory and cryptography. The projects
in the proposal will lead to not just a better theoretical understanding of such
objects, but also develop new computational tools to study them.