* 1160343
* Collaborative Research: Understanding High School Pre-Engineering Student Design Cognition, Comparisons with Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Matthew Lammi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 12/31/2015
* USD 49,556.00

This engineering education research project will explore how high school
students learn engineering design by investigating these students'
misconceptions about engineering design. The investigators will use a
longitudinal study of high school students in three states who engage in
engineering design experiences. The analysis techniques to be employed are well-
grounded in current theories. Comparisons with college students will provide
insights on how students develop design competencies.

The broader significance and importance of this project will be to guide
existing projects and efforts that introduce elements of engineering and design
into the K-12 curriculum, particularly at the high school level. As design
becomes increasingly important in university engineering programs, an increased
understanding of high school student's design experiences is need to help them
transition from secondary school to college. The project will broadly
disseminate findings among the engineering education and cognitive science
communities so that the research can impact practice. This project overlaps with
NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through preparation of an
engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's
goal of innovating for society is enabled by creating results and research that
are useful for society by informing educational policy and practices.