* 1160117
* Collaborative Research:  Development of an Integrated Eukaryotic Algae Platform for Difficult-to-produce Therapeutic Molecules
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,10/31/2016
* Zivko Nikolov, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 10/31/2016
* USD 225,000.00

1160184/1160117 &lt;br/&gt;Mayfield/Nikolov&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalable and
low-cost production platforms are of growing importance for the development of
affordable recombinant protein molecules. This is especially true in the case of
complex recombinant proteins that are often difficult and expensive to produce
in commercial protein production platforms, such as mammalian cell culture and
E. coli. Protein production by mammalian cell cultures is still expensive
because of stringent nutritional and growth requirements, specialized bioreactor
design and environmental conditions, coupled with often low expression levels.
E. coli, although able to produce large quantities of protein inexpensively, is
generally inefficient at producing properly folded, complex proteins as soluble
molecules. The single-cell eukaryotic alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, has
simple growth requirements (light, carbon dioxide, and salts) and its use as a
production platform for complex recombinant proteins combines many of the most
advantageous features of fermentation and cell cultures. The specific features
of C. reinhardtii chloroplast expression include: rapid generation of stably
transformed master cell lines, efficient mammalian protein folding in a non-
reducing environment, a host metabolism that is tolerant of "difficult-to-
express" proteins, a low propensity for undesirable post-translational
modifications and formation of insoluble aggregates, cell doubling times under
10 h using completely defined protein-free inorganic media, demonstrated
scalability, and absence of endotoxin and mammalian virus contamination. The
investigators have already demonstrated that C. reinhardtii is able to produce
complex, multi-domain proteins that cannot be efficiently expressed in and
purified from other heterologous systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
focuses on the expression and purification of two unique and therapeutically
important recombinant proteins that will serve to demonstrate the utility of the
platform, and that could have high-impact provided they can be produced and
purified at a competitive cost. To develop C. reinhardtii as a broad and
competitive platform for producing a unique class of recombinant proteins, the
interdisciplinary team with complementary expertise will address challenges
related to protein production, recovery, and purification. The goal of the
proposed research is to develop technologies and processes for an efficient,
rapid, and scalable recombinant protein production platform for using C.
reinhardtii.