* 1160859
* Spaces of rational curves and diophantine geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Yuri Tschinkel, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The main questions of this proposal concern rational points and spaces of
rational curves on algebraic varieties over algebraically nonclosed ground
fields in relation to geometric or topological invariants. On the arithmetic
side, one is interested in existence of rational points,their density in various
topologies, and their distribution with respect to heights. On the geometric
side,the focus is on birational properties, such as rationality and rational
connectedness, on projective invariants, such as the cones of effective and
ample divisors, and on geometric correspondences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
last decades, arithmetic geometry has become one of the most exciting and
rapidly growing fields. There has been tremendous progress in understanding the
arithmetic of curves. The goal of this proposal is to advance our understanding
of higher-dimensional spaces. These developments would not be possible without
the assimilation of ideas from other branches of mathematics: transcendence
theory, algebraic topology, and harmonic analysis. In return, advances in
arithmetic geometry have had strong impact in mathematical physics, dynamical
systems, complex analysis. The need for experimentation in arithmetic geometry
has lead to the development of powerful computational tools and software, which
are now widely used, e.g., in cryptography and data analysis.