* 1160721
* Facility Support: Refurbishing the High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Laboratory Principal Instrument
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2014
* Timothy Rowe, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2014
* USD 310,000.00

This grant provides for the first of two stages that will refurbish the
principal instrument at the University of Texas High-Resolution X-ray Computed
Tomography Facility (UTCT). It will replace the 9-inch image intensifier area
detector and 1024x1024 CCD camera currently used for up to 225 keV microfocal
scanning with a 16-inch 2048x2048 pixel amorphous silica flat panel enabling
distortion-free imagery over the full range of X-ray energies available from our
sources (~50-450 keV). It will also include a new high-speed, high-capacity
turntable gantry and computer system, which together will allow rapid data
acquisition and cone-beam reconstruction, in addition to superior data
resolution. These enhancements will lead to lower scanning costs and expanded
research possibilities, including ?4D? imaging in which volumes are imaged in
time series. The grant will also help fund the engineering design work required
to complete the transformation of our instrument into a cutting-edge CT scanner
matching or exceeding the capabilities of other mass-produced scanners sold
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-ray computed tomography is a completely
nondestructive means of examining the interiors of opaque solid objects. X-ray
CT produces sets of two-dimensional images ('slices') that reveal features in
the interior of a specimen as if it had been sliced open along the image plane
for viewing. CT technology was originally developed for medical diagnosis, and
subsequently adapted to industrial and scientific applications by employing
X-ray sources of greater energy and/or superior focus, and by increasing the
spatial resolution of the X-ray detectors. Since 1999, UTCT has operated as an
NSF multi-user facility, making this technology, and the expertise necessary to
exploit it, easily accessible to the national geoscientific community. UTCT has
also been utilized by a wide range of other disciplines, including biology,
anthropology, and civil, mechanical, and chemical engineering, in both academia
and industry. The improvements begun in this project will fully modernize our
principal scanner, while also placing UTCT on much firmer ground in terms of
serviceability and future upgrades, enabling it to continue in its national
mission.