* 1160751
* Investigation of Antitermination in Firmicutes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2011,02/29/2016
* Wade Winkler, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/29/2016
* USD 836,309.00

Intellectual merit: Biofilms, or surface-associated microbial communities
encased within a complex matrix, allow bacteria to grow on a wide variety of
surfaces including crops, teeth, contact lenses, and at the air-water interface.
Development of the biofilm community depends upon the production of compounds
contained within this matrix. Genes encoding such compounds are organized in
long DNA arrays known as operons; the RNA that is synthesized based on such
operons is very long, which means that there must be particular mechanisms in
place to ensure that the RNA synthesis is not prematurely interrupted during the
process of elongation of this polymer. This project pursues an altered mode of
RNA elongation, called "processive antitermination" that may be generally
required for expression of these operons and of greater importance to bacterial
biology than previously realized. The research in this program will explore the
biological purposes and the basic requirements for such processive
antitermination mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: This project will involve
graduate and visiting undergraduate students. The summer undergraduate students
who will participate in this research will be enrolled at the United States
Military Academy at West Point, where they are typically unable to participate
in traditional, summer-long research fellowships due to other training
commitments. Therefore, the project will offer them shorter, more intense
research opportunities that can still accommodate their other summer
responsibilities. This project will also directly improve the graduate training
environment at The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.
Specifically, a new short-course will be developed for the Biological Chemistry
Ph.D. students that will cover the theory and application of massively parallel
DNA sequencing methodologies, which are techniques that are important for this
research. Finally, in addition to these undergraduate and graduate student
populations, plans will be implemented to positively influence a third student
group - that of elementary school children. In Carl Sagan's last book, The
Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark, he argued that scientists
share a social responsibility to communicate clearly their efforts to the
general public. It is the absence of this communication, he argued, that causes
the general public to become less knowledgeable of such concepts as statistics,
epidemiology, electricity, and chemistry and, as a result, to become
increasingly mistrustful of general scientific pursuits. Therefore, all
individuals who receive funding from this project will help present a series of
themed lectures to a diverse population of Dallas-area elementary students.
These lectures will serve two purposes. First, the students will be exposed to
basic microbiology concepts, including the topics of this research project.
Second, the students will interact with an enthusiastic and culturally diverse
group of scientific researchers, thereby imparting upon them the clear message
that anybody can aspire to become a scientist.