* 1160841
* Greedy Approximation in Banach Spaces and Compressed Sensing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Vladimir Temlyakov, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 211,452.00

Compressed sensing is a recent theory that aims to approximate a signal using
only a small number of measurements. It is motivated by the fact that many real-
world signals can be well-approximated by or identified with sparse signals.The
proposed research will utilize techniques based on nonlinear sparse
representations with respect to redundant systems (dictionaries). The
investigator's preliminary results show that, although the prior development of
compressed sensing has occurred in Hilbert spaces, substantial improvement can
be made in the construction of efficient algorithms for exact recovery of sparse
signals when we consider the problem in a Banach space instead. To widen the
search for efficient algorithms from Hilbert spaces to Banach spaces is the main
fundamentally new idea of this proposal. We intend to study properties of
specific methods of recovery that belong to a family of greedy algorithms. These
methods allow us to build sparse representations economically. The proposed
research will develop practical, implementable algorithms that are provably
efficient with respect to convergence, rate of convergence, and exact
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For scientists and other analysts, the great
challenges of this decade involve designing systems to efficiently analyze data
and extract essential information from large data sets. It has a myriad of
existing and potential applications in both the defense and civilian sectors.
For example, managing large data bases, such as security data bases obtained
through surveillance, requires classification and compression of the data in
order to facilitate the extraction of significant features or specific
information. More generally, the problem of compression and denoising of large
data sets arises naturally in biology, medicine, and many other fields. The
scientific discipline that studies this aspect of data processing is called
'compressed sensing.' The goal of the proposed research is to build a
fundamental mathematical theory that will significantly increase our ability to
process (compress, denoise, etc.) large data sets. The main technique that will
be used to achieve this goal is based on nonlinear sparse representations
arising from greedy approximation methods (greedy algorithms), which allow us to
build sparse representations economically. It is the goal of this proposal to
utilize fundamental concepts in analysis and applied mathematics to clearly
define and quantify the data processing challenge and design new, more efficient
techniques (greedy algorithms) to address it. We believe that scientists and
other analysts will be able to implement our results to find essential
information in large data sets more quickly and more accurately than before.