* 1160663
* Collaborative Research:Aftershock Imaging with Dense Arrays (AIDA) for the August 23, 2011, Mw 5.8, Virginia earthquake aftershock sequence
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Larry Brown, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2012
* USD 25,998.00

This RAPID supports post-seismic deployment of novel high density seismic arrays
using instruments from the Earthscope Flexible Array provided by IRIS/PASSCAL to
investigate the Mw 5.8 Virginia earthquake of August 23, 2011. This event had a
NE-striking reverse faulting focal mechanism, a hypocentral depth of 6 km
(USGS), and occurred in a previously recognized seismic region known as the
Central Virginia Seismic Zone. This event passes with ca. 15 km of a NW-SE
oriented deep seismic reflection profile contracted in 1981 by the USGS,
providing a rare opportunity to link seismicity to deep structure in the eastern
U.S. The preliminary hypocentral estimate suggests that the earthquake occurred
within a complex zone of east-dipping reflections that define an imbricated
Paleozoic thrust sheet of the central Appalachian Piedmont that is underlain by
Grenville basement at a depth of ca. 9 km.

By merging the technologies of earthquake location with high resolution
structural imaging, this experiment seeks to demonstrate how aftershocks can be
exploited by both passive and active seismic techniques to identify seismogenic
structures at depth as well as energy propagation characteristics for a region
where both types of information are either rare or non-existent. The recording
experiment constitutes a prototype for imaging earthquake processes and
associated structures with unprecedented resolution by exploiting a new
generation recording technologies. If the data proves as rich as expected, this
experiment may well establish a new protocol for future aftershocks studies.