* 1160036
* GOALI:  A Scientific Synthesis of Bimetallic Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* David Thompsett, University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2016
* USD 332,000.00

#1160036&lt;br/&gt;Regalbuto&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most common method of
preparing supported metal catalysts begins by impregnating a porous oxide or
carbon with an aqueous solution of dissolved metal complexes. The goal of most
preparations is to convert the deposited precursor, often a coordination
complex, into small metal particles firmly anchored onto the high surface area
support. For a given amount of metal, the smaller the metal particles, the more
catalytically active sites are created. In promoted or bimetallic catalysts, the
goal is normally to maximize contact of the metal and promoter, or the two
metals. How to achieve this effectively is the subject of many studies, both
academic and industrial.In many cases these preparation steps are considered to
be art. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor John Regalbuto of the University of
South Carolina has been effectively studying the fundamental phenomena that
occur during supported metal catalyst impregnation, striving to transform the
art of catalyst preparation into a science. With past support from NSF his
research group has described the uptake of noble and base metal coordination
complexes over many oxides and carbons during impregnation in terms of a simple
electrostatic mechanism leading to an optimal pH at which the precursor-surface
interaction is strongest. Fundamental aspects of the other preparation steps of
these monometallic catalysts have also been studied. In this proposal, the
strong electrostatic adsorption approach will be applied to the most complicated
but highest impact preparations - bimetallic catalysts. Regalbuto postulates
that this approach will yield unprecedented control of the morphology of
bimetallic catalysts prepared with real, high surface area supports using
common, commercially available metal precursors. Specifically, he hypothesizes
that core-shell morphologies can be prepared by selectively adsorbing one metal
precursor complex onto the oxide form of a second metal, and that core-shell
morphology will be retained with low reduction temperatures and alloys will form
at higher temperatures. Another alternative application of the science approach
predicts that homogeneous alloys can be prepared with low temperature reductions
by coadsorbing metal complexes in a single adsorption
step.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hoped that successful demonstrations of the
proposed work will lead to a transformation in the understanding and practice of
bimetallic catalyst preparation. The potential scientific impact is extremely
broad, affecting all facets of the chemical industry which employ bimetallic
catalysts. With that target, this award is a GOALI award. Regalbuto has teamed
with the Johnson Matthey Technical Centre in Sonning, UK, a world leading
company in noble metal catalyst manufacture. Measurements of point of zero
charge and adsorption surveys over a wide range of noble metal oxides will be
made for the first time at JMTC as well as at the University of South Carolina.
Strategically, the partnership with industry will allow access to the copious
amounts of noble metal oxides needed for the fundamental studies of adsorption
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project work has been formulated
specifically for REU students; this work will be relatively easy to undertake,
exciting to do, and will get noticed in peer reviewed publications and
conference presentations. In addition the PI will tie into the comprehensive
portfolio of outreach and diversity programs offered at USC: the Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation, the SC Alliance for Minority Participation,
and the South East Alliance for Graduate Education.