* 1160084
* Thin Metal-Organic-Framework Membranes for High Pressure Carbon Dioxide Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2016
* USD 322,526.00

1160084&lt;br/&gt;Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-organic-frameworks (MOF)
represent a new group of microporous materials as membranes for gas and liquid
separation applications. However, several fundamental issues unique for MOF
membranes such as synthesis of thin MOF membranes and effects of adsorption
induced structural change and thermal gradient on membrane separation properties
have not been studied, and the unique separation properties of MOF membranes
unattainable by traditional microporous inorganic membranes have not been
explored for practical applications. This project is directed toward synthesis
and characterization of thin, high flux microporous IRMOF-1 and ZIF-69 membranes
and to study permeation and separation of these MOF membranes with a focus on
understanding the effects of the adsorption induced structural change and
thermal gradient on membrane transport properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will explore the unique property of large pore MOF membranes, i.e., the
carbon dioxide perm-selectivity increases with pressure for high pressure
separation of carbon dioxide from natural gas. All existing membranes exhibit a
decreasing perm-selectivity with increasing pressure. The work includes
developing synthesis methods for preparation of thin (less than 5 Ã¬m) large pore
MOF membranes, identifying an adequate method for characterizing the quality of
the MOF membranes, studying the permeation and separation properties of the MOF
membranes at high pressures, and investigating adsorption induced structural
change and thermal gradient on membrane characteristics. The membranes will be
prepared by the secondary growth method with nano-sized MOF crystal seeds. A
molecular probing method will be developed to examine the quality of the MOF
membranes. Gas permeation of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrogen and hydrogen and
separation properties of binary mixtures of these gases, particularly carbon
dioxide/methane, for the IRMOF-1 and ZIF-69 membranes will be studied in a large
pressure range (1-70 atm.) at 25-150C and compared with the results of modeling
and molecular simulations. Structural changes and thermal gradient across the
membranes during gas permeation will be studied and correlated to the gas
permeation and separation properties of the membranes. The research conducted in
this project will be transformational as it will address several major issues in
synthesis, characterization and separation properties of membranes made from a
new group of microporous materials. The results will be the basis for practical
use of MOF membranes for separation of carbon dioxide from gas mixtures, in
particularly natural gas, at high pressures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental work on synthesis and property study of IRMOF-1 and ZIF-69 membranes
will expand inorganic membrane science which has so far been focused on metallic
and metal oxide materials. The project will result in development of high
performance membranes with good separation properties for gas mixtures
containing CO2 at high pressures. One of the major applications of the membranes
will be for natural gas purification to produce high pressure natural gas that
is ready for transport in pipelines. The membranes will find other applications
such as CO2 separation in pre-combustion carbon dioxide capture processes and
will serve to increase industry's awareness of the many opportunities that exist
for applying these new membranes. The combination of the unique properties of
the MOF materials and thin film membrane technology represents a
transformational approach to development of new membrane technologies for
efficient separation of gas mixtures and will contribute to ensuring US
competitiveness and technological lead in the area of CO2 capture. The project
will also educate and train graduate and undergraduate students. In particular,
female and minority students will be trained to become leaders in membrane
science and separation technologies. An ASU graduate course in Inorganic
Membranes and Membrane Separation Processes will incorporate the expanded
perspectives resulting from the successful development of these MOF based gas
separation devices. The project will also include the establishment of a
laboratory demonstration unit using membranes for carbon dioxide separation for
high school teachers and students as part of Arizona State University's "Science
for Fun" outreach program.