* 1160895
* Methods and Applications of Computational Polymer Field Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2015
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2015
* USD 379,770.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to develop simulation methods for polymers, complex fluids, and soft
materials beyond mean field theory. This research builds on the recent
development of the field-theoretic-simulation method by the PI and co-workers.
In this project, the PI aims to make fundamental, transformative breakthroughs
in understanding and methodology that will enable field-theoretic-simulation
studies of entirely new classes of polymers and soft materials. Specific thrusts
of the project include:

1. Systematic coarse-graining methods. Methods will be developed for coarse
graining polymer field theories in conjunction with field-theoretic simulations.
Force matching techniques from the protein modeling community will be integrated
with numerical renormalization group methods to accurately parameterize field
theory models of soft materials on successively coarser computational grids.
This methodology will enable simulation studies of diverse families of nano- and
meso-structured polymeric fluids on unprecedented length scales.

2. Coherent states formalism. A new 'coherent states' representation of polymer
field theory models will be investigated as a framework for numerical
simulations. The coherent states approach utilizes stochastic fields that
resemble forward and backward polymer propagators. Among other potential
advantages, the proposed framework has a less complex analytic structure that
could facilitate numerical coarse-graining.

3. Computational framework for nucleation studies. The PI aims to integrate
field-theoretic simulations, coarse-graining techniques, and newly developed
minimum energy path methods to estimate kinetic barriers and rates of phase
transformations in nanostructured soft materials. The work will go beyond
traditional mean-field approaches and thus allows the treatment of fluctuation
mediated transitions. Relevant applications include the estimation of defect
annealing rates in directed self-assembly approaches to microelectronics
patterning with block copolymers.

This award supports graduate and post-doctoral training in theoretical and
computational polymer science. A particular focus will be to expose students and
post-docs with classical physics training to broader soft materials and polymer
science disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB in
chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The fundamental understanding
gained through this project will be further leveraged through the Complex Fluids
Design Consortium, an industry-national lab-academic partnership that is
addressing the computational design of commercial polymer and complex fluid
formulations.

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education to develop computer simulation methods to study materials composed
of polymers which are long chain-like molecules. Some examples include DNA and
the fundamental building blocks of plastics. The simulation technique is
complementary to methods that aim to directly simulate the interacting polymers
and their motions. The PI?s research includes the application of these computer
simulation methods to the design of new materials based on polymers, for example
plastics and materials composed of small organic or inorganic particles in a
matrix composed of polymers. Advanced computer simulation methods for polymers
offer the potential to better utilize the tendency of polymers to assemble
themselves into intricate and complex structures at the microscopic level to
make microelectronics, sensors, solar energy converters, and other devices.

This award supports graduate and post-doctoral training in theoretical and
computational polymer science. A particular focus will be to expose students and
post-docs with classical physics training to broader soft materials and polymer
science disciplines through a close coupling with experimental groups at UCSB in
chemical engineering, materials, and chemistry. The fundamental understanding
gained through this project will be further leveraged through the Complex Fluids
Design Consortium, an industry-national lab-academic partnership that is
addressing the computational design of commercial polymer and complex fluid
formulations.