* 1160661
* GOALI:  Size and Anisotropy Effects in Micro/Nano-bonds with Comparable Grain and Bond Sizes
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2012,02/28/2014
* Viola Acoff, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2014
* USD 265,096.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award is to
investigate process-microstructure-mechanical behavior in micro/nano bonds
fabricated using a new technology of solid-liquid inter-diffusion. These bonds,
that are used to join metallic interconnects in microelectronic devices, have a
comparable size with their constituting grains. Therefore, they are expected to
behave anisotropically. Furthermore, unlike conventional joints, these joints
mainly consist of intermetallics which profoundly affect the mechanical behavior
of these bonds. Mechanical reliability of these bonds dictates the reliability
and yield of the electronic devices fabricated using these bonds. The goal of
this research is to investigate the kinetics of bond formation as well as the
mechanics of deformation, fatigue and failure of these bonds through modeling
and experimentation. An experiment will be designed and conducted on the process
to determine the effect of process parameters on the microstructure and
mechanical behavior of these bonds and to determine the optimal process
condition. Phase field numerical models will be developed to simulate the
kinetics of bond formation. Mechanisms of deformation and damage will be studied
through in situ mechanical and fatigue experiments at the micro/nano scale.
Finite element simulation will be used to model fatigue and damage in these
anisotropic bonds. The research will be conducted in collaboration with Intel
Corporation who will provide assistance with specimen fabrication, thermo-
mechanical fatigue testing and failure analysis of the specimens.
&lt;br/&gt;This research will lead to enhancements in the solid-liquid inter-
diffusion process making it a viable option for electronic manufacturers to
produce energy efficient high quality and reliable electronic devices. It will
facilitate and expedite the process of eliminating lead from the current
electronic processes making the process more environmentally friendly and
benign. Simulation tools and fundamental knowledge generated in this research
will advance several disciplines including electronic manufacturing, mechanics
and material science and engineering.