* 1160811
* BARD workshop on Microbial virulence determinants and plant innate immunity: Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, February 5th-9th, 2012
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2012,06/30/2012
* Mary Beth Mudgett, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2012
* USD 14,350.00

The objective of the workshop is to facilitate the exchange of information among
leading scientists investigating the interplay between microbial pathogens and
the plant immune system. The participants will address two fundamental questions
pertaining to the molecular determinants that impact plant disease in
agriculture: 1) What are the critical plant immune pathways that inhibit
pathogen growth and how are they regulated? 2) What are the mechanisms by which
pathogens suppress plant immunity to persist in plants? Scientists from the US,
Israel, Europe and China using diverse tools and approaches to study plant-
microbe interactions will participate in the workshop. The workshop will provide
an interactive platform to share technology, establish collaboration, and
develop innovative technology to improve plant health, productivity and
security. Participants will: (1) critically review the status of research and
technology in the field; (2) address the agricultural impacts of biotechnology
aimed to improve plant disease resistance in the US and Israel; (3) assess
biotechnology and set priorities for future research in this area; and (4)
assemble integrated teams to develop novel research programs to combat plant
pathogens in the field. The workshop will advance discovery in the early cell
biology and signal transduction events that cover plant immune responses in
model and natural hosts. The workshop design will provide a unique format for
participants to critically evaluate the challenges and roadblocks that impede
research progress. Students will be active participants. They will gain
knowledge and feedback from leading scientists while providing a fresh
perspective for future work. Several participants have links to companies
working on agricultural technology development. Student exposure to the
infrastructure and goals of business models will be educational for their
professional development for industry-related work. Special attention has been
made to promote participation of women and minorities actively working in this
area.