* 1160467
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Traditional Authority in the State: Chiefs and Taxation in Ghana
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Clark Gibson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Peter Muhlberger
* 06/30/2013
* USD 12,000.00

What are the politics of traditional authority in the modern state? Scholars of
Africa often depict traditional authority as antagonistic to the power of
elected officials. But increasing anecdotal evidence reveals a more complex
relationship that generates crucial political and economic consequences. I seek
to explain the interaction between formal and informal political institutions in
Ghana with a strategic analysis, describing both variation in cooperation and
the political and developmental outcomes that result. I hypothesize that a
strategic delegation relationship exists between elected local politicians
(principals) and local chiefs (agents) to facilitate greater re-election success
for candidates with chiefs influencing citizen vote choice. In exchange for this
service, chiefs gain greater fiscal autonomy without interference by the
government. This trade of services between chiefs and politicians both enriches
chiefs financially and increases their legitimacy as powerful figures in the
community. This increased power in the development sphere allows chiefs to
parlay that influence into vote mobilization for certain candidates. As chiefs
become more involved in coordinating fiscal decisions, the daily importance of
elected government decreases. The delegation relationship between officials and
chiefs weakens the electoral connections between politicians and citizens,
ultimately lowering democratic competition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand
this delegation environment, I utilize several methods, combining nation-wide
descriptive analysis, formal theory, and a large household survey in southern
Ghana. I will use chiefly authority to explain electoral outcomes at the polling
station level by using data from my measure of traditional power and electoral
data to better understand the strategic considerations of this delegation. I
will create a formal model of delegation with moral hazard, where the wage
contract represents the level of fiscal autonomy chiefs are granted. Lastly, I
will use a random natural experiment that has an intervention for the level of
traditional authority in order to assess causal effects. I use information about
the location of built and planned railroads in colonial Ghana to argue that
modern transportation infrastructure weakened the traditional social fabric. I
then plan to sample villages along the treatment and placebo rail lines to
conduct a large household survey about voter mobilization, tax contribution, and
public service access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a number of
broader impacts. It can help policymakers as they design political and economic
development projects. Donor officials know the power that traditional
authorities have over the success and failure of their projects, yet little
research has been attempted to document and explain this power. Understanding
the relationship between local politics and traditional authority is a great
step toward designing policy that can more effectively meet its objectives. This
research has the ability to influence how policy-makers view the role of
informal political actors within the democratic process. Currently, Ghanaian
chiefs are constitutionally barred from the political process. If I find
evidence that chiefs undermine the democratic process, this could lead to
enhanced voter education and anti-vote buying campaigns within Ghana.
Conversely, if I find evidence of greater efficiency and quality of public
services provided by local informal institutions, this might lead to greater
delegation of fiscal authority and power for chiefs to promote local
development, a policy that could have widespread implications beyond Ghana and
Africa. By including informal and traditional authority into the scope of policy
analysis within these societies, new strategies to enhance the democratic
process and promote economic growth may be identified. The findings of this
study will apply to Ghana specifically, but its lessons may apply to other
developing country contexts as well.