* 1160672
* A Reference Grammar of Choguita Raramuri (Tarahumara) [ISO 639-3: tar]
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Gabriela Caballero-Hernandez, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 09/30/2018
* USD 189,995.00

Choguita Rarámuri (CR; Tarahumara) is an endangered, underdescribed Uto-Aztecan
language spoken in northern Mexico, an area where a significant number of
languages became extinct without any documentation before the eighteenth
century. With its complex morphology, CR provides a unique opportunity to
explore critical questions about the nature of the phonology-morphology
interface, the interplay between psycholinguistic and distributional factors in
agglutinating morphological systems, as well as the reconstruction of the
linguistic and cultural past of the Americas. Initial documentation efforts
carried out in the past decade have produced a representative sample of video
and audio recordings of a wide range of speech genres. This project will
quantitatively and qualitatively expand the existing corpus in order to deepen
description and analysis of the language towards the completion of a grammatical
description of the language. Through language documentation that is increasingly
controlled, modeled and produced by community members, the project will provide:
(1) a reference grammar linked to an annotated corpus; (2) an analysis of the
typologically unusual morphologically conditioned phonological processes of this
language; (3) an assessment of the variation in the linguistic structures within
the CR speech community, including variation between older, mostly monolingual
speakers, and younger, bilingual speakers; and (4) a corpus of transcribed and
annotated audio and visual documents available to community members to serve in
efforts of reversal of language decline. The annotated corpus will allow
conducting novel theoretical studies on the phonological cues of morphological
structure in this agglutinating language. As such, this project will contribute
to initiating studies of sophisticated and fine-grained phonological and
morphological properties in under-described languages of the Americas with
similar morphological systems. Both graduate students and undergraduates are
involved in this research, and the research will foster the community's efforts
to revitalize and fortify language use through involvement of community members.
In addition, the research will be of value to understanding the history of land
use in the area, a topic that has attracted recent attention.