* 1160122
* A multifunctional neural stem cell delivery system for brain tissue regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,05/31/2016
* Jianjun Guan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2016
* USD 348,117.00

1160122 Guan

The objective of this proposal is to create a novel neural stem cell (NSC)
delivery system that will ultimately improve efficacy of the NSC transplantation
into brain for brain tissue regeneration. The system will not only passively
protect NSCs from immune attack, but also actively stimulate NSC survival and
differentiation under hypoxic condition, a typical condition at the
transplantation site. NSC therapy holds a great potential to treat brain
diseases. However, direct NSC transplantation often results in a high rate of
cell death, caused primarily by host immune attack and hypoxic condition at the
transplantation site. A potential engineering solution is to use a biomaterial-
based NSC delivery system to protect the transplanted cells. Yet, the efficacy
of this approach is limited due to inefficient immunoprotection, limited cell-
biomaterial interaction, and hypoxic condition. The proposed work will address
these issues by encapsulating NSCs in immunoprotection capsules that will
effectively block both immune proteins and pro-inflammatory cytokines. The
capsules will also possess a microenvironment to stimulate the differentiation
of NSCs into neurons. To actively stimulate NSC survival under hypoxic
condition, cells will be continuously oxygenated.

The proposed studies will generate broader impacts on cell transplantation for
disease treatment and foster three levels of education and outreach activities.
Technically, the research has the potential to advance the current design
strategy for cell transplantation systems and significantly improve efficacy of
cell transplantation-based disease treatment. It also enables a multifaceted
education and outreach plan, including exposing high school students to polymers
and biotechnologies; engaging high school female students in science and
engineering; and providing underrepresented/minority graduate students with
solid training in the biotechnology field and will educate a new generation of
biomedical scientists and engineers.