* 1160937
* GOALI:  Georeferenced Visualization and Emulated Proximity Monitoring for Real Time Knowledge-Based Excavator Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Eric Urbain, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,999.00

The research objective of this award is to explore new visualization and
proximity monitoring methods for improving the spatial awareness and decision-
making capabilities of excavator operators. The investigated ideas will allow
excavator operators to persistently ?see? what underground utilities lie buried
in a digging machine?s vicinity, thus helping prevent frequently-occurring
accidents involving utility strikes. Methods to interpret and monitor a working
excavator?s proximity to vicinal buried assets will also be researched, which,
if successful, will enable real time knowledge-based excavator operation and
control. The research approach will involve the pursuit of fundamental knowledge
in georeferenced augmented reality visualization, equipment articulation
monitoring, and geometric proximity interpretation, and their integration for
spatial awareness and operator knowledge.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the benefits of this research will include the potential transformation of
excavator operation from a primarily skill-based activity to a knowledge-based
practice, leading to increases in construction productivity and safety. This is
turn will help realize tangible cost savings and reduction of potential hazards
to citizens, improvement in competitiveness of U.S. industry, and reduction in
life cycle costs of underground infrastructure. The research will impact
education by promoting subsurface utility engineering as an area of
specialization in engineering education. A diverse group of students will
participate in the research and acquire intensive skills and knowledge that will
allow them to make valuable contributions to society in their independent
careers beyond this research. The societal benefits of this research will thus
be: 1) reductions in construction and underground infrastructure life-cycle
costs that will be possible through safe and efficient excavation; 2) the
effective education and training of current and future engineers; and 3) the
career development of the personnel participating in the research.