* 1160985
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Center for e-Design
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2012,02/28/2013
* Judy Vance, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 02/28/2013
* USD 13,000.00

1160985 Iowa State University; Janis Terpenny &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks support for Iowa State University (ISU) to join the NSF IUCRC
Center for e-Design as a full university member research site. The Center for
e-design is currently comprised of Virginia Tech (lead), Carnegie Mellon
University, Brigham Young University, the University of Massachusetts Amherst,
the University of Central Florida, and the University of Buffalo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State University has faculty and student researchers
working in areas that are synergistic with the mission and vision of the
existing Center for e-Design. The addition of Iowa State strengthens the
presence of the center and its role as a significant national resource capable
of the following results: 1) inclusion of a multi-disciplinary viewpoint needed
to ensure the development of a new paradigm of excellence in the design of
engineered products and/or systems; 2) realization of conceptual modeling tools
aimed at reducing design cycle time and ensuring maximum achievement of design
goals for human use; 3) realization of an environment for economic and supply
chain design optimization; 4) establishment of a critical mass of expertise
focused on the development of an e-Design modeling and simulation software
platform and virtual prototyping tools, as well as strategies for achieving
simulation based acquisition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort will
contribute significantly to the successful development and preparation of
graduate and undergraduate students. Results of this research effort will be
integrated into the educational curriculum to enrich the student learning
experiences in design, modeling and simulation, decision analysis, rapid
prototyping, manufacturing, and simulation based acquisition courses. Students
associated with the Center for e-Design will receive exceptional career
development opportunities, as well as training in the ethical conduct of
research. The addition of Iowa State University to the Center contributes to the
diversity of the Center, with the leadership team and 25% of participating
faculty being women, typically underrepresented in engineering. The PI and other
ISU faculty plan to continue their long history of recruiting women and minority
graduate and undergraduate students. Research and educational findings will be
disseminated nationally and have significant broader impact through industrial
collaboration and technology transfer.