* 1160303
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science:  An Experimental Study of Diversity Management Techniques
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Sangick Jeon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

The goal of this project is to help public policy in reducing the social
problems that are associated with ethnic diversity. Considerable evidence
reveals that ethnic diversity undermines the ability of groups, communities, and
societies to act collectively and cooperatively. However, surprisingly little is
known about the strategies that might support interethnic cooperation. This
research uses experimental methods to evaluate two strategies for reducing
intergroup biases and promoting cooperation: a self-categorization (SC) strategy
that advocates the construction of unifying superordinate identities to minimize
the salience of in-group differences (e.g., based on team, nation), and a self-
verification (SV) strategy that proposes the construction of intergroup beliefs
that acknowledge the tremendous value of diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
the SC and SV approaches have been shown empirically and experimentally to be
plausible diversity management strategies. But there are three limitations to
existing research. The first is that, with few exceptions, virtually all
experiments that identify positive effects from SC or SV rely on convenience
samples consisting of American students, making it unclear how these strategies
would fare in populations with deeper and more intense divisions. Second, most
research on SV is qualitative or based on survey research, and does not
convincingly control for factors that might affect both SV and group
productivity. In other words, there is uncertainty as to whether SV has a causal
impact on group productivity. And third, no studies compare directly the
relative efficacies of the SC and SV approaches in a well-controlled setting,
making it unclear which strategy to prefer in real-world settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make a scientific advance, this research uses a field
experiment in group productivity and cooperation to test the individual,
relative, and combined efficacies of the SC and SV approaches to diversity. In
the experiment, an ethnically diverse sample of participants is recruited to
participate in a problem-solving competition for a large cash prize.
Participants are divided into groups of three for the competition, and groups
are randomly selected to receive an SC prime, an SV prime, both SC and SV
primes, or neither (pure control). Under these different treatments,
participants attempt a series of incentivized puzzles and cooperative tasks
designed by behavioral economists and social psychologists to study various
aspects of group productivity and cooperation. Outcomes are then compared across
the two cross-cutting treatments to evaluate the individual, relative, and
combined efficacies of the SC and SV strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research has practical implications in a world of increasing economic and
cultural integration, where groups and societies are not only getting more
diverse, but also fearful of its potential for generating social conflict. This
is the reason the experiment will be conducted in Nairobi, Kenya where diversity
appears to be undermining a half-century of impressive economic development,
with imminent violence that would have been a threat to American interests in
the region. Many public and private organizations, in Kenya and elsewhere, have
tried to minimize the costs of diversity by becoming "colorblind" and creating
strong organizational norms to encourage equal treatment of all individuals
regardless of background. Nation-states have similarly resorted to appeals to a
collective, national identity as a strategy for alleviating intense interethnic
cleavages domestically. Yet it is not clear how effective or even desirable such
convergence to homogeneity is. This research explores this tension between the
costs and benefits of diversity, and attempts to inform our approaches to
ethnically and culturally fractionalized groups, organizations, communities, and
societies.