* 1160410
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Uneasy Alliances: Traditional Leaders and Equality.
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,12/31/2014
* Aili Tripp, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 12/31/2014
* USD 11,940.00

The dynamic values and practices of African traditional leaders often clash with
the democratic values underpinning the states in which they reside. Of
particular concern is some chiefs' support of patriarchal customs that conflict
with the value of equality enshrined in many African constitutions. Namibia is
an especially relevant case to the study of traditional leaders' interaction
with equality policies. In 2007, despite laws that prohibit chiefs'
participation in governance, the Namibian government began a concerted effort to
engage chiefs as key stakeholders in the implementation of several gender
equality policies and campaigns. In a country in which nearly 70 percent of the
population recognizes a traditional leader's authority, the state's decision to
use chiefs as stakeholders in women's rights issues will likely impact the
efficacy of its policies and campaigns. The engagement of chiefs in the
promotion of equality policies motivates this project's central question: under
what conditions will traditional leaders promote women's rights? To answer this
question, the project examines the gender-related elements of three policy areas
in which chiefs have legal power or have been recruited by the state to serve as
stakeholders: HIV/AIDS education and prevention, communal land allocation, and
anti-gender-based violence campaigns. The project predicts that chiefs are most
likely to support policies that promote women's rights in matters outside their
historical areas of authority, thereby enlarging their sphere of influence. The
project combines archival research with interviews of informants from the
government, NGOs, rural communities, and traditional authorities. An original
survey of traditional leaders will capture demographic information and examine
motivations behind their policy preferences. Case studies of chief-headed
communities with varying policy preferences will pinpoint causal mechanisms
accounting for the logic of chiefs' support. The intellectual merit of this
research stems from its efforts to advance understanding of equality policies
and has two goals. First, it illuminates conditions under which a traditional
institution will promote democratic principles. Second, it examines the ways in
which the relationship between traditional authorities and the state changes the
goals and values of each institution. This project contributes to three bodies
of scholarship. To studies of formal and informal institutions, it introduces a
third, quasi-formal type of institution that questions the institutional
dichotomy accepted by most scholars. It joins a growing movement in the
traditional governance literature to move beyond discussions of chieftaincy as
threatening to democracy and instead examines situations in which traditional
leaders can assist in the task of democratic consolidation. To the research on
women in politics, the project adds a local-level perspective on women's efforts
to lobby chiefs in communities overseen by traditional leaders. The project has
broader impacts as well. For policymakers, understanding the motivations behind
traditional leaders' decisions to support or reject policies will improve their
strategies for crafting legislation that maximize chances of chiefly
endorsement. Findings in this case, moreover, will extend far beyond Namibia to
other African countries with strong chieftaincies, along with other countries
that have traditional leaders in some form, including Afghanistan, Pakistan and
South Pacific nations. For women's rights organizations, gender equality
policies are critical to the improvement of women's lives. The project suggests
that chiefs do not always threaten the success of women's rights policies but
can, in some cases, actually hasten the achievement of policy goals. This
insight will allow women's groups to more effectively lobby traditional leaders
for support of policies that they are likely to endorse.