* 1160156
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Political Information and the Dynamics of Public Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2013
* Thomas Leeper, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2013
* USD 12,000.00

Public opinion is integral to the political process; without a thorough
understanding of the public's views, representation by policymakers is
meaningless. It is insufficient, however, to think that opinions emerge
spontaneously; opinions instead reflect the information available to the public
- much of which comes from political elites (politicians, candidates, pundits,
etc.) via mass media. We must understand why and how individuals develop
particular opinions in order for policymakers, politicians, and the media to act
cognizant of their influence over the public whose opinions they must also
represent. How exactly are those opinions influenced by the choices that
individuals make among various alternative sources and types of politically
relevant information? In the 21st century political landscape, these
alternatives are numerous, diverse, and readily accessible -- especially on the
internet, where individuals are free to select and avoid whatever information
they so choose. Past research has not demonstrated how choices made within this
complex political environment shape political opinions over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explain how people form and
update political opinions. Specifically, it examines how opinions are shaped
over time by the information people acquire from the broader political
environment. The dissertation involves experimental methods that manipulate
information, psychological dispositions, and features of the political
environment in order to understand how these variations lead to different
opinions toward policy issues. By designing studies that mimic contemporary
politics, this research will explain how people form their opinions given much
of what they observe about politics results from their choices of where and how
to look for information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will yield a deeper
understanding of the causes and effects of peoples' information choices (i.e.,
the information they actively or passively acquire) and their preferences over
policy alternatives. The findings from the project will further public and
journalistic understanding of an ever-more-polarized and divisive political
landscape, where individuals are free to choose from a diverse array of
information alternatives on cable television and the internet. Whether the
information choices citizens make, and the information available from mass
media, polarize the political process is a vital concern to any democracy.
Findings regarding the interplay between information and opinion will contribute
to critical, informed discussion of the role of political media in contemporary
politics.