* 1160832
* CIF: Medium: Mobile multiview video: compression, rendering, and transmission
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Sujit Dey, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2016
* USD 1,188,174.00

The prominence of 3D video technology has skyrocketed. The 2009 movie Avatar in
3D became the highest grossing movie of all time. Such a movie requires left and
right views of a scene. Many video games which provide a 3D experience require
multiple views of a scene. Such data is costly to store and to
transmit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies how to efficiently compress
multiple-view video data, how to allow the scene to be viewed from any angle at
different levels of precision, and how to reliably transmit the data over mobile
wireless channels. This research has important applications in science
education, traffic monitoring, and surveillance and security.&lt;br/&gt;This
research studies efficient encoding, rendering, and transmission of multi-view
video, aiming for robust performance at arbitrary speeds of mobile units. The
research is applicable both to videos of the real world taken with multiple
cameras, and to rendered videos. The investigators study left/right view coding
such as in the H.264 MVC standard, and view+depth coding. The latter approach is
enhanced by encoding the error signal between the original view and its decoder-
synthesized version. To optimally design the system, the techniques use cross-
layer optimization, in which physical-layer channel-state information and
application-layer distortion-rate or slice-priority information are exploited.
Whenever multiple views are rendered from an underlying 3D virtual world, the
application's bit requirements can be hugely altered by rendering parameters
which affect the content and level of detail of the scene. The investigators
study user-experience models to quantify the relationship between rendering
parameters and user satisfaction, and develop a channel-aware adaptive encoding
and rendering algorithm to account for fluctuations caused by transmission over
a mobile channel.