* 1160274
* AGGREGATION: Automatic Generation of Grammars for Endangered Languages from  Glosses and Typological Information [ctn, ing, inh]
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Fei Xia, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 06/30/2015
* USD 228,071.00

The world's linguistic diversity is diminishing at an alarming rate, and there
are not enough resources (trained field linguists or funding for them) to
document all the endangered languages before they are gone. Thus there is a
critical need for software tools to support the efficiency of field linguists.
This project will develop software tools to assist in the documentation of
endangered languages by merging two types of resources: Collections of
linguistic examples curated by linguists and a cross-linguistic computational
grammar resource, called the Grammar Matrix. The result will be a system for
creating machine-readable, or implemented, grammars from data collected and
annotated by field linguists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Implemented grammars can
contribute to endangered language documentation in several ways: The grammars
themselves provide a very rich resource, allowing linguists to explore analyses
at a level of precision not usually achieved in prose descriptions. Furthermore,
implemented grammars can be used to create treebanks, that is, collections of
utterances associated with syntactic and semantic structures. The process of
creating the treebank can provide important feedback to the field linguist about
aspects of the linguistic data not covered by current analyses. The resulting
treebanks can be used to create further computational tools and are also a rich
source of comparable data for qualitative and quantitative work in linguistic
typology, grounding higher-level linguistic abstractions in actual utterances in
a computationally tractable fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While building an
implemented grammar is typically not within the scope of a field linguistics
project, field linguists do routinely create collections of examples of glossed,
translated text (called "IGT"), which encapsulate the result of extensive
linguistic analysis. This project will further develop computational methods for
extracting typological information from IGT like those pioneered by the RiPLes
project (Xia &amp; Lewis 2007, Lewis &amp; Xia 2008) and combine that
information with the cross-linguistic resource produced by the Grammar Matrix
project (Bender et al 2002, 2010) to create implemented grammars for endangered
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Information &amp; Intelligent
Systems of the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp;
Engineering is funding this award as part of its commitment to support the
development of computational tools and methods for the documentation of
endangered languages.