* 1160649
* US-Cameroon Workshop on Sociolinguistic Language Documentation in Sub-Saharan Africa in Conjunction with the Seventh World Congress of African Linguistics, August 2012
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2014
* Jeffrey Good, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/2014
* USD 46,594.00

CNIC: U.S.-Cameroon Workshop on Sociolinguistic Language Documentation in Sub-
Saharan Africa in Conjunction with the Seventh World Congress of African
Linguistics (WOCAL), August 2012 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
catalytic activity initiated by Dr. Jeffrey Good, State University of New York
at Buffalo with Dr. Pius Tamanji, Department of African Languages and
Linguistics, University of Yaound√©, Cameroon to promote new international
collaborations with African scholars. To that end, the US-Cameroon workshop on
sociolinguistic language documentation in Sub-Saharan Africa will be held in
conjunction with the Seventh World Congress of African Linguistics in August
2012. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordination of the workshop with a major
international conference where leading scholars present their research and plan
future projects is the ideal intellectual setting to maximize the impact of the
three-day workshop and draw attention to sociolinguistic language documentation
as an important area for research. The focus on Sub-Saharan Africa where there
are complex dynamics between societies and languages provides unique
opportunities as well as an ideal testing ground for developing theories and
models for sociolinguistic language documentation. Selected working group
reports will be prepared for publication and made available online. Most
importantly, the development of specific research projects and partnerships is
an expected outcome of this workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the
workshop will include U.S. graduate students, a significant number of African
scholars, and participants from under-represented groups in research. Tutorials
will be held on relevant sociolinguistic topics during the WOCAL to provide
attendees training opportunities. The focus on a largely unexplored research
topic with applications to work on language planning and maintenance make it of
potential benefit to under-resourced language groups within Sub-Saharan Africa
and beyond. Especially significant is that the results of this workshop are
likely to be of interest to Africans concerned with issues of language policy
and education, where a better understanding of the social context of
multilingualism would be of high value. This award is jointly funded by the
Office of International Science and Engineering and the SBE/BCS Documenting
Endangered Languages Program.