* 1160968
* Equilibria, Stability, Oscillations, Chaos, and Transients in Re-entrant Lines
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2012,02/29/2016
* Semyon Meerkov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Donald Hearn
* 02/29/2016
* USD 350,000.00

This research project is devoted to performance analysis and improvement of
production systems widely used in semiconductor manufacturing - the re-entrant
lines. It is universally accepted that performance of re-entrant lines is
characterized by large variability and oscillations of the throughput (TP) and
work-in-process (WIP). This leads to performance degradation and long and
unpredictable production cycle time. At present, no rigorous explanations of
these phenomena are available, and the attempts to combat them are far from
being successful. The research is intended to develop a theory that explains
fundamental reasons for these phenomena and provide techniques for their
alleviation. The approach is based on the methods of nonlinear dynamics.
Specifically, the project will investigate steady states of re-entrant lines,
their (Lyapunov) stability properties, periodic and chaotic oscillations, and
transient behavior (i.e., the processes of convergence to steady states after
machine breakdowns). As a result, the project will provide analytical tools for
investigating the performance of re-entrant lines, including TP and WIP
variability, and offer quantitative methods and qualitative insights that can be
used by production personnel to mitigate the undesirable dynamic
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this research will be
attained through industrial short courses to be offered by the PI at
semiconductor manufacturing plants. These courses will present the results of
this research in the format appropriate for factory floor applications. The PI
has been offering similar courses in the automotive industry for over ten years,
where the results of prior NSF-supported research on serial lines and assembly
systems have been presented. As an outcome, some of these results have been
incorporated in standard operating procedures at several automotive plants and
led to a substantial performance improvement. Similar outcomes are expected to
be obtained in the semiconductor industry as well.