* 1160820
* STEM For All
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2016
* Kevin Clark, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 04/30/2016
* USD 163,021.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to convene interdisciplinary
teams of STEM scholars to identify, explore, create, and engage in culturally
relevant research and activities on digital technology. It seeks to help STEM
scholars and their students to benefit from careers in STEM. The project
conducts this work through two face-to-face meetings, continuous online
discussions, and ongoing group interactions via social networks. It uses 25 STEM
scholars to review and discuss existing and future research. Participants work
collaboratively to: (1) develop a forum where interdisciplinary teams share
knowledge, devise agendas and action items that lead to broadening understanding
and pragmatic solutions for traditionally underserved students to enter and
persist in STEM fields; and (2) disseminate results from dialogues and group
actions to various audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research workgroups
synthesize and disseminate research articles, best practices, and evidence-based
culturally relevant programs that chart new directions, challenge deficit
thinking, and promote greater interest and participation in STEM. The project
benefits from ongoing partnerships with representatives from the United Negro
College Fund, Boys and Girls Clubs of America, National Urban League, National
Society of Black Engineers, National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People, National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering, and the After-
School Corporation that have agreed to contribute to this effort. The lead
institutions establish contact with media organizations that target STEM
scholars, which can assist with project dissemination. A five-member advisory
board helps guide and inform the project.