* 1160404
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Spectrum of International Undergraduate Engineering Educational Experiences
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Larry Shuman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 05/31/2017
* USD 467,814.00

This engineering education research project will investigate the types of
experiences that undergraduate engineering students have to develop global
competencies. Since globalization and technology have "flattened" the world
there is an increasing need for engineering students to be able to work in an
environment that is increasingly international. A variety of means, including
surveys and interviews, will help the research team understand the range of
experiences available to students, as well as what types of experiences best
foster global competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader significance and
importance of this project will be to inform engineering degree programs and
university administrators about the range of options available to develop
international competencies. Since such experiences are increasingly important
yet potentially expensive, such insights have the potential to inform program
development and evolution. The results of this study, while focusing on
engineering, can be generalized to other STEM fields. This project overlaps with
NSF's strategic goals of transforming the frontiers through preparation of an
engineering workforce with new capabilities and expertise. Additionally NSF's
goal of innovating for society is enabled by creating results and research that
are useful for society by informing educational policy and practices.