* 1160014
* GOALI: Fast Nonlinear Model Predictive Control for Dynamic Real-time Optimization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Fernando D'amato, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 08/31/2016
* USD 331,931.00

1160014-Biegler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For over three decades, Real-Time
Optimization (RTO) and Model Predictive Control (MPC) have emerged&lt;br/&gt;as
essential technologies for optimal process operation in the chemical and
refining industry. More recently,&lt;br/&gt;MPC has been extended to Nonlinear
Model Predictive Control (NMPC) in order to realize high-
performance&lt;br/&gt;control of highly nonlinear processes. Moreover, for many
applications there is a need for RTO to evolve&lt;br/&gt;from steady-state
optimization models to dynamic models, especially for systems, such as batch and
cyclic&lt;br/&gt;processes, that are never in steady state. Both NMPC and
dynamic real-time optimization (D-RTO) allow&lt;br/&gt;the incorporation of
first principle process models, which lead to on-line optimization strategies
consistent&lt;br/&gt;with higher-level tasks, including scheduling and planning.
However, more detailed dynamic optimization models that reflect complex reaction
and separation phenomena and multi-stage dynamic operation still need to be
addressed ? and solved as time-critical, on-line applications. Here, a major
concern is that computational times needed to solve these large-scale
optimizations lead to feedback delays in implementation that can degrade
performance and possibly destabilize the process. This proposal addresses these
issues and furthers the realization of fast on-line dynamic optimization with
first principle models. Our previous work led to a class of sensitivity-based
algorithms that separate dynamic optimization into background calculations,
where most of the computation is performed, and online calculations, where a
perturbed problem is solved very quickly. On-line computations are thus reduced
by several orders of magnitude and become very fast, even for large, complex
nonlinear models. These formulations were developed both for NMPC as well as
state and parameter moving horizon estimation (MHE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the proposed activity extends the development and analysis
of sensitivity-based&lt;br/&gt;on-line optimization with first principle dynamic
models, particularly advanced-step NMPC and MHE. This&lt;br/&gt;transformative
proposed work leads to nonlinear model predictive control and on-line dynamic
optimization&lt;br/&gt;for large-scale chemical processes without the
limitations of computational feedback delay. Advances will
be&lt;br/&gt;developed in the solution of background NLPs over multiple sampling
times. In addition, we propose to&lt;br/&gt;extend advanced-step NMPC and MHE to
hybrid systems, where discrete decisions (switches) are allowed&lt;br/&gt;at any
point in time, and the algorithm suffers no loss in computational efficiency.
Moreover, we will&lt;br/&gt;incorporate reduced order nonlinear dynamic models,
develop specialized NMPC and MHE approaches for&lt;br/&gt;these problems and
extend them to dynamic real-time optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity include the development and application of this approach to a number of
challenging power generation processes. Characterized by load changes and
dynamics with strong nonlinearities, performance of these multi-stage systems
can be greatly improved through efficient NMPC and MHE strategies. These
concepts will also be integrated within a comprehensive real-time optimization
framework that combines open source optimization and sensitivity codes with a
state of the art modeling environment. Finally, graduate training is emphasized
as a key component of this proposal. Included in the educational plan are
industrial interactions with GE Global Research and the development of courses
and materials related to Dynamic Real-Time Optimization.