* 1160335
* Collaborative Research: Airborne Detector for Energetic Lightning Emissions (ADELE) Operations on the Hurricane and Severe Storm Sentinel
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2012,03/31/2015
* Joseph Dwyer, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2015
* USD 40,000.00

This is a program to observe x-rays and gamma-rays emitted by thunderstorms. Two
known phenomena will be observed: the incredibly bright, fast terrestrial gamma-
ray flashes (TGFs) and ?glows? of gamma-rays emanating from the tops of active
thunderstorm cells. The Airborne Detector for Energetic Lightning Emissions
(ADELE) is a set of gamma-ray detectors and supporting electronics. In previous
flights, it was found that the first TGF seen from an aircraft, set strong upper
limits showing that TGFs are associated with &lt; 1% of lightning flashes, and
established that glows are quite common and extend to energies &gt;5
MeV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ADELE will be adapted to fly on a Global Hawk drone at
18 km as part of NASA?s Hurricane and Severe Storm Sentinel (HS3) mission, which
will provide 300 hours of flight time over tropical storms and hurricanes in the
Atlantic. The activities to be performed include adapting the instrument for the
new aircraft, integrating it onboard, participating in the campaigns by
monitoring our instrument in real time from NASA?s Dryden flight facility,
analyzing the data, and publishing and disseminating the results. Scientists
from Duke University will provide simultaneous broad-band radio-frequency data
to interpret the behavior of lightning corresponding to TGFs and the periods in
which glows are observed. Scientists from Florida Tech will provide
meteorological support and interpretation and will model the high-energy
processes associated with TGFs and glows. NASA Collaborator Richard Blakeslee
and colleagues will provide detailed storm electrical measurements, including
lightning, electric fields, air conductivity, and storm currents, from the
Lightning Instrument Package which will be simultaneously flown on the Global
Hawk during HS3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT &lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goals embrace understanding the physical mechanism behind TGFs and
glows and searching for high-energy emission associated with two other
phenomena: gigantic jets and elves. The measurements of the intensity and
spectrum of glows and the comparison of the gamma-ray data with lightning data
from the same storm and in-situ electric field and conductivity data (provided
by other instruments on HS3) will determine whether the glows represent a
significant current caused by relativistic breakdown with feedback. A new tool
for estimating the magnitude and extent of the electric field in the upper
layers of storms via the spectrum, intensity, and shape of the gamma-ray
emission will be developed. The ADELE flights will give dramatically improved
views of recently-discovered phenomena that may play a role in thundercloud
discharging and the physics of lightning initiation. The discovery of high-
energy radiation from gigantic jets and elves, both of which should involve high
electric fields, is a possibility, since this would represent the first time a
sensitive high-energy detector was taken into the vicinity of these
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACTS &lt;br/&gt;The program will
train several graduate and undergraduate students, some already involved with
ADELE and some new, in the skills of instrument development, programming, field
work, data analysis, and publication. The TGF measurements (both detections and
non-detections) will also help us address the public health question of how
often (if ever) aircraft passengers are exposed to the radiation dose of a TGF.
Directly within the region where TGFs are formed (probably less than a square
kilometer), the dose could be up to 100 times the annual limit for non-
radiation-workers.