* 1160780
* Environment-Agent Interaction in Autonomous Networked Teams with Applications to Minimum-Time Coordinated Control of Multi-Agent Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop motion coordination and path-
planning algorithms for small/micro unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs/MAVs) using
appropriate, state-dependent performance metrics that capture the interactions
of the vehicle with the environment, the mission objectives, as well as the
system-theoretic attributes of the network. The environment includes both the
ambient conditions (e.g., winds) as well as the actual, or perceived,
adversarial behavior of any opponents operating in the vicinity of the vehicle.
A key concept that will play a major role in developing these results will be
the generalized (Zermelo) Voronoi diagrams which can capture the dynamics of the
state of the agents in the network (e.g., estimated-time-of-arrival, path
curvature constraints) much better than traditional Voronoi diagrams that are
based solely on Euclidean distance. With the help of these diagrams, the
proximity relations between different agents and/or between the agents and a set
of targets will be characterized, and decentralized and distributed control
strategies will be developed.

If successful, the results of this research will enable small-scale autonomous
aerial, marine or underwater vehicles to operate in teams towards a common
objective such as environmental monitoring, distributed surveillance, multiple
target allocation, coordinated target pursuit, etc. in the presence of locally
strong winds or currents and with limited on-board power and computational
resources. Owing to their small size, the trajectories of these aerial platforms
are strongly influenced by the prevailing winds, as well as the limitations
imposed by the available on-board resources. The tools to be developed in this
research will also find application in other areas of networked controlled
systems, where intelligent agents must cooperate to perform their mission, a
task that would be infeasible if it were to be undertaken by a single member of
the team. Graduate and undergraduate engineering students as well as local high
school teachers will benefit from their involvement in this research through
NSF?s REU and RET projects and through Georgia Tech?s PURA and Dash
undergraduate research fellowship programs.