* 1160005
* A Switch for Synthetic Biology Based on Feature Density
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 327,592.00

1160005/ Bentley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most successful examples of the new
field of synthetic biology have come from imparting new capabilities into
microorganisms for the production of unnatural products or products not
typically made by those cells. Entire genomes are rearranged - at times to
ensure the effects of product overproduction are tolerated by the producing
cells (e.g., biofuels can inhibit producing cell growth). Generally, all cells
act identically and optimally. In few examples are the cells themselves the
"product" of synthetic biology. In an alternative view, individual cells can
carry out high level functions. They can even direct other groups of cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation of this work is to exploit the sensing and
computational power of bacteria. More specifically, a new biological switch that
will expand the reach of synthetic biology is envisioned - a switch that is
activated by cells that recognize "features" on nearby surfaces. Notably, one
could build a bacterium that surveys the area-based density of a feature on the
surface below. A "go"::"no-go" decision is made and implemented by the "smart"
bacterium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One potential application would reengineer
bacteria to recognize a cancerous cell from a healthy cell. The cancer cells
have more epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) on their surfaces than healthy
cells. While nanoparticle-based drug delivery brings drugs to any cell
displaying the receptor, this new methodology would instead ask the drug
carrying bacteria to decide whether the cell is truly cancerous, based on the
surface density of the EGFR. The bacteria could then reprogram themselves to
synthesize the drug and deliver it. This autonomous smart mode of drug delivery
is unprecedented.