* 1160568
* Student Poster Symposium at ASME Society-Wide Micro and Nano Technology Forum, Denver, Colorado, November 11, 2011 - November 17, 2011
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2011,09/30/2012
* Daniel Attinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2012
* USD 40,000.00

PI: Tony Jun Huang, Pennsylvania State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
CBET 1160568&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort seeks NSF funding for
student participation grants for the 2011 ASME Society-Wide Micro and Nano
Technology Forum to be held during the ASME IMECE 2011 in Denver, Co. The
proposed Forum will bring together ASME members and others, with a focus on new
developments in the field of micro and nanotechnology. For the past three years
the forum has been enthusiastically embraced by ASME IMECE attendees, in
particular students; each year, there have been more than 150 poster
presentations and about 300 attendees at the forum. The proposed NSF awards will
be used to further nurture student development by encouraging participation from
a select group of meritorious students working in the general area of
micro-/nanoscale engineering by providing them partial travel grants including
expenses related to conference registration fees and lodging. The travel awards
will be decided by a panel of experts from the Micro and Nano Forum organizing
committee, and will be based on the technical quality of the poster abstracts
submitted and statement from their research advisors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
the past, the participating students at the ASME Micro and Nano Forum have
greatly valued the opportunity given to them by the Forum to showcase their
research, interact with their peers, and meet people outside of their immediate
environment. Besides this, the Forum also provides opportunities to increase
student exposure to cutting-edge research in the frontiers of micro and nano
technologies, and increase student abilities with respect to tools that will
make them competitive in a research environment, namely, team work and project
management, oral and written technical communication skills, ethics, and overall
research acumen. In addition, the students will get an opportunity to attend
technical presentations (over 2000 presentations and posters are anticipated to
be presented at IMECE 2011) relevant to their current research, and also in
other mechanical engineering fields. This will expose them to solutions and
challenges that may be relevant to their current projects, while at the same
time provide opportunities to discover exciting new research activities to
pursue in future. In this regards, the mission of the forum fits well with the
mission of NSF (in particular the Engineering Directorate) in attracting young
research talents and mentoring them for a career in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Direct exposure of the participating students to leaders
in their research fields (technical organizing committee members, judges, etc.)
will provide them with a unique opportunity to disseminate their most recent
research, and receive first-hand information on available opportunities for
postdoctoral positions, as well as faculty positions. ASME traditionally hosts
several Grand Challenge sessions where speakers from industry or government
identify critical technical challenges facing the nation in various fields. In
addition, ASME award lectures by prominent researchers, special sessions on
ethics and the next-generation engineering education curriculum, and technical
tours to local industry and national laboratories represent other opportunities
for student learning and growth. Like in the past, personnel from NSF, DoD
agencies, national laboratories, and industry are expected to have a strong
presence at the conference. Members from these groups will be involved in
providing professional development seminars, workshops, information sessions and
recruitment activities, and will provide further new avenues for student
development as well. While selecting students for the travel awards, every
effort will be made to include and encourage student participation from both
minority and traditionally underrepresented student groups in engineering.