* 1160756
* Hydrogen in Transparent Conducting Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2017
* Michael Stavola, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 05/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

****Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The physics of hydrogen impurities in
transparent conducting oxides, a rapidly emerging class of electronic materials,
is the focus of this research program. The transparent conducting oxides combine
transparency in the visible with high conductivity. Native defects such as
oxygen vacancies and cation interstitials have traditionally been invoked as the
source of conductivity. Recent theory, however, finds that in many conducting
oxides, native defects are unlikely to be responsible for their conductivity.
Instead, hydrogen centers are predicted to be shallow donors that give rise to
strong n-type behavior. While a number of exciting theoretical predictions have
been made, a modern understanding of the conductivity of transparent conducting
oxides and the role played by hydrogen is in its infancy. IR and Raman
spectroscopies will be used to probe the structures and reactions of H-related
centers and their relationship to changes in conductivity. A central goal of
this project is the education of students. Experimental studies of impurities
and defects in semiconducting oxides and their effect on conductivity provide an
excellent opportunity for students to learn about the optical properties of
materials, characterization methods, and how defects affect properties. Students
are engaged in collaborations with leading research groups in the U.S. and
abroad and learn the value of teamwork by first-hand
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;****Non-Technical Abstract****&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of this research program is an experimental study of hydrogen in
transparent conducting oxides, an unusual class of materials that combine
transparency in the visible with high conductivity. Transparent conducting
oxides are widely used in common electronic devices like flat-panel displays for
computers. The presence of hydrogen is common in the metal oxides where it forms
strong O-H bonds and interacts with other impurities and defects. Surprisingly,
hydrogen is proposed to be an important source of conductivity. The goal of this
project is a fundamental understanding of the hydrogen impurity in conducting
oxides, its fascinating reaction chemistry, and hydrogen's role as a source of
conductivity. Research on strategic electronic materials, where interesting
physics and important technological applications intersect, provides students
with an excellent opportunity to learn about current developments in
semiconductor technology, the optical properties of materials, the physics of
semiconductors, and how defects affect properties. And the opportunity for a
student to make important contributions to problems that have an impact on
electronics technology ignites in him or her the excitement that leads to a
successful career in science and engineering.