* 1160624
* Planning: CE21 Maryland - Building Community and Knowledge to Increase Statewide Support for Computing Education
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Susan Martin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 08/31/2015
* USD 238,920.00

The University of Maryland, Baltimore County will gather data about the status
of Computer Science education in Maryland high schools and build relationships
among high school teachers, community college and university faculty, and state
education administrators to facilitate and increase state-level support for
lasting improvements to computing education. Despite the overall success of the
K-12 education system in Maryland, opportunities to study computer science vary
tremendously among the 24 school systems and approximately 200 high schools in
the state. This disparity can be attributed to several factors, including the
lack of a state-mandated computer science high school graduation requirement,
the fact that there is no state-required teacher certification in the
discipline, the absence of a standardized computer science curriculum, and
barriers to entry for girls and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CE21 Planning project, the
interdisciplinary team at UMBC will focus on two main goals: (1) performing an
assessment of the current state of high school computer science in each of the
24 Maryland school systems and (2) increasing knowledge about national issues
associated with computer science education among high school and state
administrators in Maryland, through state-wide summit meetings for teachers,
administrators, and higher education faculty. The longer term objective of this
work is to develop curriculum and teacher development programs that will improve
the quality, breadth, and student diversity of computer science education in
Maryland.