* 1160700
* Using Computational Tools to Facilitate Corpus Collection and Language Use in Arrernte (aer)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2014
* Julia Hirschberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Shobhana Chelliah
* 11/30/2014
* USD 98,219.00

Linguists studying endangered languages in the field often ask their informants
to describe pictures that illustrate particular characteristics of their
language, such as how it uses pronouns or spatial relations or concepts of time.
This enables the field linguist to obtain natural language with minimal
instruction, exercising minimal influence on what is said, so that accurate
information about the language can be recorded. Typically such pictures are
prepared in advance, based upon research hypotheses about the language -- but
often new hypotheses emerge in the course of sessions with informants.
Researchers at Columbia University have proposed to develop an aid to field
linguists which makes it possible to test new research questions as they arise
in the field. They will adapt existing text-to-scene generation software,
WordsEye, which allows users to create 3D scenes from simple English input, to
produce a novel tool for fieldwork called WELT, the WordsEye Linguistics
Tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WELT tool will ultimately have two modes of
operation: 1) In Phase 1, English input will automatically generate a picture
which can be used to elicit a targeted description, 2) In Phase 2, input in the
target language will automatically generate a picture representing the meaning
of the input, to verify linguistic hypotheses with native speakers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While WELT is intended ultimately for general use, it will
initially be developed to study Arrernte, an endangered language spoken by
~6000-8000 Arrernte people in Central Australia. While some aspects of this
language are well documented, a number of idiosyncratic lexical and
morphological features of the language that relate to describing spatial
relations are not well understood. Such features are interesting because they
relate directly to how a language is used by its speakers to describe the way
their perceive the world. The language group's remote location and insular
culture have made it difficult to document by traditional means, so that tools
such as WELT should be particularly useful. WELT will be tested in the field as
part of an existing cooperation with Dr. Mark Dras and other researchers at
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia.&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Information
&amp; Intelligent Systems of the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering is [co-]funding this award as part of its commitment
to support the development of computational tools and methods for the
documentation of endangered languages.