* 1160795
* EAGER: ON BUILDING A BRIDGE BETWEEN CLASSICAL CONTROL THEORY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS:
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* B. Ross Barmish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2014
* USD 120,000.00

Objective: The proposal deals with feedback control based methods for investment
in lieu of the traditional financial models. The goal is to exploit the
properties of feedback which do not require elaborate price modeling. Consistent
with basic feedback principles, the controllers are reactive to price rather
than predictive in nature.

Intellectual Merit: The research will stimulate the application of feedback
principles in finance as an alternative to economic modeling. Rather than using
unreliable stochastic price models, we treat price as an external uncontrolled
input against which we seek robust performance. The feedback controller simply
processes the history of price and possibly volume to determine the appropriate
level of investment. In a portfolio context, controller design will result in
new alternatives to the celebrated Markowitz theory for weighting of various
components. The proposed research includes the notion of robust certification of
performance in a so-called idealized market. The approach is to replace
expensive and time consuming back-tests with a new robustness paradigm for
evaluating investment strategies.

Broader Impact: The research plans to develop simple recipes and software for
the self-directed investor who is in essence competing against well capitalized
hedge funds and large financial institutions that can afford to take risky bets
with potentially high payoffs. We envision workshops for non-experts aimed to
teach attendees how to manage investments, a web site from which tutorial
literature and trading codes can be readily downloaded. This line of research
has the potential to motivate a new generation of graduate students in systems
engineering to consider careers in finance.