* 1160765
* Quasispecies Network Theories for the Cross Scale Evolutionary Dynamics of Pathogens
* BIO,EF
* 08/16/2011,09/30/2012
* Claus Wilke, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 09/30/2012
* USD 58,052.00

This project will develop a theoretical framework to understand how the inherent
variability of viral pathogens, and hence the evolution of escape from
prevailing host immune responses, develops across levels of biological
organization. The goal is to integrate dynamics from viral quasispecies
evolution within hosts, through host social transmission networks, to population
level epidemics and viral evolution. The required theoretical framework will be
derived via analytical approaches, bolstered by case studies; the resulting
theory will be used to explore the integrative scale at which selection works,
across a range of important acute and chronic viral pathogens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding dynamics across integrative scales or levels
of organization, from the molecular level to the continental scale, is a key
frontier of theoretical biology. Infectious diseases represent particularly
fertile ground for exploring these ideas. What makes the problem challenging and
fascinating is the adaptive feedback across scales - from protein to pandemic
and back - through the pressures of natural selection. The project will develop
and disseminate theoretical tools to explore these dynamics and apply them to a
range of important pathogens, from influenza to retroviruses. Research will be
tightly integrated to interdisciplinary training of undergraduates and
postdoctoral researchers through Pennsylvania State University's
interdisciplinary Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics. Postdoctoral
researchers will organize and run interdisciplinary workshops in disease
dynamics. Summer research opportunities will be provided for undergraduates
majoring in physics and biology; each student will be required to develop a
project in the 'other' discipline.&lt;br/&gt;