* 1160445
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: How Elite Polarization Constrains Leader Rhetoric
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* James Druckman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2014
* USD 11,900.00

My dissertation seeks to contribute to our understanding of how citizens make
decisions to engage with or to ignore partisan political events and the
implications of that behavior on political actors and institutions-
specifically, the Presidency of the United States. During times of extreme
partisanship and disagreement between Democrats and Republicans, certain types
of partisans may inoculate themselves against political rhetoric or events that
challenge existing political beliefs. Partisans expect their party to perform
better, to produce high-quality candidates, and to take appropriate issue stands
(e.g., Gerber &amp; Huber 2010; Taber and Lodge 2006; Gerber, Huber, &amp;
Washington 2010). When partisanship is a more prominent element of politics-
during times of party polarization, for example- individuals tend to engage with
their partisan identity more deeply and to use it to evaluate the political
world around them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliance on partisan identity, however,
carries a potentially major liability: it predisposes citizens to a distorted
view of the political world. In the heat of partisan rhetoric and political
campaigns, partisan identities become more salient, leading citizens to hold
situational self-conceptions as Republicans, Democrats, or Independents, and to
think about politics from an "us" verses "them" perspective. To preserve
expectations and to protect their partisan identities, people often engage in
selective exposure and motivated reasoning, the tendency to choose to expose
themselves to information that simply validates their partisan identities and to
react to new information in ways that only supports previous beliefs. When
confronted with uncongenial information, they tend to ignore, to discount, or to
counter-argue it (Taber and Lodge 2006). I hypothesize that this may cause
problems for the President and Presidential communication since the President is
often viewed as both a party leader and a representative of the nation as a
whole. Using survey and original experimental data, I will show that an
increasingly partisan environment tends to (1) prevent Presidents from gaining
access to and affecting an audience outside of like-minded partisans and
ideologues; (2) increase the likelihood that individuals rely on partisanship
rather than update their beliefs when confronted with new information; and (3)
provide added incentives to avoid rhetoric that challenges existing political
attitudes. The implications of these findings are that the President and his
rhetoric may have limited influence, only having an intensifying effect for
like-minded partisans while having little or no effect on the other party.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to investigate the impacts of party
polarization, partisanship, selective exposure, and motivated reasoning. On a
broader level, however, it is asking the value we place on a free-flowing, open
marketplace of ideas in the United States and the functionality of a political
system with highly polarized parties. Given the relationship between elite
polarization, salience of partisanship, and biased reasoning, there may be
reason to believe that meaningful political debate that transcends party lines
may be in decline. It is concerning if exposure to political ideas, policies,
and office holders only occurs among those who already agree with them. The
President, one of only two nationally elected officials, may be becoming less
effective as a uniting leader as a result of this partisan shift. Rather than
having the option of pivoting between roles of party leader and national public
opinion leader, the President may no longer have that option. Relatedly,
political attitudes may be becoming more entrenched, particularly given that
individuals can self-select the information that supports existing beliefs and
can resist updating their beliefs with new information. Finally, this project
will discuss the implications of this recent phenomenon on the Presidency, on
political parties, and on deliberative democracy as well as possible remedies.
There is inherent value in robust, informed debate between the public and our
elected officials; a trend toward selective exposure and biased partisan
reasoning is a potential hazard to any attempt to cultivate a genuine,
deliberative democracy.