* 1160924
* I/UCRC Phase I:  Optical Wireless Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Kevin Houser, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 05/31/2016
* USD 323,000.00

I/UCRC for Optical Wireless Applications &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1160924
Pennsylvania State University; Mohsen Kavehrad &lt;br/&gt;1161010 Georgia Tech;
Gee-Kung Chang &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Optical Wireless
Applications (COWA) will focus on generating technology that enables
manufacturing of specific devices with larger communications capacity, employing
integrated opto-electronics device design with interfaces necessary to
facilitate collaborative device, system and network design. Pennsylvania State
University (PSU) and Georgia Tech (GT) are collaborating to establish the
proposed center, with PSU as the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to establish an NSF-sponsored Industry &amp;
University Cooperative Research Center on Optical Wireless Applications (COWA),
in order to explore Optical Wireless Technology and economic potentials of
energy efficient light sources through innovative designs and applications of
solid-state optical sources and detectors for a wide range of practices that
include optical imaging, remote sensing, communications and networking. The
envisioned Center is based on the integration of interdisciplinary expertise at
PSU, and GT with devices and systems-based engineering design and networking
concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The envisioned Center will include efforts to
instill the cultural paradigm shift associated with promoting research programs
of interest to both industry and universities; exploring and extending the
interface between engineering systems design, networking and integrated electro-
optic device designs; improving the intellectual capacity of the workforce
through industrial participation and conduct of high-quality research projects;
and developing curriculum in components, systems and networks design aspects of
optical wireless applications. The results of this research are expected to
contribute to the business competitiveness, energy security, environmental
protection, and climate forecast. The proposed Center will make every effort to
promote diversity. In addition, it will work with existing university resources
to recruit and build strong relationships with minority and women-owned
companies.