* 1160862
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Connecting the Ephemeral and Archival Information Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 536,276.00

This collaborative research project (IIS-1160894, W. Bruce Croft, University of
Massachusetts Amherst and IIS-1160862, Jamie Callan, Carnegie-Mellon University)
addresses the complex issues of ephemeral information that is generated as part
of social interactions is different in terms of time scale, quantity, and
quality to archival information found on the web. This project investigates the
hypothesis that, because of the context provided, searching either ephemeral or
archival information is enhanced using the connections between them. It develops
new retrieval models and features for ranking functions in a range of search
tasks that can exploit an integrated ephemeral/archival network. Some search
tasks are based on previous TREC blog, microblog, and web activities. It also
investigates two new tasks, conversation retrieval and aggregated social search.
Conversation retrieval targets information units in the form of "conversations"
or "events" instead of simply retrieving social postings or web pages.
Aggregated social search ranks information in different granularities, such as
sentence, posting, conversation, or thread, based on the underlying query
intent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research that explores the connections between
ephemeral and archival information requires a dataset that contains both types
of information. A crucial part of this project extends the archival ClueWeb12
dataset with ephemeral microblog, blog, and discussion forum data that links to
the web data. This extension is distributed to the research community as the
ClueWeb12++ dataset. This project (http://ciir.cs.umass.edu/research/ephemeral/)
is the first to address the full possibilities of search that exploits all the
connections and contexts created by bringing together the two "worlds" of
information. It also develops and distributes a unique new dataset that supports
the development of a new generation of tools to access a broad range of
information. Students at collaborating institutions, University of Massachusetts
Amherst and Carnegie-Mellon University will be involved in educational
activities and benefit from research experience.