* 1160291
* Retrievable and Reusable Nanoparticle-Pinched Polymer Brushes Enable Highly Efficient Microalgae Dewatering for Cost-Effective Biofuel Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,03/31/2016
* David Wu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2016
* USD 299,025.00

1160291&lt;br/&gt;Liang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Various analyses based on the
production rate and environmental considerations have suggested that biofuels
from microalgae are likely the only realistic substitute capable of releasing
our reliance on fossil fuels. Despite decades of effort, commercial production
of microalgae-derived biofuels has not emerged because current technologies for
microalgae dewatering add a huge cost to the final product, and present a major
barrier between algaculture and biofuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A knowledge gap
exists in the underlying principles governing microalgae dewatering,
particularly for the rational design of coagulation agents. The long-term goal
of the proposed work is to understand the underlying principles that govern the
stability of a colloidal suspension of living cells, and to direct the phase
separation of free-floating cells in a controllable fashion. The overall
objective of this proposal is to identify the rational correlations between
inter-algal pair interactions and coagulation-agent structures in order to
achieve highly efficient microalgae dewatering at a negligible cost. The central
hypothesis is that nanoparticle-pinched polymer brushes, i.e., radiating polymer
chains covalently bonded to a nanoparticulate core, are far more effective in
dewatering microalgae than conventional flocculants; in addition, using solid-
state nanoparticles allows low-cost operations (e.g., using magnetic fields) to
be designed to collect algal biomass and retrieve the coagulation agents for
multiple cycles of microalgae dewatering, which further reduces the operational
cost significantly. We have formulated this hypothesis based on our strongly
supportive preliminary data. The rationale underlying the proposed research is
that, once the structural characteristics responsible for the unusually high
performance of this novel coagulation agent are understood, precise control of
its structure is expected to enable unprecedentedly cost-effective microalgae
dewatering. Hence the bottleneck preventing commercialization of microalgae-
derived biofuels will be cleared. We plan to test our central hypothesis and
accomplish the overall objective of this application by pursuing the following
three specific aims: 1. Identify a facile and highly efficient approach to
synthesize paramagnetic nanoparticle-pinched polymer brushes with well-defined
structures; 2. Determine how the microalgae dewatering efficiency is regulated
by the structural characteristics of the coagulation agents; 3. Determine the
efficiency of retrieving nanoparticle-pinched polymer brushes for continuous
cycles of microalgae growth and dewatering. The expected contribution of this
work is to determine the structural characteristics of engineered coagulation
agents that endow them with an unusually high efficiency in microalgae
dewatering and an unusually low operational cost. This contribution is
significant, because it creates a class of super coagulation agents via
examining rational correlations between inter-algal pair interactions and
flocculants of well-defined structures. This aspect has been poorly understood
despite decades of relentless trial-and-error experiments with commercially
available chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy and environment represent the
top challenges for the sustainable development of our societies. It is well
understood that securing renewable energy sources is the grand challenge of our
time, but it is not always recognized that any engineered material proposed to
address that challenge must be sustainable itself, an example is the design of
microalgae coagulation agent in this application. The researchers plan to bring
broad societal awareness on this aspect with the following integrated
activities: Incorporating research into teaching. The assembled research team
will be a nucleus to enhance biofuel research at Mines by giving seminars,
developing course materials, and attracting industry sponsorship. The PI will
build a webpage devoted to microalgae harvesting issues, and disseminate the
video clips of microalgae dewatering experiments to Youtube to advertise
sustainable materials for sustainable energy; Outreach to Underrepresented
Groups. The researchers plan to build a focused and sustainable outreach program
by developing lecture materials and classroom demonstration experiments on algal
biofuels, which will be used by the PI and his graduate students, to participate
in an existing outreach program at Mines that spans grades kindergarten through
the twelfth in two school districts, Adams County District 50 (AC50) and Meeker
County (MC). Both school districts are rurally located and have a high
proportion of students who are living in poverty