* 1160680
* Some Problems in Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2016
* Daniel Oberlin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 140,590.00

This mathematics research project will support the investigation of several
important problems in mathematical analysis. One of these problems is in Fourier
analysis and concerns the restrictions of Fourier transforms to curves in
Euclidean spaces. The other problems in this project are in geometric measure
theory. These fall into two categories. The problems in the first of these two
categories are all specific instances of the following: what can be said about
the dimension of a set in d-dimensional space if that set is known to be the
union of a particular class of sets of a certain type. The most famous of such
problems is the so-called Kakeya conjecture that a set containing a unit line
segment in each possible direction must have full dimension. These problems lead
directly to the study of the boundedness of operators known as Radon transforms.
The problems in the second of the two above-mentioned categories have to do with
the extent to which certain given patterns can occur in sets of a certain fixed
size. A prototypical example here is the unit distance problem. That problem
asks about the number of line segments of length one which can be formed by
joining pairs of points chosen from a given
set.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mathematics research project in the
areas of Fourier analysis and geometric measure theory has the potential to
impact a quite diverse collection of science and technology-related disciplines.
Here are some examples: Fourier analysis is an important tool in the study of
wavelets, and these in turn have applications ranging from data compression and
image analysis to communications theory; the study of the restriction theory of
Fourier transforms has applications to disciplines that are concerned with waves
and wave-like phenomena, such as fluid mechanics and quantum physics; the Radon
transforms are the basic mathematical tools which make possible today's
sophisticated medical imaging techniques; sets called fractals, which are one of
the objects of study in geometric measure theory, provide patterns for the
antennae in some cellular telephones.