* 1160219
* Catalytic Deoxydehydration of Biomass-Derived Polyols to Olefins
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Friederike Jentoft, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2016
* USD 425,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;#1160219&lt;br/&gt;P.I.: Friederike C.
Jentoft&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key chemical transformations that are needed in
the conversion of biomass into fungible fuels or useful chemical intermediates,
such as olefins, are characterized by effectively removing oxygen ideally
without significant loss of carbon. One approach would be to achieve this
employing several catalytic conversion processes, allowing each to be optimized
in terms of catalyst employed. Polyols, molecules with multiple OH
functionalities, are easily obtainable from cellulosic biomass in known
conversion processes. Principal investigators Friederike C. Jentoft and Kenneth
M. Nicholas of the University of Oklahoma are proposing to develop novel,
heterogeneous catalysts that will convert biomass-derived polyol substrates in
liquid phase, hydrophilic media. The target reaction is a deoxydehydration, that
is, oxygen and water will be removed simultaneously by reduction and
dehydration, respectively. With the help of a sacrificial reducing agent, the
net loss of two OH groups from the polyol can be effected, and a versatile
olefinic product is obtained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of
this project are to develop supported oxo-metal complexes as catalysts for the
deoxydehydration of polyols to olefinic products, to identify the reactive oxo-
metal species involved in these processes and to elucidate the reaction
mechanism. Achievement of the project?s objective will be facilitated by the
synergistic interaction between the Nicholas group in the Department of
Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry and the Jentoft group in the School of Chemical,
Biological and Materials Engineering. The groups combine expertise in
organometallic chemistry and homogeneous catalysis with expertise in
heterogeneous catalysis and spectroscopy. The PIs will explore an array of
catalyst compositions, with candidate transition metals for the oxo-complexes
being rhenium, molybdenum and vanadium, and candidates for supports being
activated carbon, ceria, and layered double hydroxides. The catalytic activity,
selectivity and stability of these materials for deoxydehydration of polyols
will be tested using sulfites and molecular hydrogen as reducing agents and a
variety of conditions and solvents. The key steps in the catalytic
deoxydehydration processes will be elucidated by spectroscopically monitoring
the interaction of deoxydehydration reductants and glycols with active supported
oxo-metal complexes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Successful execution of this research
project will: 1) establish a new, potentially useful, chemical transformation of
cellulosic- and glycolic feedstocks for the sustainable preparation of value-
added unsaturated products and intermediates that can be further converted by
existing processes; 2) provide fundamental knowledge and understanding of
chemical reactions involving carbohydrate/polyol substances, supported metal-oxo
species, practical reductants, and suitable reaction media; and 3) supply
cutting-edge cross-disciplinary educational and technical training in the key
discipline of catalysis for undergraduate and graduate students as well as for
postdoctoral researchers.