* 1160352
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Variational multiscale approaches to biomolecular structure, dynamics and transport
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Kelin Xia, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 319,477.00

A major feature of biological science in the 21st Century will be its transition
from a phenomenological and descriptive discipline to a quantitative and
predictive one. Revolutionary opportunities have emerged for mathematically
driven advances in biological research. Experimental exploration of self-
organizing biomolecular systems, such as HIV viruses, molecular motors and
proteins in Alzheimer's disease, has been a dominating driven force in
scientific discovery and innovation in the past few decades. However, the
emergence of complexity in self-organizing biological systems poses fundamental
challenges to their quantitative description because of the excessively high
dimensionality. This Focused Research Group (FRG) will provide a platform, led
by leading researchers from Michigan State University, University of Wisconsin-
Madison and Pennsylvania State University, who will synergistically merge their
expertise in theoretical modeling, scientific computing and mathematical
analysis, for quantitative descriptions of biomolecular systems. The research
addresses grand challenges in the structure, function and dynamics of self-
organizing biomolecular systems due to exceptionally massive data sets. These
challenges are tackled through the introduction of new variational multiscale
models, which reduces the dimensionality and number of degrees of freedom by a
macroscopic continuum description of the aquatic/membrane environment, and a
microscopic discrete description of biomolecules. Additionally, to further
reduce the dimensionality of excessively large biomolecular systems, the
investigators introduce a coarse-grained approach based on the density cluster
dynamics which extracts stable manifolds in molecular dynamics simulations. This
FRG project offers innovative new approaches to the massive data management,
dimensionality reduction, computer simulation, theoretical modeling and
mathematical analysis of biomolecular systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a timely effort to promote the quantitative transition of biological science,
which will lead to emerging new fields in both mathematical and biological
sciences. In particular, the proposed effort will significantly strengthen the
leading role that the U.S. researchers can play in mathematical molecular
biosciences by aggressively pursuing cutting-edge research and collaboratively
training a new generation of mathematicians in this emerging interdisciplinary
field. Three annual workshops and international meeting will be held in Michigan
State (Year 1), Wisconsin (Year 2) and Penn State (Year 3) to strengthen the
collaboration and extend the societal impact.