* 1160951
* Collaborative Research:  Tribochemically Induced Gelation and Film Formation at Metal Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Mathew Mathew Thoppil, RUSH UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER
* Continuing Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2016
* USD 116,631.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the mechanisms responsible
for the formation of mechanically robust coatings at metal surfaces, arising
from the combined action of mechanical and chemical forces. While the methods
employed in the project can be applied to a variety of metals, the focus will be
on cobalt-based alloys that are of direct relevance to biomedical devices. The
scientific questions to be addressed by this work revolve around the nature of
mixed metal/organic layers that form at the metal surface, strongly affecting
its properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this project will
result in a greater understanding of alloy materials that are widely used in
biomedical implants, including knee and hip replacements. The nature of the
mixed metal/organic layer formed at the surface of these materials has been
shown to be responsible for many of their favorable properties, but may also
play a role in an observed increase in the number of painful and costly device
failures. This project will provide the necessary scientific background to
develop implants that behave in a more consistent manner. In addition, the
collaborative nature of the project brings together physical science
undergraduate and graduate students at Northwestern University with medical
students at Rush University Medical Center. The project is designed so that
several medical students will participate in the project and develop an
understanding of scientific issues underlying the use of implant materials that
they may be using in future clinical practice. Conversely, engineering
undergraduate and graduate students at Northwestern will be informed of the
performance requirements and constraints that are relevant to the design and use
of medical implant materials.