* 1160289
* Carbon Nanotube Templated Battery Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2012,12/31/2016
* Robert Davis, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 12/31/2016
* USD 362,000.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop
electrochemical storage materials based on three dimensional carbon nanotube
composites. The carbon nanotube templated microfabrication (CNT-M) composites
consist of patterned vertically aligned carbon nanotube (VACNT) templates coated
with electrochemically active material. These structures allow for complex
hierarchical structuring of the material on both the micro and nanoscale. An
application where hierarchical structuring could play a transformational role is
in high capacity battery materials, like nanostructured silicon, the target of
the proposed work. Research on nanostructured silicon anodes has resulted in
materials with extremely high specific capacities, but it has not generally
resulted in materials with correspondingly high areal and volumetric capacity,
which are also required for high capacity cells. Additionally, capacity
stability is a challenge on these very high surface areas materials due to the
formation of surface electrolyte interphase (SEI) layers. We will fabricate and
test silicon CNT-M anodes that will provide a high degree of structural control,
which we will use as a tool to study the influence of surface area on SEI
stability and impact, and the influence of pore size, layer thicknesses and
structure on electrode capacity at different rates. We will also extend this
fabrication process to create microscale encapsulation cells for the
nanostructured silicon material, separating the liquid electrolyte from the
nanostructured silicon surface in order to control SEI stability and
dramatically reduce the negative impact of SEI formation. In short, the proposed
transformational work will allow us to understand and optimize the influence of
electrode&lt;br/&gt;structure on the performance of energy storage electrodes in
a way that has not previously been possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It also holds
the promise of creating structurally engineered electrodes, including
microencapsulated and three dimensional electrodes, for a new generation of
high-performance electrical storage devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of
the proposed work include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Fabrication of hierarchically
patterned silicon electrodes. Structures based on patterned VACNT templates that
can facilitate optimal ion and electron conductivity, allow for control of the
silicon/electrolyte interface using microencapsulation, and provide a platform
for the development of three dimensional batteries will be
fabricated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterization and optimization of CNT-M
electrodes. Structural and electrochemical characterization will be coupled with
computational modeling to identify and quantify rate limiting mechanisms and the
influence of geometry on rate and stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary team of experts from BYU with an established record of
successful collaboration has been assembled to take advantage of this
transformational opportunity. The team includes a physicist with expertise in
nanofabrication including extensive work in vertical nanotube growth and
chemical vapor deposition; another physicist with expertise in nanoscale
materials characterization including transmission electron, scanning
transmission electron, and focused ion beam microscopy and microanalysis; and a
chemical engineer with expertise in electrochemistry and energy storage
materials and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
proposed work is that it introduces potentially transformational electrochemical
materials based on templated carbon nanotube composites. These new materials
have the potential to enable the development of energy storage systems with both
high energy density and high power density, including 3D electrodes. Energy
storage with these characteristics is desperately needed to address a wide
variety of issues in our rapidly changing energy generation and delivery
systems. These unique materials also provide a well-controlled test bed for
fundamental understanding of the structural&lt;br/&gt;factors that limit
electrode performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include the development of new
energy storage materials with the potential to have significant societal and
environmental impact. In addition, the proposed work will involve education of
undergraduate and graduate students in a multidisciplinary environment where the
specific training is in energy storage materials. The PI?s have a long track
record of involving undergraduates in a&lt;br/&gt;positive research mentoring
environment and will continue this effort. The impact of the work will be
extended further through a primary school outreach program that will develop and
sustain interest in science and technology by underrepresented groups.