* 1160515
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Does Power Corrupt? An Experimental Approach To Explore the Origins of Corruption in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2013
* Clark Gibson, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 07/31/2013
* USD 11,915.00

Government corruption is widespread in Africa. However, as spectacular as
scandals&lt;br/&gt;involving corruption in the central government might be, it
is the behavior of local officials that&lt;br/&gt;most citizens directly
experience, and it is at this level that government officials may
be&lt;br/&gt;especially susceptible given the lack of media presence and
bureaucratic oversight. A culture of&lt;br/&gt;corruption promotes short-term,
selfish behavior and punishes behavior that citizens would&lt;br/&gt;consider
fair and oriented towards the common good, such as egalitarianism and trust.
The&lt;br/&gt;consequences of such behavior can be
disastrous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But what causes corruption? Is the widespread
corruption in African politics the product&lt;br/&gt;of political institutions
or of the type of individuals who seek office? Do individuals prone
to&lt;br/&gt;corruption self-select into government positions or does holding
office condition traits that&lt;br/&gt;underlie corrupt behavior? Some
researchers in political science assert that political
institutions&lt;br/&gt;are responsible for corruption in Africa. Others argue
that Africa faces widespread corruption&lt;br/&gt;because Africans are corrupt,
that their culture embeds corruption in tradition and
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;According to the viewpoint of the former group, that of
the institutionalists, corruption arises&lt;br/&gt;after political officials
take office. According to the latter viewpoint, the cultural
viewpoint,&lt;br/&gt;corruption is ever-present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For my
dissertation, I plan to test whether political institutions cause corruption
using a&lt;br/&gt;novel series of experiments with local-level political leaders
in Zambia and Tanzania. Since&lt;br/&gt;Zambia and Tanzania have similar
national levels of corruption but different corruption&lt;br/&gt;environments at
the local level, they are compelling comparison cases. Designing research
to&lt;br/&gt;investigate the origins of corruption is difficult, since most of
the existing data is based on&lt;br/&gt;surveys of citizens, not based on the
behaviors of government officials. Fortunately, there is
an&lt;br/&gt;alternative approach that I plan to utilize in my dissertation. I
will gather real politicians to&lt;br/&gt;observe their choices in person,
allowing me to observe how choices are made and where&lt;br/&gt;corruption
arises. This method of data collection will allow me to observe the behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;government officials rather than studying corruption via third
party surveys. I will recruit a&lt;br/&gt;sample of politicians who ran for
local government in Zambia and Tanzania. Some of the&lt;br/&gt;subjects will
have won the last election and some of them will have lost, providing me
with&lt;br/&gt;comparison groups. With carefully chosen comparison groups, any
differences in behavior in my&lt;br/&gt;experiments can be attributed to the
political institutions associated with holding office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work holds promise for both policymaking and science. Donors
and&lt;br/&gt;international organizations believe that corruption undermines
prosperous and peaceful&lt;br/&gt;governments in Africa. While some members of
this group believe that the creation and support&lt;br/&gt;of well-designed
political institutions can reduce the level and extent of unethical
behavior,&lt;br/&gt;others believe that such behavior is too culturally
entrenched to change. There is little rigorous&lt;br/&gt;research to inform
these positions. My dissertation will help provide a theoretically informed
and&lt;br/&gt;methodologically sound examination of the foundations of
corruption. Understanding the causes&lt;br/&gt;of corruption can enable
policymakers to create institutions designed to moderate its
existence&lt;br/&gt;and effects. The project also takes an important step
forward in the use of politicians as&lt;br/&gt;participants in the study of
corruption. Hundreds of research projects have been designed to&lt;br/&gt;tackle
issues of politics, but none that we know of use actual politicians to
investigate the&lt;br/&gt;foundations of the choices of the political elite.