* 1160938
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Mid-Atlantic Center for Fisheries Science (MaCFiS)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2013
* Roger Mann, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 02/28/2013
* USD 11,500.00

Planning Grant: Mid-Atlantic Center for Fisheries Science (MaCFiS)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1160942 Rutgers University; Eric Powell &lt;br/&gt;1160938
College of William and Mary Institute of Marine Science; Roger Mann
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mid-Atlantic Center for Fisheries Science (MaCFiS)
will utilize academic and recreational and commercial finfish and shellfish
fisheries resources to address urgent scientific problems limiting successful
management of these fisheries during the period of intense climate change.
Rutgers University the College of William and Mary Institute of Marine Science
are collaborating to establish the proposed center, with Rutgers University as
the lead institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to seek
funding for a planning meeting to establish a new Industry/ University
Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) entitled "Mid-Atlantic Center for Fisheries
Science." The focus of the proposed center will be to develop essential
biological data on fish stocks, including fecundity, age structure, and sources
of mortality; improved models of sampling design, population dynamics, and
fishery performance; evaluation of geographic and depth variations in stock
structure and how these relate to the genetics, physiology and sexual dimorphism
of species; and improved approaches to fishing to limit discard reduction
through gear innovation, but also through modifications in fleet deployment
consistent with oceanographic processes. These subjects encompass much of the
fields of marine biology and oceanography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
center would have significant impact on both the commercial and recreational
fishing industries. The research at the proposed center will result in improved
survey sampling methods, improved population dynamics models, new approaches to
discard reduction, evaluation of geographic/depth-dependent variations in stock
structure, identification of physiological/genetic origins of stock dynamics,
and other meritorious outcomes, all aimed at the dual goals of sustainable fish
stocks and sustainable fishing industries, thus simultaneously optimizing
economic benefit while optimally husbanding the nation's fish resources.