* 1160151
* GOALI: Molecular modeling of confined nano-phases: pressure enhancement, diffusion and electrical double layers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Keith Gubbins, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2016
* USD 451,647.00

Abstract 1160515 Gubbins, Keith E.

This GOALI project involves university-industry collaboration between
researchers at North Carolina State University (NCSU) and at Quantachrome
Instruments, a leading maker of instruments for characterizing nano-structured
materials. The aim of this project is to investigate the effects of confinement
in nanoporous materials on pressure enhancement, diffusion, phase changes and
supercapacitor performance, using realistic atomistic models of the materials.
Fundamental understanding of these effects will assist in optimization of the
materials for specific applications. The materials to be studied are carbide-
derived carbons, mesoporous carbons and oxides, and hierarchical carbons and
oxides. Applications of particular interest are the use of these materials for
diffusional separations, chemical reactions and supercapacitors.

This project will involve cooperative research with researchers in Zhejiang
University in Hangzhou (Professors Wang Qi and Liu Ying-Chun and coworkers) in
China on diffusion in nanopores; the University of Hong Kong (Professor Kwong-Yu
Chan and coworkers) on carbon-based supercapacitors; and Shinshu University
(Professor Katsumi Kaneko) on pressure enhancement effects.

Preparation of these materials and experimental studies of structure and
adsorption on them will be performed by researchers at Quantachrome Instruments
and University of Hong Kong, and this data will be provided to the NCSU
researchers. Quantachrome scientists will also offer advice on directions for
the modeling work carried out at NCSU. The NCSU researchers will develop and
test new simulation methodologies to model these materials and study effects of
confinement on the properties of confined nano-phases. In particular, Monte
Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations will be carried out to study
adsorption, pressure enhancement and diffusion in these materials. In the case
of the carbon materials, molecular simulations will be carried out to determine
their use as supercapacitors, including studies of capacitance, power density
and diffusion in the pore structures, with the aim of understanding the
influence of pore design on performance.

Intellectual Merit. The realistic models that are being developed in this work
will make possible fundamental investigations of the influence of confinement
and nature of the material on adsorption, phase changes, diffusion, reactions
and electrode performance. Recently, we have demonstrated that very high
pressures (tens of thousands of bars) exist in confined nanophases within
carbons and silicas, and studies of this effect are expected to provide new
insight into many confinement effects.

Broader Impact. Improved understanding of the behavior of nano-phases confined
within these novel nano-porous materials will impact a broad range of
technologies, and is essential to the design of new biological and chemical
sensors, nano-reactors, energy storage media, electrodes for fuel cells and
supercapacitors, and nano-structured catalysts. The graduate students working on
this project will learn modern multi-scale modeling methods, and will gain
experience of international cooperative research through our active
collaborations in this area with the researchers in China, Hong Kong and Japan.