* 1160874
* Catalyzing International Partnerships in Community-related Environmental and Sustainability Research and Education: Ethical, Structural and Institutional Issues of Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2014
* Matthew Therrell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* R.  Clive Woods
* 03/31/2014
* USD 20,000.00

The project will convene a group of researchers and students from the U.S.,
Africa, and Asia to catalyze the expansion of a unique international
collaborative model of education and research. It will support the participation
of environmental, sustainability and community engagement researchers and
practitioners focused on improved resilience of environmental systems in
developing regions of eastern and southern Africa (Uganda, Kenya, Mozambique,
South Africa), as well as the Asian highlands of Nepal, Mongolia and
Myanmar/Burma. Current and potential international colleagues will participate
in a structured writing clinic that aims to focus on: 1) the synthesis of
education and research best practices regarding ethical, structural and
institutional issues of international collaborations; and 2) the collaborative
generation of interdisciplinary research related to community development
focused on environmental change and sustainability. Broad environmental research
and education interests that underpin the larger workshop include the
functioning and resilience of forested ecosystems in developing areas of Africa
and Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will provide a venue for
international collaborators to share their experiences and perspectives on
participating in international research and teaching partnerships. It has been
the researchers? experience that this approach helps to foster cross-cultural
knowledge exchange within a community of trust and equity for all partners. At
the same time, the workshop seeks to provide an opportunity for U.S. based
scientists, researchers, educators and students to learn from these interactions
and to disseminate this knowledge through the development of a special higher
education journal issue. Articles and potential topics that will be addressed
and disseminated in the special edition journal include: improved teaching and
methodological approaches for preparing students to engage in international
environmental research and education projects, measuring student learning
outcomes from interdisciplinary research experiences, new pedagogies for
community and faculty collaboration in environmental sustainability initiatives,
and ethics, protocols and practices of cross-disciplinary and international
environmental sustainability research. Dissemination will also include
presentations at major symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will promote
interdisciplinary research and education collaborations between U.S. and
international colleagues that would have not been possible otherwise.
Specifically, it will support the participation of graduate students, beginning
investigators, as well as professionals from predominantly four-year
institutions. It is anticipated that the workshop will yield information that
improves future curricula focusing on environmental sustainability, community
engagement and sustainable development. Meeting results and recommendations will
be disseminated including: perspectives on interdisciplinary collaboration, best
practices regarding student preparation to conduct ethical and responsible
international research in a special higher education journal issue as well as
through the expansion of our project website and other digital media.