* 1160026
* Routes to UV Activated Fouling Reversal and Molecular Weight Cutoff Control in Tethered Micelle Ultrafiltration Membrane Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Travis Bailey, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

1160026&lt;br/&gt;Bailey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award by the Chemical and
Biological Separations program of the Chemical, Bionengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems (CBET) Division and the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Chemistry Division supports work by Professor
Travis S. Bailey to develop new a new class of ultrafiltration membranes
relevant to biological separations prevalent across a range of industries,
particularly pharmaceutical processes involving antibody and protein based drug
purification. In a recent article by Reuters published in April 2011, it was
projected that as early as 2014, 8 of the 10 world?s top selling drugs will be
antibody based biologics. Separations involving the manufacture of these
biologics continue to represent a major fraction of the production cost, due to
high costs of current membrane technologies (e.g. Protein A type columns),
limited membrane lifetimes due to excessive fouling, and difficult integration
into large scale purification process flows. In response to these fundamental
challenges, this work explores a new approach to ultrafiltration membrane
fabrication based on photoactive tethered micelle networks, assembled from
nanostructured block copolymer assemblies. The principal objectives of the
proposed research are to develop and validate the potential of this new class of
ultrafiltration membranes to provide (1) high flux, (2) narrow and uniform pore
size distributions, (3) user-enabled tuning of the molecular weight cutoff
regimes and (4) built in fouling resistance and reversal capabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cumulative energy (and therefore cost) savings associated
with higher efficiency ultrafiltration processes would have worldwide impact,
dramatically reducing purification processing costs associated with antibody and
other protein based drugs being brought to market. Improved fouling resistance
and effective reversal strategies would additionally extend the range of systems
for which ultrafiltration is a viable separations solution.