* 1160961
* Collaborative Research, WSC-Category 2: Regional Climate Variability and Patterns of Urban Development - Impacts on the Urban Water Cycle and Nutrient Export
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2011,09/30/2016
* H. Allen Klaiber, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2016
* USD 281,615.00

PI # 1: Welty, Claire Proposal Number: 1058038 Institution: University of
Maryland Baltimore County

PI # 2: Smith, James A. Proposal Number: 1058027 Institution: Princeton
University

PI # 3: Irwin, Elena G. Proposal Number: 1058059 Institution: Ohio State
University

PI # 4: Klaiber, H. Allen Proposal Number: 1058064 Institution: Pennsylvania
State Univ University Park

PI # 5: Towe, Charles Proposal Number: 1058101 Institution: University of
Maryland College Park

PI # 6: Groffman, Peter M. Proposal Number: 1058162 Institution: Institute of
Ecosystem Studies

PI # 7: Gold, Arthur Proposal Number: 1058194 Institution: University of Rhode
Island

PI # 8: Kaushal, Sujay Proposal Number: 1058502 Institution: University of
Maryland College Park

Intellectual Merit The goal of the proposed work is to evaluate the interactions
between urban development patterns and the hydrologic cycle and its associated
nutrient cycles, within the context of regional and local climate variability.
The paradigm driving this research is that dynamic interactions between the
natural and human components of the urbanizing landscape produce striking
spatial heterogeneity and temporal variability in water storage and fluxes that
are major determinants of water quantity and quality. Their specific objective
is to create a modeling system capable of simulating the feedback relationships
that control urban water sustainability. They propose to address the following
research questions: (1) How do human locational choices, water-based ecosystem
services, and regulatory policies affect the supply of land and pattern of
development over time? (2) How do the changing composition and variability of
urbanizing surfaces affect local and regional climate? (3) How do patterns of
development (including the engineered water system) and climate variability
affect fluxes, flow paths and storage of water and nitrogen in urban areas? The
proposed work will integrate theories and models across the disciplines of
hydrologic science, environmental engineering, biogeochemistry, and economics.
Core elements include spatial modeling of urban development patterns and
individual land use and location processes at parcel and neighborhood scales and
for different policy scenarios; three-dimensional modeling of coupled surface
water/groundwater and land surface-atmospheric systems at multiple scales
(including consideration of the engineered water system), where development
patterns are incorporated as input; and field work and modeling aimed at
quantifying flow paths and fluxes of water and nitrogen in this system. They
will use the Baltimore Ecosystem Study LTER (http://beslter.org), as a platform
for place-based research to carry out the proposed work. In doing so, they will
take advantage of a 12-year database of hydrologic and chemical characterization
data; high-resolution land-cover, land use, and socio-demographic information;
and a high-density hydrologic observing system.

Broader Impacts This project will contribute to the education and professional
development of over 20 undergraduate students, seven PhD students, and three
post-doctoral associates at the partner institutions supported by the project.
In addition, it is expected that data produced by this project can be used in
dissertation research by a number of other graduate students affiliated with the
BES LTER, whose expertise spans environmental engineering, hydrology,
biogeochemistry, aquatic ecology, urban and environmental economics, and public
policy. New modeling capabilities will enable us to broaden the scope of
training and research opportunities provided to students at all levels. New
instrumentation will contribute to the growth of infrastructure capabilities of
the LTER as a resource for the scientific community. Their work involves
frequent communications with local agency decision-makers involved with planning
and implementing programs affecting land use and water resources, e.g.,
Baltimore City Department of Public Works, Baltimore County Department of
Environmental Protection and Resource Management, Maryland Department of the
Environment, and the EPA Chesapeake Bay Program. Modeling tools such as the ones
proposed are very much needed to support decision-making associated with water
resource management. The BES LTER has an active and extensive environmental
education program working with Baltimore City and County school systems; data
derived from LTER-related research projects in the Baltimore area, such as the
one proposed will be used in this LTER-supported program.