* 1160010
* Noise-synchronized Electrophoretic Manipulation in Nanoporous Hydrogels
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Victor Ugaz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 07/31/2016
* USD 272,608.00

1160010 &lt;br/&gt;Ugaz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work aims to show how
the same dynamics governing phenomena as diverse as global climate change and
sensory perception can be exploited to direct macromolecular transport through
nanoporous surroundings. The researchers aim to demonstrate this in the context
of gel electrophoresis by establishing a resonance condition in an entropic
trapping transport regime that synchronizes the otherwise noisy uncorrelated
motion of DNA between pores in the matrix. Surprising consequences of exploiting
this unique effect include simultaneous transport of different-sized molecules
in opposite directions, and a counterintuitive inverted size dependence of
separation efficiency. This resonance effect can be precisely manipulated by
adjusting the driving electric field and pore size distribution of the
surrounding gel matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the foundation of
promising preliminary studies, new fundamental research will be performed aimed
at understanding how the nanoscale pore morphology of hydrogels can be tailored
to fully harness the unique features of entropic trapping-based macromolecular
transport. This information, currently lacking, is a key to fully exploiting the
benefits of this resonance effect in practical settings. First, a predictive
transport model based on input generated will be developed by applying a
combination of mechanical, calorimetric, and TEM-based studies to quantify the
nanoscale pore size distribution across a broad range of matrix formulations.
These results will allow us to rationally tailor gel compositions and
polymerization conditions to achieve optimal resonance synchronization targeting
macromolecular analytes of specific size. Second, the results will be extended
to a broader range of analytes by applying new photoinitiator and gel
compositions to obtain larger average pore sizes, and by incorporating
additional activation modes into the transport model with input from single
molecule visualization studies. Third, the fundamental insights gained in
Objectives 1 and 2 will be adapted toward realistic separations involving
analysis of STR/SNP products, long DNA, and proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to access the same dynamics that explain global climate change events
and apply them to describe macromolecular transport at the nanoscale is
intellectually intriguing, with few parallels in published literature. The
ubiquity of gel electrophoresis casts a relatable backdrop for the practical use
of resonance phenomenon to achieve vastly improved fractionation by simply
applying a periodic electric field in a gel with a specific pore size
distribution. Timely far-reaching implications include establishing design rules
to construct matrix architectures optimally tailored to exploit these effects,
and enabling new manipulation and sorting functionalities in other emerging
adaptations of nanoscale potential well traps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
resonant synchronization effect, previously thought possible only in idealized
nanomachined topologies, can be readily accessed in widely used polymeric
hydrogels despite their heterogeneous nanopore arrangement. The proposed
research will establish rules for design of matrix architectures optimally
tailored to exploit this unique transport mode. By providing a new avenue to
access these phenomena in ordinary hydrogels (as opposed to idealized planar
nanomachined topologies), an unprecedentedly pathway exists for the results of
this research to be directly implemented in virtually any molecular biology lab.
These effects are also likely to significantly broaden the possibilities to
execute synchronized manipulation of macromolecules and particles in 3-D
nanoenvironments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology has enormous potential to
impact molecular biology by enabling significant improvements in electrophoretic
separation efficiency. We propose to incorporate this instrumentation into
simple devices that allow the DNA separation process to be viewed and studied in
the classroom. The researchers plan to harness the portability and ease of
operation of this system to develop numerous adaptations aimed at students
ranging from K-12 through college, as well as additional outreach opportunities
(workshops for high school students and teachers, minority outreach, graduate
school recruiting, etc.). This research will be integrated into curriculum at
both the undergraduate and graduate levels, leveraging the PI's involvement in
multiple REU efforts and as chair of a biotechnology-focused professional
science master's program.