* 1160772
* Interaction of Engineered Nanomaterials with Artificial Cell Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/08/2011,08/31/2013
* Jonathan Posner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 195,571.00

0932885&lt;br/&gt;Posner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past five years, there
has been a growing interest in the health-related issue of toxicity of
engineered nanomaterials. Cells have various routes for uptake of molecules and
particles through their cell membranes to control their internal environment
including highly selective membrane proteins and peptides as well as protein
mediated endocytosis and phagocytosis. Nano-particle (NP) based drug delivery
and molecular imaging applications that deliver NP into cells typically use
biochemical functionalization which promote specific signaling and uptake. The
lipid bilayers that make up cellular membranes are believed to be impenetrable
to ions and unfunctionalized macromolecules, however, epidemiological studies
have shown that unfunctionalized NPs can, under some conditions, cross or
disrupt the cell membrane through passive, unmediated routes causing acute
cellular toxicity and cell death. The unmediated NP adsorption onto and the
uptake into cells is poorly understood. Recent research focuses on either
collection of empirical epidemiological data (e.g. uptake of NP by cells,
toxicity to organisms such as rats or fish) or precise NP characterization (e.g.
size, shape, degree of aggregation, charge, and surface chemistry). However, it
is almost impossible to transition from these measurements to detailed
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for unmediated NP uptake into cells
and disruption of the bilayer. Quantitative measures of nanomaterial
bioavailability and toxicity need to be assessed so that the impact of
nanotechnology on human health and the environment can be addressed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The intellectual merit of the proposed
work is to understand the mechanisms and conditions under which engineered
nanomaterials can cause disruption of, and passive transport through, simplified
model cell membranes, namely lipid bilayers. The,investigators hypothesize that
under some conditions engineered NPs can passively translocate across, and cause
nanoscale defects in, bilayers which plays a role in cellular toxicity. The
interaction of nanoparticles and lipid bilayers are unique because the particle
and membranes have nearly the same length scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
impact: Fundamental understanding of the interaction between NP and lipid
bilayers is potentially transformative because it may: (1) improve our
understanding of toxicity of engineered and environmental NP; (2) enable
rational design of benign NP for delivery of drugs and biomedical/molecular
imaging; (3) result in high-throughput toxicity testing protocols; and (4)
evidence-based regulation and protocols of nanomaterials. An experimental
platform and methods will be developed for quantifying the NP transport through
lipid membranes in real time as a function of the NP and lipid properties and
the physicochemical environment. A "bottom-up" approach will be employed to
increase the complexity of the bilayer through incorporation of membrane
proteins as well as glycolipids to form an artificial
glycocalyx.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineered nanoparticles are largely
unregulated because the transport, fate, and toxicity of NP have not been
adequately assessed. The proposed research focuses on the interactions of
engineered nanomaterials with lipid bilayers, arguably the most important
interface between life and the environment. This proposal addresses NP toxicity
and has strong implications on the regulation of NP production, distribution,
and application in medicine, clothing, cosmetics, etc. As an integral part of
the proposed work, the PI aims to increase engineering and physical science
graduate students' awareness of the societal and ethical implications of nano
science and technology through: (1) development of a cross-listed graduate level
course on the societal and ethical implications of nanotechnology; and (2)
organization of a two week student workshop in Washington, DC which examines
scientific policy and culture. The PI will also build upon his strong commitment
to undergraduate research by funding underrepresented undergraduate researchers.