* 1160039
* Molecular Engineering of Multiple Weak Interactions for High Selectivity Bioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2012,02/28/2017
* Steven Cramer, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 02/28/2017
* USD 340,000.00

1160039&lt;br/&gt;Cramer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will employ several
state of the art libraries of novel ligands and materials in concert with
protein libraries in a detailed study of MM ligand--protein interactions in the
presence of FPMs. High throughput batch and column experiments will be performed
using several protein libraries to screen for selectivity trends based on the
different interaction moieties present on the ligands and modifiers. Protein
pairs and MM ligand/FPM combinations exhibiting unique selectivities will then
be investigated using NMR and MD simulations. Solution NMR titration experiments
will be carried out with labeled proteins and MM ligands to determine changes in
binding kinetics, association affinities, and ligand binding sites on the
proteins in the presence of FPMs. Hyrodgen-deuterium exchange experiments and
SS-NMR will be performed with resin bound proteins to examine protein-ligand
binding interactions in solid phase systems. Extensive MD simulations will be
performed on increasingly complex systems to develop a new framework for the
understanding, manipulation, and prediction of multiple weak interactions in MM
systems in the presence of FPMs. This will be achieved by (i) developing a
database of the effects of FPMs on the fundamental water-mediated interactions
using model solutes; (ii) identifying the key contributors to MM ligand-protein
interactions and their synergies; (iii) developing tools to predict the effects
of FPMs on protein-ligand MM interactions and carrying out MD simulations to
provide insights into the importance of ligand flexibility, steric effects, and
avidity effects. The knowledge base created by the experimental and theoretical
studies will then be used to formulate a process for designing MM separations
and validation of process will be carried out using Fab variants. Finally, the
refined process will be applied to engineer efficient separation conditions for
the purification of complex industrial mixtures provided by our industrial
collaborators &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide a
fundamental understanding of the nature of MM ligand binding to proteins in both
solution and solid systems in the presence of FPMs which will have a significant
impact on the development and implementation of MM chromatographic technology
for downstream purification. This work will enable the design of next generation
MM chromatographic systems which will have important implications for
separations ranging from large scale biopharmaceuticals to complex bioanalytical
applications. Since the balance of weak interactions is the norm and not the
exception in condensed high dielectric media, the systematic studies described
in this proposal have the potential to provide new understanding of this
important problem which will be readily translated to many related biological
(molecular recognition, binding, aggregation), bioprocessing (formulation) and
biomedical systems (bone regeneration, biomaterial design). The proposed
research will also have an important impact on the education of both graduate
and undergraduate chemical engineering students. The Cramer laboratory has a
long track record of producing chemical engineers with a first rate training in
chromatographic bioprocessing. This training will continue with the graduate
students and undergraduates involved in this project. The proposed research will
be carried out in the Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies
which provides excellent multidisciplinary training opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students. Students will gain exposure to cell culture,
solution NMR spectroscopy, chromatography and molecular simulations. The
research developed in this project will also be incorporated into a chemical
engineering senior laboratory chromatography experiment recently developed the
PI as well as a course on Chromatographic Separation Processes. Finally,
simulations performed in this project, as well as conceptual parts of molecular
interactions will motivate new aspects of the Molecularium project, which uses
animation movies to teach and inspire students at all levels about the
fascinating world of molecules.