* 1160483
* NSF Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Advanced Self-Powered Systems of Integrated Sensors and Technologies (ASSIST)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2024
* John Lach, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2024
* USD 37,936,436.00

NERC FOR ADVANCED SELF-POWERED SYSTEMS OF SENSORS&lt;br/&gt;AND TECHNOLOGIES
(ASSIST)&lt;br/&gt;VEENA MISRA, DIRECTOR&lt;br/&gt;NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIV.,
PENN STATE UNIV., UNIV. VIRGINIA, FLORIDA INTERNATIONAL UNIV.,
KOREA&lt;br/&gt;ADVANCED INSTITUTE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, TOKYO INSTITUTE OF
TECHNOLOGY, UNIV. ADELAIDE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of ASSIST is to use
nanotechnology to improve global health by enabling correlation between personal
health and personal environment and by empowering patients and doctors to manage
wellness and improve quality of life. ASSIST's nano-enabled energy harvesting,
energy storage, nanoscale transistors and sensors will produce innovative, self-
powered, wearable health monitoring systems that provide long-term sensing to
enable effective management of chronic conditions and improve quality of life
outcomes. ASSIST will advance environmental health research and policy and
strengthen clinical trials. This vision, guided by industry partners,
environmental/social scientists, and medical practitioners, will address the NAE
Grand Challenge of Advanced Health Informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission
of ASSIST is to transform U.S. and global health informatics, electronics, and
biomedical engineering industries through development of enabling
nanotechnologies for energy harvesting, battery-free energy storage, and ultra-
low power computation and communication, integrated with physiological and
ambient nanosensors and biocompatible materials, to empower personal
environmental health monitoring and emergency response. ASSIST goals are
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Advance discovery through fundamental knowledge and
innovative solutions in human body energy harvesting and energy storage based on
thermoelectrics, piezoelectrics and
supercapacitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Leverage nanostructured
materials/structures to improve system energy efficiency orders of
magnitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Demonstrate wearable, reliable, low power, non-
invasive sensors for health and environment and develop robust techniques for
heterogeneous and hierarchical systems integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Design
intelligent power management for battery-free sensing, computation, and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Develop systems integration requirements,
incorporating research on human and social factors, and demonstrate Exposure
Tracking and Wellness Tracking testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Create a culture
of team-based research, education, and innovation, employing a diverse group
focused on research, design, and production of solutions and systems for health
and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Form partnerships with precollege institutions
to strengthen the STEM pipeline and promote technical literacy and motivation to
contribute to solving NAE Grand Challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit: ASSIST's research on high-efficiency nanostructured, flexible
thermoelectrics and nanodomain piezoelectrics will enhance harvested power
levels from the human body while novel nanostructured electrodes will increase
the storage density of capacitors. Exploration of nanoscale quantum well and
quantum wire structures coupled with strain engineering will enhance the
performance and reduce the energy consumption of advanced CMOS devices. Precise
atomic scale control of heterostructured interfaces will significantly improve
the energy efficiency of complementary inter-band tunnel transistors.
Investigation of novel sensing modalities enabled by nanomaterials, will
significantly reduce power levels and increase functionality of self-powered
systems. For example, nanoenabled dry adhesives, nano-hydrogel composites,
nanowires, nanomembranes and nano-enabled materials for enhanced light
absorption and detection will result in high performance sensors. ASSIST will
integrate these technologies into systems with intelligent power management
strategies using hierarchical integration from nanoscale materials and devices
to the human body interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Direct
correlation of individual environmental exposure to health response for
understanding impacts on chronic conditions (e.g., asthma, allergies, heart
disease, autoimmune disease); Long-term sensing of critical environmental
triggers and health vitals, leading to unprecedented data/tools for public
health research and clinical trials; Enhanced understanding of onset and
progression of disease and its effective management; Better informed
environmental health regulatory policymaking; New tools for disaster emergency
response; More rapid diagnosis and improved treatment effectiveness;
Strengthened STEM pipeline to engineering careers through intensive school
partnerships; Enhanced public science literacy and diversity of U.S. engineering
graduates.