* 1160763
* Representation Theory and its Interactions with Topology and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jonathan Kujawa, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 132,100.00

The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to address questions in the
representation theory of algebraic (super)groups, Lie (super)algebras, quantum
(super)groups, finite groups, and related algebras. The purpose of this proposal
is to integrate the study of these algebraic objects with tools from low-
dimensional topology, cohomology, algebraic geometry, and algebraic
combinatorics. Building on results already obtained by the PI and collaborators,
the PI will use support varieties and cohomology to study the representations of
complex Lie superalgebras. In particular, the PI will investigate complexity,
the Balmer spectrum, and related questions to shed light in this poorly
understood area. In a separate project the PI will use modified trace and
dimension functions arising in low-dimensional topology to prove the generalized
Kac-Wakimoto conjecture for classical Lie superalgebras, and to investigate the
tilting modules of algebraic and quantum groups. Although these tools have
individually proven to be fundamental to new developments in the field,
relatively little work has been done using them in conjunction. This project is
in the area of mathematics known as representation
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic structures such as groups and
Lie algebras arise in nature as the symmetries of some object. The ``super''
versions of these are the ones which involve both symmetries and anti-
symmetries. These so-called supersymmetries play a fundamental role in physics
and mathematics. Representation theory is devoted to understanding how these
structures interact with other objects. Because of the intricate nature of these
objects, it is productive to use geometric and topological tools to extract new
information about these systems. This is the approach taken in this proposal. It
is expected that the research conducted in this proposal will shed new light on
these areas. Because of the insight representation theory provides regarding the
underlying structure and symmetries of an object, it has proven valuable in
other areas of mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, cryptography, quantum
computing, computer graphics, and art. Gains in understanding in representation
theory can be expected to pay dividends in these other fields. In terms of
broader impacts, the PI has been active in the promotion of integrating research
and education. The PI will continue to lead a vertically integrated group of
undergraduate and early-career graduate students on research related to this
proposal. He will also continue to take a leadership role in engaging younger
students in mathematics. This includes co-organizing the University of Oklahoma
Math Day, leading the departmental Math Club, and authorship of the OU Math Club
Blog. It is noteworthy that the Blog has over 100 visitors per day from around
the world. He will also continue his efforts to mentor junior mathematicians
through formal and informal collaborations. The PI will promote the development
of algebraic, geometric, and topological tools in representation theory as an
invited speaker in the U.S. and abroad and as an organizer of conferences in the
area.