* 1160462
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Finding Mechanisms to Reduce Violence and Support for Armed Groups
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2013
* Michael Gilligan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 08/31/2013
* USD 11,923.00

Can development programs and reforms reduce violence and decrease support for
armed groups? This research will analyze the impact of three different
interventions on violence: land reforms that bolster the rights and land
holdings of low-income sharecroppers, a group associated with insurrection;
guarantees up to 100 days of individual wage labor for each rural household; and
mandated political representation for disadvantaged minorities in village
councils. Research will utilize archival and survey-based data -- varying over
space and time to measure the effect these programs have on violence and
civilian support for governments. The researchers have collected micro-level
data both online and in government offices. This project will fund the
completion of a stratified random sample survey of approximately 1,500
households across 150 village clusters. By combining measurements of armed group
behavior as reported in newspapers with other data collected, this research will
determine whether development initiatives affect conflict outcomes.

This project will test theories related to how short-term economic incentives
affect violent conflict, how long-term economic inequality shapes violence, and
how political discrimination impacts the dynamics of civil war. Studying the
impact of these large development programs is crucial to improving the
livelihoods of the most vulnerable populations, and potentially, finding non-
military strategies to ameliorating civil war.