* 1160878
* Large Scale Data Transfer: Addressing a Critical Need with a Low Cost Internet2 Service
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Stephen Wolff, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2014
* USD 49,525.00

Since the inception of the Internet, the problem of sending files between users
that were too large for most servers has plagued users. Often the simple process
of getting the sender and recipient to set up accounts on a common service to
allow exchange of their respective identities results delays in actually sending
a file, as this information needs to be known before a file exchange can be
initiated. Internet2 pursues in this work the creation of a general bulk data
transfer service that will allow researchers to stage datasets in the 10MB-1TB
size range for short periods of time. An initial data store of 100TB will be
provided as a short-term repository, allowing robust implementation to meet the
needs of the community as none of the space will be allocated long-term and will
be available for re-use quickly. This work focuses on modest functional goals
(solving only the problem of exchanging files, rather than their long term
storage and sharing) while emphasizing a global reach to work across a large
population with no advanced user planning or provisioning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this work lies in its unique
solution to a problem affecting a broad scope of research communities,
particularly those that deal with large file data transfers, and in the value it
will offer through a solution that already enjoys international deployment. The
existence of a simple but comprehensive solution that is independent of any
community infrastructure will be a critical component of the overall R&amp;E
cyberinfrastructure. FileSender, the core software to accomplish this, has
evolved into an international open-source community that is gaining significant
traction. By providing a service based on FileSender in the U.S., this project
will capitalize on and extend the potential for this to become a ubiquitous and
common solution throughout the international research and education community.