* 1160375
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Language Matters: The Causal Role of Linguistic Identity in "Ethnic" Mobilization in Moldova
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2013
* Yoshiko Herrera, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* erik herron
* 06/30/2013
* USD 12,000.00

This project investigates the relationship between linguistic identity, an
individual's proficiency and identification with relevant languages, and support
for political mobilization and separatism. It focuses on the populations of the
Moldovan regions of Gagauzia and Transnistria, an area of strategic importance
whose conflict has witnessed involvement by Europe and Russia. Increasing our
understanding of how identity links to conflict situations has serious
implications for the development of democracy and stable societies.

This research will produce several important intellectual contributions related
to identity and its consequences. Linguistic identity influences an individual's
political proclivities because it may limit the ability to join certain identity
groups: learning a new language is difficult, while developing native-level
fluency is often impossible for adults. As a result, an individual's linguistic
knowledge can permanently mark the individual as either belonging or not
belonging to certain groups. Under some conditions, individuals who lack the
necessary linguistic abilities for group membership may attempt to better their
situation by raising the status of a group to which they belong, or by creating
a state in which this group will be protected.

Though language is often conflated with ethnicity, the two Moldovan cases
indicate that linguistic and ethnic identities can operate independently in
relation to separatist mobilization; the cases thus serve as ideal laboratories
for assessing the relationship between language and political behavior. The
project uses a unique survey instrument to investigate the role of linguistic
identity in these two regions. By analyzing the relationship between different
forms of identity and perceptions of discrimination and life-opportunities, this
project will determine whether or not language is actually perceived to block
upward mobility in a society. By assessing the impact of different forms of
linguistic identity (i.e. identification vs. proficiency) in relation to support
for separatism and mobilization, it will investigate how this identity can
motivate willingness to mobilize and provides a new avenue for research on
identity-based conflict.

The project also features important broader impacts. As ethnic conflicts remain
widespread, it is imperative to develop a better understanding of the mechanisms
by which such conflicts arise. Furthermore, separatism in Moldova is itself
important: as recent territorial struggles in the Republic of Georgia proved,
post-Soviet territorial conflicts can have worldwide repercussions. The research
will enhance our understanding of conflict processes, an essential part of
informing foreign policy decision-making.