* 1160381
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Towards Elucidating the Transport Mechanisms of Fine Volcanic Ash
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2012,12/31/2013
* Kimberly Genareau, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2013
* USD 14,418.00

This pilot study project addresses the general problem of reducing volcanic ash
impact by determining the viability of using novel instrumentation to determine
the transport properties of fine volcanic ash in the atmosphere. Volcanic ash is
known to present hazards to aviation, infrastructure, agriculture, and human and
animal health. With the emergence of aviation in the last 50 years as a key
component of global travel and transport, the importance of understanding how
long ash is suspended in the atmosphere, and how far it is transported has taken
on greater importance. Airborne ash abrades the exteriors of aircraft, enters
modern jet engines and melts while coating the interior parts thus causing
damage and failure. For example, the 2010 Eyjafjallaj√∂kull eruption in Iceland
was the most disruptive event in aviation history, with billions of dollars of
losses to the aviation industry and global economy. Much of this was unnecessary
and better knowledge of the transport of fine ash could minimize such losses in
the future. However, present understanding of ash transportation can only
account for general air movements, but cannot fully address how much or how long
ash remains in the atmosphere, and how much falls out as it travels downwind. To
address this lacking, this project focuses on the interaction between ash and
atmospheric air by performing experiments of ash flow in a special scientific
wind tunnel designed to simulate slow atmospheric currents.

The time fine ash stays in the atmosphere depends on its terminal velocity
(under the influence of gravity), but current formulations for this are based on
raindrops that are relatively large and quasi-spherical, rendering them
inapplicable to fine ash, which is smaller (<60 &#956;m), non-spherical, and can
have complex surface and internal structure. As a result, it is not presently
possible to accurately predict the removal rates of fine particles from the
volcanic ash clouds that pose aviation and other hazards. To provide
observational data to resolve this problem, the novel facilities at UNH and
Lehigh University are being used in this pilot study to design experiments for
measuring terminal velocities of fine ash with a range of sizes and shapes. The
new Flow Physics Facility (FPF) at UNH is the largest low turbulence slow flow
wind tunnel in the world designed for academic research. Now, for the first
time, it is being used to analyze the aerodynamic properties of fine ash
particles in both laminar and turbulent conditions. The Center for Optical
Technologies at Lehigh includes state of the art SEMs (stereo and mono) that
provide the means for characterizing the shapes and sizes of fine ash to be used
in the wind tunnel (FPF). The results of this pilot study will set the stage for
subsequent empirical formulations for terminal velocities of the two types of
ash particles (simple and compound) that have recently emerged from a previous
NSF-supported study of volcanic ash morphology. This will lead to an
understanding of the fundamental physics that controls the aerodynamics of
volcanic ash in the atmosphere (altitude range from 150 to 1000 mb).