* 1160413
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Potentially Problematic Parties in Government: A Study of the European Extremism.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Jonah Levy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2014
* USD 12,000.00

This project investigates the coalitional and policy strategies that mainstream
parties in Western Europe adopt with respect to extremist parties. It addresses
questions such as: when, and why, does the mainstream choose to work with
extremist parties in coalition, and how do these decisions affect policy? The
project will significantly expand our knowledge of political extremism in
Europe, a phenomenon which has implications for democratic practices and policy-
making.

For the scholarly community, the project has three main intellectual
contributions. First, this project brings together the extensive literature on
coalition decisions and policy decisions in a model of mainstream party
behavior. Second, it builds on recent work that presents mainstream parties as a
major determinant of far-right party success or failure. Finally, the project
moves beyond standard questions by using primary-source evidence and content-
rich data collection. The focus on far-right electoral success, public opinion,
and legislation will help policy-makers, journalists, and other observers better
understand political extremists' involvement in government.

The major research tasks are two-fold: interviews, followed by data collection
and coding. Interviews will be conducted with members of parliament and other
political actors in the Netherlands and Austria, two countries where extremist
parties have been governing partners (officially or unofficially). Nearly 400
party manifestos from 17 Western European countries will be analyzed for over-
time variation in parties' policy positions. Lastly, data on public opinion and
extremist vote share will be added to the legislation data, to present a
comprehensive picture.

Important broader impacts come from the method by which the data is collected.
This project's method of manifesto coding offers an alternative to the widely-
used manifesto collection technique, as it focuses on the content, not only the
direction, of party positions. Thus, the coding techniques employed could
encourage scholars interested in a particular policy area to adopt a similar in-
depth method. This research will also substantially enhance our understanding of
extremist parties and their influence in Europe. Discovering why and how
mainstream parties collaborate with and oppose extremist parties will help
policy-makers in diplomatic work.