* 1160364
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: International Criminal Tribunals' Impact on Violence Against Civilians in Ongoing Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Karen Alter, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2015
* USD 12,000.00

The post-Cold War era has witnessed unspeakable atrocities against civilians. In
the Bosnian war alone, tens of thousands of civilians perished, not accounting
for wider traumas wrought by the bombings of major cities and rampant sexual
violence. In establishing the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and a subsequent generation of international criminal
tribunals (ICTs), members of the international community sought to craft devices
that could curb such atrocities and even break the cycles of violence that
perpetuate them. And yet, by holding out the threat of criminal prosecution,
ICTs could potentially delay the end of hostilities as parties hold out for
immunity, or even trigger violent retaliation. Almost nineteen years after the
creation of the first post-Cold War ICT, we still know very little about the
actual impact of prosecuting war crimes. What we do know, however, is that with
the creation of the first permanent ICT--the International Criminal Court
(ICC)--the shadow of criminal prosecution extends to contemporary
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to better understand how and when ICTs
might impact violence against civilians, this project starts off by exploring
the ICTY's involvement in the conflicts in Croatia (1991-95), Bosnia (1992-95),
Kosovo (1998-99), and Macedonia (2001). The hostilities associated with the
break-up of Yugoslavia allow one to investigate an ICT's varied role in
conflicts that have run their course. Moreover, these cases afford me access to
a wealth of reliable longitudinal data that often does not exist for more recent
conflicts. In addition, the wars in Croatia and Bosnia present interesting
variation that I can explore. In particular, the ICTY came into existence midway
through both conflicts. These cases can thus help me to determine whether the
ICTY's involvement per se shaped behaviors on the ground while hostilities were
still raging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;My fieldwork investigates how the existence
and actions of the ICTY influenced the various conflicts associated with the
break-up of Yugoslavia over time. The research includes collecting primary
documents generated while hostilities were still playing out, and interviewing
ICTY officials, veterans, political elites, and international/local activists
associated with each conflict. I will use interview and archival data to
reconstruct patterns of events in an effort to understand how the ICTY affected
the decisions and actions of (would-be) war criminals, as well as the broader
networks of actors whose active or tacit support facilitated violence against
civilians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, I expect to find that the ICTY's
influence was variable, meaning that in certain cases it was unable to influence
outcomes despite extensive efforts, yet in others, the shadow of criminal
prosecution had some tangible effect on the strategies of actors on the ground
and the international support structures that became important in the post-
conflict phase of reconstruction. I intend to publish my findings as a series of
scholarly articles and as a book, and use the research to develop courses on
international criminal justice. I also hope to build on this research in the
future, focusing on the wide range of cases in which the ICC has become
involved. With the ICC, the shadow of criminal prosecution now extends to
modern-day conflicts. It is thus essential that we begin to understand how and
when ICTs might actually contribute to limiting violence against civilians. The
current project constitutes an important step forward in this effort.