* 1160179
* Analysis and Optimization of the Pavlik Harness Treatment of Neonates with Hip Dysplasia
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Faissal Moslehy, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2015
* USD 355,474.00

PI: Kassab&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 1160179&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pavlik harness is
the standard orthopaedic device utilized worldwide to non-surgically correct
congenital hip dysplasia (CHD) in infants, but its mechanism of action has not
been studied, and is therefore little understood. As a result, treatment with
this device fails for about 15% of the patients. Nearly 76% of hip
osteoarthritis cases are attributed to untreated hip dysplasia at an early stage
in life and this disability usually requires total hip replacement before the
age of 50. It is estimated that nearly 1/20 full term infants are born with some
type of hip instability, of which 2-3 out of 1000 will require treatment, and
that nearly 15% will fail treatment for CHD with the Pavlik Harness leading to
disability as the ultimate consequence. Accepting the rate of failure of this
device as a leading cause of disability as a result of hip osteoarthritis, we
propose to use the results of our year-long preliminary study as the foundation
to engage in the hereby proposed research project where we will use engineering
fundamentals to develop a case-specific approach to the treatment of CHD based
on data extracted from individual CT-scans of infants afflicted by the
condition. To do this we propose to: (1) develop a finite element model of the
dynamic physiological response of the hip due to loads imposed by the Pavlik
harness based on patient specific infant geometry, accounting for large
deformation and non-linear behavior of the musculature, (2) formulate an
automated algorithm based on the principle of minimum energy to determine
optimum Pavlik harness load components necessary to successfully vector the
femoral heads into their correct physiological position in the acetabula, while
maintaining hip reduction for the full length of treatment, and (3) establish
the proposed FEM-optimization methodology as a planning tool to achieve the goal
of computationally determining patient-specific optimal configuration of the
Pavlik harness allowing the optimum configuration to be transferred to the
recipient infant, aiding in the success of the treatment. This will also serve
in training physicians to successfully use and apply the Pavlik
Harness.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The primary intellectual merit of this
project is the expectation that our study will provide insight into the
mechanisms of the successful treatment of CHD and suggest feasible clinical
methods aimed at reducing the rate of failure of the treatment with the Pavlik
Harness. Because no characterization has been made of the mechanism of action of
this common orthopaedic device, the results of this project would constitute a
breakthrough in the understanding and treatment of CHD. We have devised a multi-
disciplinary framework, bringing together engineering analysis via finite
element modeling, to predict optimal configuration of the Pavlik Harness
geometry for each patient and serving to guide treatment planning. Although the
?optimal? configuration is not universal, we will have devised a universal
patient-specific treatment planning procedure. Another intellectual merit is
that this is truly an interdisciplinary research program bringing together
medical professionals and engineers in an integrated and complementary approach
providing a physics-based framework to approach a practical medical problem
whose solution has a critical impact on a large patient
population.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The primary impact of this project on
society will be to ultimately improve the quality of life of patients with CHD
that are undergoing corrective treatment using the Pavlik Harness. This study
offers a practical solution to achieve effective treatment that draws from
engineering expertise and modeling capabilities integrated with medical input
and knowledge. Moreover, since 120,000 total hip replacements are performed
annually in the United States, early detection and non-surgical correction of
CHD in infants can potentially prevent enormous subsequent health-related costs.
Also, graduate and undergraduate students will be immersed into a highly
interdisciplinary working environment as by its very nature, the project
requires students to synthesize learning from several engineering courses and
physical sciences in a real-life problem of importance to society. Students are
very eager to get involved in such projects that are at the interface of
engineering and medicine. The bioengineering research activities of the Co-PIs
have attracted a number of students including several females and Hispanic,
several of whom have won science and engineering technical competitions, one on
a pilot study of the very topic of this grant proposal. The College of
Engineering and Computer Science (CECS) at UCF is ranked as the 3rd college of
choice for Hispanics in the US by the Hispanics Business Magazine, and this
project offers a unique means of recruiting such students in the field of
bioengineering.