* 1160326
* Real-Time Non-Contact Sensing of Variations in Cardiorespiratory Volume
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Victor Lubecke, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Rajakkannu Mutharasan
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,422.00

Lubecke&lt;br/&gt;1160326&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doppler radar has the potential
to provide a convenient, safe, non-contact approach to the measurement of volume
associated with cardiopulmonary function. This may transform the way vital signs
related to blood pressure and ventilation are monitored in medical diagnostic
and prognostic applications. Current conventional methods of monitoring
ventilation are either uncomfortable (spirometer, thermistors) or inaccurate
(impedance, ECG RSA measurements), and are implemented only briefly in cases of
critical need, if at all. Current pulse pressure and stroke volume assessments
are typically invasive catheter measurements, done routinely for only some ICU
patients, or non-continuous spot-checks where a health care giver administers a
disruptive pneumatic-cuff based measurement. These contact methods can also
alter the measured quantities. Previous success with non-contact radar
measurements of cardiopulmonary activity have been limited to rate assessment,
because of technological challenges associated with accurate quantitative
characterization of the displacement of the human torso under real-life
conditions. The key to transcending challenges to making non-invasive volume
assessment possible lies in the study of smart precision monitoring systems that
can isolate measurement variations caused by environmental circumstances from
those caused by actual cardiopulmonary activity.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
We propose a three-year collaborative effort between the University of Hawaii at
Manoa?s Electrical Engineering Department and John A. Burns School of Medicine,
to conduct fundamental research exploring radar methods for continuous non-
contact assessment of cardiorespiratory volume for sedentary human subjects. The
findings could result in biosensing systems that are sensitive to medically
significant changes in cardiopulmonary volume, while remaining discriminative
and robust with respect to biometric variations between subjects and changes in
subject position. The proposed effort will advance knowledge in both radar
measurement of physiology and the understanding of human cardiopulmonary
function. It will also support potential technological breakthroughs at their
intersection, including new diagnostic techniques. The particular strength of
our team is the combination of Doppler radar (Lubecke, Boric-Lubecke), and non-
invasive cardiology expertise (Seto). Recent work by the PI?s on Doppler
cardiopulmonary sensing has resulted in over 70 papers, a book chapter and a
book under contract, 14 invention disclosures, 4 patent applications, and an
emerging technology award. In related work, graduate students working with the
PI?s have earned recognition and awards in four student paper competitions at
major IEEE conferences.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: Outcomes of this project can
lead to valuable tools beneficial to society in life-science, healthcare,
emergency response, and security/military operations. The research poses a
motivating educational opportunity that leverages Hawaii?s unique needs for
remote healthcare tools, and reaches out to a diverse population of ethnic
minority students that have been historically underserved by local educational
and industrial opportunities. Research outcomes will be integrated with
education through training a new generation of engineers with the awareness of
biosensors issues through courses (biomedical and sensors courses),
undergraduate research projects, and K-12 STEM outreach activities. Our results
will be disseminated broadly through scientific publications and seminars,
public lectures, and K-12 outreach, including STEM days, school visits, and
summer programs. This research represents Broadening Participation as it
encourages participation by minority students, and includes individuals from
underrepresented groups (Hispanic PI, and female Co-PI) from an EPSCoR state.