* 1160768
* US-India Planning Visit: Complex Interactions of Ecological and Socioeconomic Factors that Drive Sustainability of Ancient South Indian Agroecosystems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Ann Russell, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 04/30/2013
* USD 5,005.00

1160768 &lt;br/&gt;Russell &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides seed-
funding for a visit to India for Dr. Ann Russell to catalyze a collaborative
research project with scientists at Kerala Agricultural University (KAU)
focusing on the Complex Interactions of Ecological and Socioeconomic Factors
that Drive the Sustainability of Ancient South Indian Agro-Ecosystems. The
collaborators are Dr. Russell, Department of Natural Resource Ecology &amp;
Management, Iowa State University and Drs. Mohan Kumar, Dean of the College of
Forestry and Indira Devi, Professor of Environmental Economics at KAU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning visit will provide the foundation for new
research that will explore the ecological and socioeconomic underpinnings of the
4000-yr-old agricultural systems in Kerala as well as facilitate the development
of a proposal for the Catalyzing New International Collaborations solicitation.
The findings from this exploratory work will provide the necessary background
for a subsequent proposal to be submitted to the CNH (Dynamics of Coupled
Natural and Human&lt;br/&gt;Systems) Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding
will make it possible for the PI to organize a multi-disciplinary team to begin
new research on the coupled effects of biogeochemical and socioeconomic factors
in relation to the sustainability of South Indian agricultural systems. The
ultimate goal of this series of projects is to develop a conceptual framework
that advances understanding of the controls over sustainability for a broad
array of agricultural systems. The inclusion of graduates and undergraduates in
these projects will also provide unique international research experiences for
US students.