* 1161022
* I/UCRC Phase II:  Renewal of CHREC Center at Florida and GWU
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2019
* Herman Lam, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2019
* USD 3,100,323.00

IIP 1161022 &lt;br/&gt;University of Florida &lt;br/&gt;George
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IIP - 1161014 &lt;br/&gt;The George Washington University
&lt;br/&gt;El-Ghazawi &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests a five year
renewal (phase II) of NSF funding for the University of Florida (UF) and the
University of George Washington (GWU) sites for the Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for High-Performance Reconfigurable
Computing (CHREC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHREC is currently comprised of the
University of Florida (UF) as the lead institution, the George Washington
University, Brigham Young University (BYU), and Virginia Tech as research
partners. These institutions were brought together to establish the CHREC I/UCRC
to investigate, develop, and evaluate new concepts, methods, infrastructure, and
tools in reconfigurable high-performance computing (HPC) and high-performance
embedded computing (HPEC), from building-block devices to hardware and software
infrastructure to applications and tools, and advance these technologies through
research and education for the benefit of Center members, students, and the
discipline at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHREC is ideally situated to explore
key research challenges of specific interest and paramount importance to its
membership. The proposed university sites possess the expertise, experience,
base of high-quality students, cutting-edge facilities, and administrative
commitment to support this endeavor, as well as a strong record of success.
Areas of research thrust for the next phase of CHREC include: design automation
and programming methods; algorithms and applications; device and core building
blocks; and systems and services. CHREC will continue and expand its role as the
first university/industry research center in this fast-growing and increasingly
important field of computer engineering. Research results will lead to new
concepts, technologies, insights, and tools in reconfigurable computing for HPC
and HPEC, experience rapid technology transfer via the I/UCRC structure, and
thereby enrich and expand the nation's lead in these vital industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHREC will continue to have a direct impact upon the
success of this field as a whole by helping support a national R&amp;D plan and
serving as a catalyst that brings leading organizations together to define
common goals, methods, and standards. The PIs will continue to integrate the
research results into the university educational process with expanded programs
at multiple levels in engineering, and state-of-the-art facilities will be
leveraged. Activities will be structured to attract a diverse set of students
and faculty, including underrepresented students via several minority
recruitment programs. Broad dissemination of results will occur through
scholarly journal and conference publications, the center web site, and press
releases.