* 1161967
* 3D Multicellular Mechanics in Angiogenesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,11/30/2015
* Josephine Allen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 11/30/2015
* USD 199,860.00

The research objective of this award is to develop scattering, imaging, and
digital image analysis tools, combined with deformable tissue culture scaffolds,
to investigate the mechanics of angiogenesis in 3D systems. Angiogenesis is
formation of blood vessels within developing and wounded tissue, an essential
process for oxygen, nutrient, and waste exchange between blood and metabolically
active cells. Studies conducted under this award will apply dynamic light and
x-ray scattering, and time-lapse imaging, to measure morphology, motion, and
force generation in endothelial cell networks growing within 3D scaffolds.
Culture scaffold material properties and chemical functionality the will be
investigated to determine their role in angiogenesis. In parallel, molecular
biology techniques will be employed to study the underlying molecular mechanisms
of angiogenesis, including genetic screens, histological evaluation of cell
networks, and immunohistochemical evaluations of angiogenic marker expression.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, these studies would add significantly to
the field?s understanding of mechanics in angiogenesis and represent an
integration of time-lapse characterization tools, scaffold engineering, and
molecular biology for 3D cell mechanics studies. The knowledge gained from these
efforts will enhance the field?s ability to investigate collective cell
mechanics in other 3D tissue constructs, providing a set of tools for the large
multicellular systems typically found in tissue engineering, wound healing, and
regenerative medicine studies, and advancing technology development within these
areas. The educational plan focuses on digital imaging and analysis tools for
use in K-12 science classes, and the creation of an annual workshop with
educators at a partner school in which teaching modules will be developed and
distributed to participating science teachers. The initiative will involve
extensive sharing of analysis software and discussions of how to effectively
incorporate contemporary imaging and analysis tools to improve the communication
of scientific concepts that are difficult to grasp, or difficult to observe,
without these tools.