* 1161163
* Fundamental Research in Quantum Field Induced Strain in Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Pradeep Sharma, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 07/31/2017
* USD 211,948.00

The goal of this project is to elucidate the basic science underpinning quantum
field induced strain in quantum dots. While tremendous efforts have been
expended to understand the impact of mechanical strain on the electronic
structure of quantum dots, initial results of the Principal Investigator (PI)
also suggest a startling reverse effect i.e. despite absence of external
strains, if the quantum dot is made small enough (1-3 nm range), the electronic
structure change due to quantum confinement may induce a strain in the quantum
dot which in turn will alter the band structure. The latter, in turn, will
further alter the strain thus resulting in a nonlinear self-consistent type
coupling. This provides a basis for the identification of novel size effects in
the electronic structure of quantum dots beyond what is currently understood.
Through the use of parameter-free ab initio methods complemented by multi-band
envelope function approach, we will illustrate the physical implications of this
new coupling through exploration of a (i) mechanism of universal optical
actuation in nanowire structures, and (ii) impact of reverse coupling on non-
radiative auger recombination and consequences for solar energy and laser
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technological perspective, successful
completion of the proposed research will enable a new paradigm in quantum dot
engineering leading to an impact on next generation nano-electronics,
photovoltaics, chemo-bio sensors, quantum electro-mechanical systems among
others. Novel strategies will be implemented to increase enrollment of female
students. To foster scientific literature appreciation among undergraduates, a
mock "editor-reviewer journal forum" will be used. An ongoing NSF-funded GK12
program run by the PI in close cooperation with Houston area schools will be
leveraged for outreach to K-12 schools. In this program, graduate students use
"science behind Harry Potter" to revitalize science education in schools while
at the same time learning valuable communication skills that teach the art of
articulating complex scientific ideas to audiences of all type.