* 1161731
* CGV: Medium: Collaborative Research: Understanding Translucency: Physics, Perception, and Computation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Edward Adelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2018
* USD 395,000.00

People care greatly about the appearance of translucent materials such as food,
skin, soap, and marble, and they are able to distinguish subtle differences in
these materials based on their appearance. The translucent appearance of these
materials is caused by internal volumetric scattering, which is challenging to
simulate, especially because humans are so sensitive to their subtleties. Since
in the natural world scattering materials are the norm, not the exception, it
makes sense that the human visual system is so well engineered to analyze them.
However, very little is known about how this analysis is achieved because the
perception of volumetric translucency is almost
unstudied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, involving faculty
from three universities with complementary expertise in computer graphics, human
vision, machine learning, and computer vision, addresses the fundamental
unsolved problem of understanding translucency for graphics. The PIs will
develop a perceptually-motivated pipeline for translucency, contributing new
scattering representations, perceptual dimensions, and computational algorithms
to computer graphics. The scattering representations, based on a polydispersion
model, will provide analytic expressions for wavelength-dependent bulk
scattering properties of translucent media; this will significantly expand the
range of materials that can be simulated with high visual fidelity. Finding
perceptual knobs that relate physical scattering parameters with visual
appearance will be achieved by coupling large-scale computation (using cloud
computing) with controlled perceptual studies. Novel acquisition approaches that
employ hyperspectral imaging will be created, as will editing and rendering
applications that use the new perceptual representations of translucency. Low-
dimensional models to represent scattering media will be developed and used to
enable efficient and accurate acquisition and rendering. A suite of test
materials and scenes will be developed to evaluate the fidelity of rendered
images based on the developed theory and computational
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Currently, the simulation of
translucency presents challenges in terms of both computation and visual
fidelity. This restricts the ability of practical algorithms to predictively
simulate translucent materials, thus fundamentally limiting the use of graphics
in real applications. By building the computational tools to characterize,
study, and use knowledge of translucency perception, this research will
fundamentally change the graphics pipeline for translucent materials. and will
potentially revolutionizing industrial design, interior design, skin care and
cosmetics, and entertainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an
education program that is tightly coupled to the research program. The PIs have
already been meeting twice a week for more than six months, and their graduate
students already share data, code, and equipment. During the activity, the
students will make week-long and month-long visits to each other's laboratories
to collaborate, and in this way the project will produce a generation of
researchers who are "T-shaped" in the sense of being both deep in their
respective fields and able to work effectively across these synergistic
disciplines. The PIs also plan to organize a workshop that will brins together
researchers in vision science, computer graphics, and computer vision, so that
the important ties between these fields are strengthened even further.