* 1161922
* 2012 Polymer Physics Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2013
* Scott Milner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2013
* USD 7,500.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Polymer Physics
GRC will be designed both to present exciting progress in well-established
research areas, and to introduce the community to important emerging topics in
the areas of energy and biological applications. The conference will feature 22
invited lectures, wherein the opening 10 minutes are specifically designed for a
general polymer physics audience. This conference will gather leading people in
the field and bring them into extended contact with one another and with younger
researchers (specifically, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers).
Extended discussions in both formal and informal settings over many days are
accomplished by the retreat-like atmosphere of the GRC format that is known to
build and nurture lifelong interactions and to ignite new collaborations. In
addition to the scientific content of these discussions, it is also an
opportunity for mentoring. The PI has set specific diversity objectives for the
speakers and discussion leaders with respect to career stage, gender, and
geography. To integrate the new and returning conferees, the PI will continue
the recent tradition of a speakers? table, where speakers dine with junior
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will also offer the Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS) in Polymer Physics. The GRS is an opportunity for
students and post-docs to assume the lead role in a scientific conference.
Attendees will share current research with their peers through oral and poster
presentations; initiate early professional relations that may develop into
future research collaborations; and obtain a sense of the scope of research
topics, methodologies, and career opportunities contained in the realm of
polymer physics. The GRS is a venue for graduate students and postdocs to
discuss their research in an intellectual environment of GRC caliber, but with
an audience of peers. Attendees will share their current research with other
young scientists whose perspectives and expertise span the range of research
topics and methodologies in polymer physics. Interactions with senior-scientist
mentors will illuminate the scope of corresponding career trajectories. In
addition, students will gain the confidence to participate actively in the GRC,
asking questions after talks and getting to know other researchers during meals.
More generally, it is hoped that the GRS will engender a sense of community
among the next generation of leading scientists in polymer physics.