* 1161283
* Harmonic Analysis of Waves and Eigenfunctions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Hart Smith, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 270,000.00

This mathematics research project concerns the behavior of eigenfunctions and
propagating waves in various settings where the methods of classical geometric
optics do not apply. One focus of study is curved spaces where the Riemannian
metric is of low regularity. For metrics which are not twice-differentiable the
geodesic flow is not well-posed, and hence does not determine the flow of energy
for waves on such spaces. We consider Lipschitz metrics (i.e. one bounded
derivative), and show that one can nevertheless control the rate of dispersion
of energy in a manner consistent with the uncertainty of the geodesic flow. We
apply combinatorial arguments to obtain best possible bounds in Lebesgue spaces
for eigenfunctions. Manifolds with boundary, where energy reflection off the
boundary is specified by Dirichlet or Neumann conditions, are also studied.
Here, diffraction effects and multiply reflected geodesics lead to violation of
the standard rate of energy dispersion. We adapt tools developed for Lipschitz
metrics, and combine them with reflection techniques to obtain optimal bounds,
as well as new dispersive estimates for both wave and Schrodinger equations on
manifolds with boundary. Application of these estimates include new well-
posedness results for nonlinear wave and Schrodinger equations. A key method for
all of our work is the decomposition of waves into appropriately scaled wave
packets. We combine this decomposition with paradifferential techniques to
obtain quantitative bounds on solutions in these settings, where the more
precise asymptotic formulas of geometric optics do not
hold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of vibrational modes and wave
propagation finds applications in the equations of physics, in signal analysis,
and in the seismic imaging methods used for geophysical exploration. This
mathematics research project aims to establish quantitative bounds that are both
of theoretical interest, for the behavior of high-frequency vibrations, and of
practical interest, in particular for seismic imaging and for better
understanding the nature of the errors that are introduced by computational
approximations. One setting we study is that of rough media, characterized by
the sound speed changing in a non-smooth manner, which is a model for the
intricate mix of materials occurring within the earth. We also study the manner
in which waves reflect off hard objects, including shapes which involve complex
multiple reflections. In both of these settings, precise wavefront analysis
methods do not exist. Instead, our work relies on decomposing signals into
coherent wave-packets, and determining (to a suitable order of approximation)
the evolution of these packets as they propagate through the media. The packets
developed in our work have also found applications in medical imaging, including
reducing the amount of scans needed to sense features of interest.