* 1161941
* SHF:Medium:Collaborative Research: From Molecules to Complex Shapes: Programming Pattern Formation with DNA
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Rebecca Schulman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2016
* USD 527,440.00

Development in humans and other higher organisms creates
complex,&lt;br/&gt;precisely defined multicellular structures and patterns.
These&lt;br/&gt;structures are the result of molecular programs that are stored
in the&lt;br/&gt;sequences and concentrations of biomolecules and are executed
when&lt;br/&gt;molecules interact and change state through chemical reactions.
The&lt;br/&gt;goal of this proposal is to understand how biochemical systems can
be&lt;br/&gt;reliably programmed to form asymmetric patterns with multiple
layers&lt;br/&gt;of organization. This proposal is part of a general goal to
understand&lt;br/&gt;how to program global behavior and structure based on local
rules,&lt;br/&gt;which a key intellectual challenge in many areas of computer
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose that complex, hierarchical
chemical patterns can be formed&lt;br/&gt;by systems in which the molecules
collectively execute a molecular&lt;br/&gt;program for pattern formation. The
PIs will develop a&lt;br/&gt;chemical programming language in which information
from simple input&lt;br/&gt;patterns is integrated by logical operations to form
new pattern&lt;br/&gt;regions. These logical operations are then systematically
integrated&lt;br/&gt;into larger programs, allowing the generation of patterns
with&lt;br/&gt;complex, multiscale structure similar to that seen
in&lt;br/&gt;biology. Designed synthetic DNA molecules that together act as
circuit&lt;br/&gt;elements will be used to implement this language. DNA
molecules are&lt;br/&gt;ideal substrates for a molecular programming approach
because they&lt;br/&gt;have complex sequences with predictable behaviors and
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;This research is tightly integrated with an outreach
program that will &lt;br/&gt;develop an educational program dedicated to
teaching the&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary skills that are necessary to be
successful in&lt;br/&gt;molecular programming.&lt;br/&gt;