* 1161231
* Graduate and Transfer STEM Talent Expansion Program (GT-STEP)
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2012,01/31/2018
* Alla Webb, Montgomery College
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 01/31/2018
* USD 1,800,000.00

The Graduate and Transfer STEM Talent Expansion Program at Montgomery College --
a public, culturally diverse, three-campus community college -- provides a
systematic and comprehensive approach to increasing the number of students who
attain an associate's degree and/or transfer to four-year institutions as STEM
majors. Major foci of the program include 1) revision of gateway STEM courses to
incorporate active-learning strategies and supplemental instruction, 2)
engagement of students in research, within and beyond the classroom, early in
their undergraduate years, and 3) technology-assisted mathematics tutoring for
pre-calculus students. These core strategies are supported by enhanced academic
advising and support, faculty and peer mentoring, a summer bridge program for
entering students, and professional development of faculty and staff across the
three campuses.

Intellectual Merit: The project builds on well-established best practices for
increasing retention in and recruitment of students into STEM degree and
transfer programs. Project elements are being developed in parallel at each of
the three Montgomery College campuses; project staff members then engage in
system-wide dissemination and professional development of faculty and staff.

Broader Impacts: The project is increasing the number of students who attain an
associate's degree and/or transfer to four-year institutions as STEM majors,
with particular emphasis on serving the diverse students and returning veterans
who attend Montgomery College. In the longer term, the project enhances
institutional capacity (e.g., curricular reform, support structures, and
professional development) for continued support of increased STEM degree
attainment and transfer. In addition, it is serving as a model approach to
developing and integrating a systematic program across a multiple-campus
community college, which informs institutions considering similar efforts
elsewhere in the nation.