* 1161475
* Manufacturing of Hydrocarbon Fuels from Sunlight, Carbon Dioxide and Water with Metal Nanostructures: Mechanistic Investigations to Improve Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* David Ryan, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 416,541.00

The objective of this award is to study the fundamental mechanisms of a recently
discovered, highly efficient artificial photosynthesis process utilizing cobalt
or iron nanostructures to directly convert carbon dioxide and water into
hydrocarbon fuels with solar energy in a simple reaction chamber. The project
will address fundamental questions encountered in preliminary research: What is
the mechanism of photosynthesis on nanostructured metal surfaces? How does the
morphology of the femtosecond laser nano/micro-machined surface and the presence
of a three-phase (gas/liquid/solid) interface affect the photosynthesis rate?
Answers to these questions will be obtained by studying key aspects of the
artificial photosynthesis process such as (a) the surface plasmon optical
absorption for light harvesting; (b) the rates of photodissociation and
hydrocarbon synthesis; and (c) the lifetime/durability of the metal
nanostructures for long-term use. Based on the knowledge acquired through this
research, a cost-effective photosynthesis manufacturing process on a large scale
can be found to meet global energy needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from the
proposed research will enable scientists to overcome key existing barriers to
large-scale applications of the artificial photosynthesis technology. Efficient
artificial photosynthesis would reduce the global energy problem, decrease the
dependence of the United States on foreign imports and fossil fuels, and address
environmental concerns such as the high carbon dioxide concentration in the
atmosphere. Information on the properties of the metal nanostructures will also
be of value to other fields where nanostructures and photo-
physics/chemistry/biology are widely used, such as medicine, environment,
chemical production, military, and security. The proposed method is also
potentially applicable to fertilizer production with sunlight to greatly impact
agriculture. The proposed work will contribute to nurturing multidisciplinary
scientists and engineers through research-based education.