* 1161517
* Molecular Tailoring of Interfacial Fracture
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2016
* Philippe Geubelle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2016
* USD 340,979.00

The research objective of this grant is to establish fundamental relationships
between molecular scale surface modification and macroscale interfacial adhesion
and fracture. The research program will emphasize the development of integrated,
multiscale experimental and numerical tools to characterize, model, and
ultimately expand understanding of how self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) can be
exploited to control mechanisms of interfacial failure, with emphasis on the
high strain rate regime at which experimental conditions and molecular-level
models can be directly related. The experimental assessment of the strength and
toughness of the SAM-mediated interfaces will be achieved through advances in
high strain rate, laser-induced dynamic delamination methods. To support the
experiments and provide insight on the interfacial failure processes, advanced
modeling tools combining molecular dynamics models and a continuum-level
multiscale cohesive framework will be developed, validated, and applied. The
novel integration of MD and continuum-level cohesive models of delamination will
deliver important insights on the molecular tailoring of adhesion properties in
delamination events.

The research project will have significant educational and technological impact.
SAMs are increasingly used in a wide range of technological applications,
including lubricants in MEMS, diffusion barriers in microelectronics, adhesion
promotion, and for control of heat transport across interfaces. Assessing and
predicting the adhesion properties of SAMs are critical for successful
performance in these and future applications. This research project will provide
training for two graduate students and one summer undergraduate research
student, who will benefit from a truly multidisciplinary education in materials
science, solid mechanics, and chemistry and will have the opportunity to
participate in outreach activities.