* 1161767
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Regression Testing Techniques for Real-world Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Myra Cohen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 332,333.00

Reports estimate that regression testing, which is the activity of retesting a
software system after it has been modified, can consume up to 50% of the cost of
software development and maintenance. Although there are many techniques that
can reduce the cost of regression testing, most of them do not account for
important characteristics of modern systems, such as product lines, web
applications, service-oriented architectures, and cloud-based applications.
These systems are increasingly heterogeneous: they may come from different
sources, may be written in different languages, and may be accessible in
different formats (e.g., source code, binary code, or through remote
interfaces). Moreover, modern software is often environment dependent: its
behavior can be affected not only by changes in the code, but also by changes in
its complex environment (e.g., databases, configuration files, and network
layouts). Because most existing regression-testing techniques do not account for
these characteristics, the application of these techniques can result in
inadequately tested software, problems during maintenance, and ultimately poor
software quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to
go beyond the state of the art in regression testing by defining novel
approaches that can be applied to modern, real-world software and account for
its characteristics and complexity. To achieve this goal, the research will
first extend analysis techniques on which regression-testing approaches rely,
such as system modeling, version differencing, coverage analysis, and impact
analysis. The research will then leverage these fundamental techniques to
develop, evaluate with industrial partners, and make available a family of
regression testing techniques and tools that can (1) build comprehensive models
of heterogeneous, environment-dependent software systems, (2) evolve these
models throughout the systems' lifetimes, and (3) analyze the changes across
models to understand their effects on the systems' behavior and retest them
effectively and efficiently. The impact of the research will be manyfold. First,
the rigorous, transformative, and highly automated techniques developed will
help improve the quality of today's large, complex software systems, thus
benefitting all segments of society that depend on software. Second, the release
of the produced tools and infrastructure will let other researchers and
practitioners build on our results, advancing knowledge and understanding.
Finally, the research findings will be integrated in curriculum materials that
will be made available to the broader scientific community, which will help
prepare a globally competitive workforce and further benefit society.