* 1161077
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Modeling, Monitoring, and Analysis of Spatial Point Patterns for Manufacturing Quality Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Tzyy-Shuh Chang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 06/30/2015
* USD 202,387.00

The research objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) collaborative research award is to establish a series of
quality control methodologies on modeling, monitoring, and diagnosis of spatial
point patterns. A spatial point pattern is a set of locations randomly
distributed within a designated region. It is a natural way to model many
critical quality characteristics in various manufacturing processes, such as the
surface defects on steel bars, slabs and semiconductor wafer, and the
distribution of reinforce particles in composite materials. The research
approach is in three focus areas: (i) Modeling and monitoring of replicated
spatial point patterns by integrating the deterministic point pattern alignment
methods and spatial statistics techniques; (ii) Identification of the impacts of
covariates on replicated point patterns based on a nonparametric functional
regression model; and (iii) Geometric and three-dimension point pattern
detection by bringing the Hough Transform method, an interesting computer vision
method, into the quality control area.

If successful, the results of this research will provide a novel set of quality
control tools to various relevant industries such as steel rolling,
semiconductor manufacturing, and composite fabrication. These tools will take
advantage of the increasingly available spatial point data and help to
significantly improve the process productivity and quality. The close
collaboration with OG Technologies in this Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry project will lead to a realistic testbed and quick
dissemination of research results among practitioners, as well as initiation of
technology transfer. The interdisciplinary nature of this project can provide
students the unique opportunity to obtain training in spatial statistics,
manufacturing quality control, and computer vision.