* 1161715
* The Design Cognition of Professional Engineers and How They Differ from Students
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* John Gero, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 09/30/2016
* USD 380,000.00

The research objective of this award is to characterize the design cognition
(design thinking) of professional engineering designers and to compare their
design cognition with that of student engineers designing. Previous NSF-funded
projects that involved studying engineers designing have primarily focused on
studying students designing. There is a paucity of research on studying
professional engineers designing. The science of engineering design requires
empirical results not just from students but also from professionals. The
empirical research method used to gain access to engineers design cognition is
protocol analysis. This project uses a design-based ontological coding scheme to
derive information from protocol studies of professional engineers designing.
This coding scheme provides the foundation for describing the design cognition
of designers and converts the qualitative data in a video of a designer into
quantitative data from which statistical models of design behavior can be
generated. These models characterize the design cognition of the designers. They
are then used to compare the design cognition of professional engineers with
that of students, whose design cognition was characterized in a previous NSF-
funded study. Deliverable include an archive of protocol videos, a set of
protocol transcripts, and a set of research methodologies as well as the
statistical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this research will
characterize the design behavior of professional engineers. This will then be
compared with the behavior predicted by formal models of designing. The results
of this research are intended to provide the basis for determining similarities
and differences between the design behavior of professional engineers and
undergraduate engineers. The results will be disseminated to allow for
improvement in design education to bring students to closer to professional
engineers during their undergraduate and graduate design education. The results
are intended to lay the foundation for the generation of design support tools.