* 1161904
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Information Architectures for Femto-Aided Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,02/28/2014
* Amir Avestimehr, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 02/28/2014
* USD 274,099.00

Femto-aided cellular networks appear to be one the best solutions to achieve
multi-fold capacity needed for future wireless networks. However, Femto-aided
cellular systems have an information architecture that is very different from
current planned and centrally managed cellular architecture. In this project,
both the design of information architecture to acquire network state information
and the optimal use of the resulting NSI will be addressed. The project is
organized into three symbiotic research thrusts on network-aware physical-layer
(PHY) coding schemes, network protocols and algorithms leveraging advanced PHYs,
and their architectural prototypes. The first thrust utilizes recent innovations
in deterministic models of wireless networks and develops novel physical-layer
cooperative encoding and decoding schemes that operate with delayed,
inconsistent, and erroneous NSI. The second thrust builds on the new physical-
layer coding schemes to design network-scheduling algorithms to address
performance issues. Finally, the third thrust utilizes the WARP programmable
radios and studies implementation challenges of the protocols. The project goals
of foundational design for Femto-aided cellular networks will have significant
impact on industry practice. The PIs will facilitate technology transfer through
their established industry affiliate program. A broad range of education and
outreach activities will also complement the research agenda, including
integration of research findings into the courses, promoting underrepresented
and undergraduate populations, and engaging with the middle/high school
community to raise the level of interest in engineering and mathematics.