* 1161228
* UCF COMPASS (Convincing Outstanding-Math-Potential Admits to Succeed in STEM)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2020
* Michael Georgiopoulos, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,799,943.00

This STEP Type 1B Project (compass: Convincing Outstanding-Math-Potential Admits
to Succeed in STEM) is implementing a sustainable model for recruiting freshman
students into STEM majors and helping them to persist in STEM to a bachelor's
degree. Towards this goal, the main objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;- Recruit new
freshmen with strong SAT mathematics scores who are undeclared majors into
enrolling in the COMPASS STEM Explorations course, offered in both the fall and
spring, and convince them to choose a STEM major by the end of their freshman
year by reinforcing the course with additional experiences (described in the
next paragraph); &lt;br/&gt;- Retain a majority of the recruited majors in STEM
through graduation; and&lt;br/&gt;- Determine how career interest and career
readiness assessments influence student choice of STEM majors and retention in
STEM through graduation in order to improve this model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undeclared majors entering college for the first time are
encouraged at orientation to register for a course in Career Planning. All
registered students with high mathematics SAT scores are placed into the STEM
section of this course called Explorations in STEM Careers, which teaches self-
assessment, explores the world-of-work with STEM specifics, and provides
experiential learning through job shadowing. Following course completion, more
extensive job shadowing experiences are offered, followed up by sophomore
undergraduate research experiences and industrial internships. These experiences
are intended to develop and strengthen participating students' emerging
identities as scientists and engineers. The COMPASS learning community is
supported by a network of mentors made up of peers, graduate students, staff,
faculty, administrators, and industrial STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Type 1B model expects to produce 473
more degrees during the grant's lifetime. The institutionalization of the
project's activities has the potential to sustain a gain of 95 additional STEM
degrees per year after the grant is completed.