* 1161413
* CIF:Medium:Space-from-Time Imaging: Fundamental Limits, Algorithms, and Preliminary Demonstrations
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Jeffrey Shapiro, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 03/31/2015
* USD 750,000.00

For centuries, the primary technical meaning of image has been a visual
representation or counterpart, formed through the interaction of light with
mirrors and lenses, and recorded through a photochemical process. In digital
photography, the photochemical process has been replaced by a sensor array, but
the use of optical elements is unchanged. Thus, the spatial resolution in this
traditional imaging is limited by the quality of the optics and the number of
sensors in the array. This project develops the foundations of achieving spatial
resolution, in 2D and 3D, by measuring temporal variations of light intensity in
response to temporally- or spatiotemporally-varying illumination. This is a
radical departure from traditional imaging, in which time is associated only
with fixing the period over which light must be collected to achieve the desired
contrast. Reducing requirements for lenses, mirrors, and numbers of sensors can
both lower costs and enable entirely new imaging configurations. Of particular
interest is to enable 3D capture in mobile devices such as cell phones.

Space-from-time imaging (SFTI) is based on the recognition that information of
interest in a scene, such as bidirectional reflectance distribution functions at
various wavelengths and distances from the imaging device, are embedded in the
transfer function from a light source to a light sensor. Furthermore, light
transfer is linear. Thus, SFTI introduces new inverse problems with at least
portions of the forward models being linear. The investigators will apply and
extend analysis techniques developed for other imaging methods, such as computed
tomography and synthetic aperture radar, to develop theoretical foundations for
SFTI. Analysis will inspire and be informed by proof-of-concept experiments.