* 1161541
* CSR: Medium: CloudTracker: Transparent, Secure Provenance Tracking and Security Policy Enforcement in Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Donald Porter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2018
* USD 870,996.00

As companies, governments, and individual users adopt increasingly diverse
computing platforms, from outsourced cloud computations to personal laptops and
mobile devices, enforcing uniform security policies across these platforms
becomes unwieldy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similarly, regulatory compliance and
business auditing requires tracking the history of this data in a comprehensive,
secure, and platform-independent manner. Unfortunately, technology has not kept
pace with these practical concerns, and several systems and security research
challenges must be addressed to make this vision a
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a natural and under-explored connection
between understanding the origins of data and using that data's history to
enforce security policies. To leverage this connection, this project is
developing a comprehensive, general framework for automatically tracking the
history of data and enforcing associated security policies in cloud computing
environments. The research focuses on three key research challenges. First, the
project investigates novel applications of virtualization technologies to
transparently infer data provenance by inspecting a guest operating system (OS)
and applications. Second, this project is developing techniques to securely
store, manage, and query provenance data at cloud scale. Finally, the project
combines the first two technologies to transparently and collaboratively enforce
security policies throughout the cloud and end-user
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prototype system is designed to allow
individual users and organizations to rapidly adopt new technology platforms,
from clouds to novel end-user systems, without having to worry about the
interaction of these new systems with security policies and regulatory
compliance concerns.