* 1161909
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Hybrid Unmanned Aerial Vehicles that Interact with Surfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Russell Tedrake, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 09/30/2017
* USD 253,941.00

In this project, the PIs propose just the first-year study of a program of
research for "Hybrid Aerial Vehicles" that routinely execute dynamic maneuvers
to land on, move along, and take off from sites such as walls, roofs, trees and
power lines. These platforms combine the best attributes of unmanned aircraft
and climbing robots. They can reach remote sites rapidly, flying directly to
them. After landing, they can move along surfaces to strategic locations and
provide stable inspection platforms while consuming little power for hours or
days. If they cling tenaciously, they can also ride out weather that is too
rough for flight. When conditions improve, or the mission changes, they can jump
off and become airborne, flying to a new site..

Broader Impacts: Although this is only an initial investigation, the PIs
suggest, in addition to the usual publication and web-based dissemination, the
long-term impact of the larger project will be enhanced with workshops organized
to bring together academic and industry experts in the emerging topic of
perching aircraft. The proposal also includes a new course to be offered during
MIT?s Independent Activities Period that will introduce undergraduates to
interesting problems that arise at the intersection of aerodyamics, robotics and
bio-inspired mechanisms. The course takes advantage of the low cost of small RC
planes to provide hands-on testing and prototyping. Based on the experience
gained in running the course, the same material will be adapted to a short
course for high school students, organized in collaboration with the Stanford
School of Education. Both laboratories have a strong track record of involving
undergraduates and under-represented minorities in research and in outreach to
local high schools. To help disseminate the educational material, all software
and hardware will be open source.