* 1161997
* III: Medium: Hardware/Software Accelerated Data Mining for Real-Time Monitoring of Streaming Pediatric ICU Data
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Eamonn Keogh, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,199,822.00

On any given day in America, there are at least one thousand children fighting
for their lives in Pediatric Intensive Care Units (PICUs). In the PICU the
patient's condition is carefully monitored with automatic sensors. Most of this
data is shown in a five-minute "sliding window" display, so a doctor summoned to
a patient's bedside always has her most recent history to consider. However what
happens to the data that "falls off" this sliding window? In most PICUs, a tiny
fraction of it is coarsely aggregated and recorded, but surprisingly, most of
this data is simply discarded. Even if most or all the data is recorded, its
sheer volume simply overwhelms researchers and analysts; very few tools exist to
help them make sense of and learn from this data. This currently discarded data
is a potential goldmine of actionable knowledge that could improve outcomes
(decreased mortality/morbidity, reduce pain, etc.), and reduce costs (implicit
in reduced length of stay). However, the very nature of this data -
multivariate, heterogeneous, high dimensional, temporal, noisy, biased, and high
frequency - poses significant challenges for traditional analytical techniques
from statistics and data mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an
interdisciplinary team of investigators is developing: (a) xcalable machine
learning algorithms for mining archives of annotated PICU data to find
regularities and patterns that can be used to aid in diagnostics and prediction
of outcomes; and (b) techniques for monitoring ICU telemetry in real time to
detect whether the patterns and rules discovered in the offline step have
occurred and can be used to guide interventions (actions by the
doctor).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together experts in data mining
(Keogh, Tsotras), high performance computing (Najjar), and medicine (Wetzel) to
investigate holistic solutions to the above problems. The project contributes to
research-based advanced training of graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of California Riverside. The findings, datasets, software, and
teaching materials created by this project will be archived in perpetuity at
www.cs.ucr.edu/~eamonn/UCRPICU/