* 1161505
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Ultra-Responsive Architectures for Mobile Plattorm
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Marios Papaefthymiou, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 04/30/2017
* USD 560,000.00

Conventional microprocessors are designed primarily for
sustained&lt;br/&gt;performance; they can operate at near-peak performance
essentially&lt;br/&gt;indefinitely until their energy source is exhausted. In
battery and&lt;br/&gt;cooling constrained environments such as mobile devices,
sustained power&lt;br/&gt;(and, consequently, peak performance) must be limited
to at most a few&lt;br/&gt;watts so that the device can dissipate heat using
only passive&lt;br/&gt;convection. However, many interactive mobile applications
(such as&lt;br/&gt;handwriting/speech recognition or image-based search) instead
call for&lt;br/&gt;bursts of intense computation in response to user input,
creating the&lt;br/&gt;need for a new ultra-responsive operating regime: rather
than limit peak&lt;br/&gt;power assuming sustained operation, systems should
instead exploit heat&lt;br/&gt;storage to enable brief computation bursts that
greatly exceed&lt;br/&gt;sustainable thermal limits without overheating. This
project&lt;br/&gt;investigates an approach called "computational sprinting", the
central&lt;br/&gt;essence of which is to compute at unsustainable rates but only
briefly&lt;br/&gt;so that temperatures do not reach unsafe
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address the
architectural, thermal,&lt;br/&gt;electrical, and software barriers to ultra-
responsiveness via&lt;br/&gt;computational sprinting. In particular, the project
explores: (1)&lt;br/&gt;architectures and memory systems that sprint via
parallelism (activating&lt;br/&gt;tens of reserve functional units/cores) and
voltage boosting&lt;br/&gt;(overdriving cores for single-thread performance)
while facilitating&lt;br/&gt;fast burst onsets; (2) thermal designs that improve
thermal response&lt;br/&gt;behavior to enable longer and more intense sprints;
(3) mobile-optimized &lt;br/&gt;electrical designs that provide stable supply
voltages&lt;br/&gt;despite current surges of an order-of-magnitude or more; and
&lt;br/&gt;(4) software mechanisms that explicitly manage limited thermal
budgets &lt;br/&gt;and anticipate and stage data needed during the sprint. The
project&lt;br/&gt;includes the fabrication of an experimental testbed to
approximate the&lt;br/&gt;computational, thermal and electrical capabilities of
a future many-core&lt;br/&gt;mobile device and to provide practical experience
with sprinting.&lt;br/&gt;Project impacts include (1) developing and advancing
techniques for&lt;br/&gt;improving the responsiveness of mobile devices and (2)
integrating the&lt;br/&gt;discoveries into a new cross-departmental course on
computer system&lt;br/&gt;design.