* 1161620
* Evolution Equations and Elliptic Boundary Problems in PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Michael Taylor, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 145,521.00

This mathematics research project will investigate problems in partial
differential equations, including both evolution equations and stationary
problems. Evolution equations to be investigated include nonlinear wave
equations on non-Euclidean spaces, nonlinear Schrodinger equations, and Euler
and Navier-Stokes equations (NLS). Specific goals include investigation of
strong dispersive estimates for nonlinear wave equations, local and global
solutions to NLS whose initial data satisfy conditions not given purely in terms
of Sobolev space estimates, standing wave and traveling wave solutions to
nonlinear wave and NLS equations and their stability, small viscosity limits of
solutions to Navier-Stokes equations, and Euler and Navier-Stokes equations on
regions with rough boundary. Stationary problems to be investigated include
elliptic boundary problems on rough domains and analysis on manifolds with
weakly bounded geometry. Specific goals include investigation of Fredholm theory
for as large a class of uniformly rectifiable domains as can be managed, looking
for an appropriately general version of the notion of a regular elliptic
boundary problem in this nonsmooth context. This builds on work with Hofmann and
Mitrea on classes of chord-arc domains (also called SKT domains), and looks
forward to more general classes, including domains with inclusions.
Investigations of these topics will result in the development of useful
analytical tools for partial differential equations. These will likely include
new results in the areas of singular integral operators, harmonic analysis of
elliptic operators, geometric measure theory, and singular perturbation
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mathematics research project in the
area of partial differential equations makes contact with a range of scientific
issues. The Navier-Stokes equations bear on the study of fluid flows, both how a
fluid will flow through a pipe and how that flow will transport solvents, and
what sorts of different behaviors govern flows in pipes with smooth or rough
walls. Nonlinear Schrodinger equations model various real-life phenomena and
have applications to subjects such as optical cables, surface waves in shallow
water, and a delicate state of low temperature matter known as a Bose-Einstein
condensate. Potential applications of the study of equations on rough domains
include the investigation of hidden structures, such as sudden transitions in
the nature of materials in the earth, often across rough, unknown boundaries,
the knowledge of whose locations can be of substantial value. The mathematical
techniques developed in the proposed project will have the potential to impact
these areas. Taylor has directed three Ph.D. students in the past four years,
who have begun to make their own contributions to such problems, and he is now
beginning to train a new student.