* 1161621
* Differentiation and Stratification during Development: A Joint Computational and Experimental Investigation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2018
* Xing Dai, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,996,946.00

Epithelial development and regeneration involve multi-tiered regulatory
mechanisms integrating multiple signaling and transcriptional activities to
regulate the dynamics and spatial distributions of stem/progenitor cell-derived
cell lineages. How does a stratified epithelium like the mammalian epidermis
utilize complex regulatory networks and cell-to-cell communication to control
its growth and stratification of cell layers during development and
regeneration? How does the epidermal system robustly obtain its desirable
spatial pattern while satisfying many biological constraints? The investigators
use a systems biology approach integrating modeling and experimentation to study
these questions. In addition to identifying new critical regulatory circuits and
determining their specific functions in the developing epidermis, the research
team characterizes and searches for generic principles on capabilities,
limitations, and tradeoffs of different regulatory circuits and modules for
proliferation, differentiation, and spatial organization during development.
Computationally, the project develops multi-scale and stochastic models
incorporating intracellular regulatory networks, extracellular morphogens,
individual cells, cell division, cell-to-cell communication, and tissue growth.
The outcome of the study will lead to new computational algorithms and modeling
techniques for high-performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
not only shed new light into skin research, but also establish a founding
paradigm for other epithelial systems such as the tongue, esophagus, stomach,
and the olfactory epithelium, all of which share with the skin epidermis a
stratified organization, ability to regenerate, and tissue polarity. Given the
importance of stem/progenitor cells in regeneration and tumorigenesis, our study
will also have important implications on epithelial tissue engineering and
cancer therapy, which are central topics in health and medicine. Furthermore,
the investigators will conduct a broad range of activities on outreach,
education and diversity, including summer research for high school students on
cell lineage modeling and several specific activities for enhancing recruitment
of underrepresented undergraduate students into the UCI interdisciplinary Ph.D.
program on Mathematical and Computational Biology. The overall research and
educational activities will involve students at several levels with a theme on
bridging research and training to provide new opportunities and better
environment for interdisciplinary training and research at the interface between
mathematics and biology.