* 1161031
* I/UCRC Phase I:  Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2012,03/31/2020
* Sandra Clinton, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 03/31/2020
* USD 473,000.00

I/UCRC for Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites (SIBS)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1161031 University of North Carolina at Charlotte; Robert
Cox &lt;br/&gt;1161017 Carnegie Mellon University; Volker Hartkopf
&lt;br/&gt;1160872 CUNY City College; Robert Paaswell &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Center for Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites (SIBS) would bring
together a disparate set of stakeholders (i.e. building owners and operators,
component manufacturers, designers, utility providers, etc.) to develop a
research agenda focused on the interaction between buildings and their
environment. This is an interaction that involves several resource flows (i.e.
energy, water, materials, and air) and occurs at scales that affect individual
buildings and the community at large. Carnegie Mellon University and the CUNY
City College are collaborating to establish the proposed center, with the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC) as the lead institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this planning project is to initiate
formal partnership with various industry partners and government/non-
governmental agencies that have an interest in creating a more sustainable built
environment. The research themes at the proposed IUCRC are aimed at the industry
need to respond to regulatory and public demands for minimizing virgin material
use, water use, non-renewable energy use, and waste generation, and also at the
societal need to protect the natural systems that support human life. The
proposed Center will be multi-disciplinary in nature and independent of any one
department, school or college. SIBS plans to leverage opportunities and funding
from technology commercialization offices and business incubators in North
Carolina, New York, and Pennsylvania. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Broader Impact
includes the enhancement of R&amp;D and technology transfer infrastructure for
the buildings industry, student training (including minority students) in an
area that is likely to grow over the next several decades, and workforce
training through an annual education and outreach programs for member company
employees. Additionally, long term economic impact is expected through potential
spin-off companies and increased revenue for existing companies. The proposed
center has a broad and deep education and outreach program that includes
graduate and undergraduate researchers on all projects. In addition, the PIs
intend to use various mechanisms to disseminate SIBS research results to
practitioners and students.