* 1161214
* STEP To Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2018
* Micheal Fultz, West Virginia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2018
* USD 499,248.00

This Type 1A project is working to increase the number of graduates receiving
baccalaureate degrees in STEM through focused recruiting, early academic
support, and ongoing mentoring and student engagement. These activities build on
existing support structures at the university and adapt effective practices from
other universities to increase STEM enrollment and to reduce attrition among
first- and second-year students. The recruiting efforts include evidence-based
practices for non-traditional recruiting of underrepresented minorities through
contact with parents, churches, and other community organizations. Early
academic support features a five-week credit-bearing residential bridge program
to address common deficiencies in mathematics, longitudinal learning communities
to establish a system of major-oriented peer support, and peer-led supplemental
instruction to improve student performance in key freshman- and sophomore-level
introductory courses in the STEM programs. Ongoing mentoring and student
engagement build on the university's prior success in placing students in
undergraduate research positions and internships with university faculty and
regional STEM-related employers. The STEP to Success Program is expected to
increase enrollment of first-time freshmen in STEM majors by 20% and increase
year-to-year retention by 10 percentage points, producing 16 additional STEM
graduates per year by the end of the award period, including at least 10 per
year from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The intellectual merit
of this project lies in its goal of establishing a lasting institutional
infrastructure to continue its targeted recruiting efforts, early academic
support, and provision of opportunities for student participation in research
and internships. The project is exercising broader impact by working through an
existing network of sister Historically Black Colleges and Universities to
disseminate the results and findings of the project and offer training to
faculty, administrators, and students at other institutions interested in
replicating the approaches the project is finding most effective.