* 1161334
* The New Mexico STEM Transfer Coalition: Improving the Success and Matriculation Rates of Two-Year College STEM Students from Small, Minority-Serving Colleges in Northern New Mexico
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Mary Dezember, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2018
* USD 1,249,999.00

This project is a consortium of six minority-serving colleges in New Mexico
formed to increase the number of associates and baccalaureate degrees granted in
STEM fields. The consortium is led by New Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology (New Mexico Tech), a state science and engineering institution, and
includes four community colleges in rural northern New Mexico, and Northern New
Mexico College - an institution that is currently in transition from being a
community college to a four year degree granting institution. The consortium has
a cultural affinity because the participating colleges are small, enrolling less
than 3,000 students each, and located in rural areas with high percentages of
Hispanic, Native American, low-income, and first-generation college students.
The program of work is based upon institutional self-study that has identified
the major systemic and institutional obstacles to students completing STEM
degrees. Project activities include: &lt;br/&gt;1. Creating and implementing
fully developed 2+2 or 2+3 degree plans and reverse transfer opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;2. Enhancing advisement, student development, and undergraduate
research opportunities to improve 2-year and 4-year graduation rates and to
facilitate the transfer of 2-year students into baccalaureate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;3. Establishing paid research opportunities to provide STEM students
with income while attending school, foster their interest in STEM careers, and
develop student-employer relationships prior to graduation. &lt;br/&gt;4.
Developing and improving pre-engineering and science programs to establish
consistent, high-standard programs at the 2-year colleges in the consortium.
&lt;br/&gt;5. Building Northern New Mexico College's capacity to offer high
quality four-year STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the five-year grant
period, the project is projected to double the number of STEM Associate of
Science degrees awarded at the 2-year colleges, triple the number of transfers
to New Mexico Tech and Northern New Mexico College, and increase their
graduation rates at both schools. Overall the project plans to serve 610
students.