* 1161879
* NeTS: Medium: Mobile Computing over Intermittently Connected Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Irfan Essa, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 07/31/2016
* USD 695,000.00

Mobile devices are increasingly being relied on for a number of services that go
beyond simple connectivity and require more complex processing. Such
applications have become an indispensable part of everyday life. This has been
made possible by two trends. First, truly portable mobile devices, such as
smartphones and tablets, are increasingly capable devices with processing and
storage capabilities that make significant step improvements with every
generation. A second trend is the availability of improved connectivity options
for mobile devices which have enabled applications that transcend an individual
device's capabilities by making use of remote processing and
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary approach in wide-use today to enable
such remote processing makes use of standard cloud computing resources to off-
load the 'heavy lifting' that may be required in some mobile applications to
specially designated servers or server clusters. Another technique for remote
processing of mobile applications proposes the use of cloudlets which provide
software instantiated in real-time on nearby computing resources using virtual
machine technology. This previous work assumes the availability of
infrastructure-based compute resources and additionally requires good, constant
connectivity to such resources for the duration of a computational task. This
leaves the important and challenging question of handling intermittent
connectivity of mobile devices unaddressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
generalize the remote mobile computing paradigm to enable its operation in the
presence of intermittent connectivity. This, in turn, provides the important
ability to leverage more compute resources including those provided by
intermittently-connected cloudlets and even those available in other mobile
devices. Our work can be viewed as enabling a truly general vision of cyber
foraging which envisions mobile applications 'living off the land' by exploiting
nearby computational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work will be
conducted by an interdisciplinary team which includes researchers with expertise
in mobile wireless networks, in program partitioning and execution in mobile
environments, and in building applications that involve analysis and
interpretation of rich multimedia data. The work will include efforts in 1)
development of a remote execution framework for a number of scenarios with
varying availability of remote compute resources and a diversity of intermittent
connectivity features, 2) development of application profiling and partitioning
tailored to intermittently-connected environments, 3) experimentation with
sequential and embarrassingly parallel applications, and 4) evaluation through
proof-of-concept prototypes as well as extensive
emulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This work generalizes the
mobile computing paradigm to include full consideration of the increased
computational power of mobile devices together with their inherent intermittent
connectivity. In doing so, we draw upon and push forward recent advances in
program analysis, networking in intermittently connected environments, and
mobile multimedia applications. The unified framework developed within this
research has conceptual and pragmatic value; it sets the stage for a future in
which mobile applications can leverage and dynamically adapt to any and all
available resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The work is multi-
disciplinary, and the students working on the project will be exposed to
problems that lie in the intersection of computer science disciplines such as
networking, programming languages, and distributed processing. Our research will
also enable applications that run at the edge of the network and without fixed
infrastructure, thus empowering citizens where they are, with limited external
dependencies.