* 1161418
* CIF:  Medium:  Collaborative Research: Multihop Multiflow Wireless Networks:  A Treasure Hunt
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2016
* Syed Jafar, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 03/31/2016
* USD 187,499.00

Wireless networks are the dominant medium through which people connect to the
Internet, communicate, do business and access information. The ever-growing
demand for higher data rates places the conventional approaches to network
design under considerable stress. To meet this demand, future wireless networks
are rapidly evolving towards high-density, user-deployed, heterogeneous
infrastructure characterized by very high data rates at shorter communication
range, with possibly harsh interference. In this context, multiple flow and
multiple hop communication is expected to play an increasingly important role.
Yet, current visions of how such networks should be designed are limited by the
fact that the fundamental understanding of such novel communication paradigms is
still in its infancy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses key
questions about multihop multiflow networks in the form of new ideas, insights
and tools, with a transformative impact on the design of future networks. The
project is organized into three symbiotic research thrusts on extensibility,
side information and algorithms. In the extensibility thrust, the investigators
develop a new understanding of the capacity of multihop multiflow networks of
prototypical network models. The side information thrust moves beyond idealized
model assumptions and incorporates imperfect or uncertain conditions at multiple
spatial and temporal scales. The third thrust on algorithms translates the new
key ideas developed in the first two thrusts into explicit coding and signal
processing algorithms with polynomial complexity in the network size, for
resource-efficient multiflow multihop communication. The research can broadly
impact the wireless industry by generating new ideas that will power the design
of future generations of wireless networks. The project also includes a
dedicated educational plan to recruit and train under-represented minorities in
this field.