* 1161874
* Complex Bio-Nano-Dynamics of Motor Proteins in Dynamically Controlled Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Bogdan Epureanu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 08/31/2016
* USD 319,999.00

The recent breathtaking advances in modern engineering and bioscience research
have enabled the identification of properties and roles of biomolecules that
power cellular processes. The hallmark of these nanoscale systems is their
multi-scale organization. In neurodegenerative diseases for example, axonal
degeneration occurs because the neurotransmitters do not reach the synapse
correctly. This is because binding of kinesins on microtubules is hindered.
Hence, interrogating the properties of the nanotransport done by kinesins on
microtubules is crucial for early/presymptomatic diagnosis of neurodegenerative
diseases. Such early diagnosis will be enabled the novel models developed in
this work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to create an
innovative approach to model and to actively interrogate the complex bio-
nanotransport of groups of kinesins interacting with microtubules in controlled
fluids. Specific aims are: (a) novel models: develop new models which bridge the
gap between nano/pico length/time scales and macroscales through combined
atomistic/continuum modeling and experiments, and (b) novel detection: create
novel methods to interrogate kinesin-MT systems about their properties by
monitoring the nanotransport done by these systems in controlled fluids.
Uniquely combined theoretical and experimental methods from atomistic
simulations, nonlinear dynamics and bioengineering are used.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will answer important scientific questions,
and will impact applications spanning from cell science to biomolecular
nanotechnology and engineered biodevices. For example, understanding how to
model motor proteins in controlled fluids and how to identify properties of
nanotransport in vivo is a key element in the next generation of drug technology
and delivery, and can profoundly impact medicine. This work contributes to such
understanding by using nonlinear dynamic approaches for solving very important
questions in medicine and cell biology. If successful, this research can
radically transform the way neurodegenerative diseases are diagnosed. Also, this
work will provide fundamental understanding of bio-mechanochemical processes
which affect the development of lab-on-a-chip bio-applications.