* 1161626
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: General Frameworks for Approximation and Fixed-Parameter Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2018
* Erik Demaine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 400,000.00

This research develops general frameworks for efficient graph algorithms, which
allow to solve entire categories of computational problems all at once. The PIs
aim for a general theory of algorithms, wherein a given problem of interest can
simply be adapted into the general approach. This approach differs from the
traditional study of algorithms, which often focuses on individual solutions to
specific problems.

The type of computational graph problems the PIs consider are "optimization
problems", where the task is to find a solution whose cost, quality, size,
profit, energy, or speed is as large or as small as possible. Most interesting
graph optimization problems are NP-hard, essentially implying that there are no
efficient algorithms to find the very best solution. This research considers the
two main types of algorithms for solving NP-hard graph optimization problems.
Approximation algorithms allow the result to be a small factor away from the
optimal, but still require a fast running time. Fixed-parameter algorithms allow
the running time to be exponential, but confine that exponentiality to a
(typically small) parameter other than the problem size, while requiring an
optimal solution.

The type of graphs the PIs consider include planar graphs, which can be drawn in
two dimensions without any edges crossing each other, and nearly planar graphs
such as graphs of bounded genus and graphs excluding a fixed minor. Many graphs
of practical interest---for example, computer networks and road networks, which
are "drawn" on Earth---are planar or nearly planar. In these settings, the PIs
aim to develop general frameworks for approximation and fixed-parameter
algorithms.