* 1161476
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Graph Cut Algorithms for Domain-specific Higher Order Priors
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Endre Boros, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 354,980.00

Optimization is a powerful paradigm for expressing and solving a variety of
imaging problems. Modern optimization methods have had considerable success on
problems that involve interactions between pairs of pixels. This has lead to
important advances, but many imaging problems clearly require explicit modeling
of higher-order interactions. This project is addressing this challenge through
a close collaboration between researchers with expertise in graph algorithms and
computer vision. The project is focused on two core applications: MRI image
reconstruction and boundary detection in natural images. Besides their innate
interest, these applications are closely related to other important imaging
problems such as fMRI distortion correction, super-resolution, angiography and
road detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimization problems with high-order
interactions are inherently difficult from a computational point of view. The
computational complexity can be reduced for problems with specific properties.
By identifying common properties in many important imaging problems it is
possible to design powerful optimization methods that are broadly applicable.
The project is bringing together researchers in computer vision and algorithms.
The collaboration is leading to new algorithms that are of broad interest to the
computer vision and imaging communities. These algorithms have the potential to
transform the way that several important classes of problems are solved. All of
the algorithms being developed are being carefully evaluated, with their
implementations made widely available on a web repository. Dissemination of the
ideas is facilitated by workshops and mini-courses being organized at Brown,
Cornell and Rutgers.