* 1161990
* Collaborative Research:  A Pre/Post Disaster Investigation of the Effect of Network Capacities on Disaster Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* James Moody, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 05/31/2016
* USD 18,147.00

This research project investigates what can be done before an event to improve
inter-agency communication and coordination during a disaster. Due to a number
of social, economic, developmental, physical and environmental factors, natural
disasters like floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and wildfires are anticipated to
increase. Consequently, we need to have a better understanding of how
communities can respond to and better prepare for disasters. This project is
unique in two ways. First, it will examine whether factors like attachment to
community, inter-organizational relationships, and network leadership are
associated with better community preparedness. Second, the research will measure
these factors in communities ahead of a disaster to see if they lead to better
communication and coordination when an actual disaster happens. Wildfires,
because they are one of the most commonly occurring natural disasters in the
United States, are the focal events of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results from the research will help improve disaster management by providing
information that can inform how the many agencies, organizations, and groups
involved in disaster preparedness and response can better organize themselves to
create more disaster resilient communities. These lessons for better disaster
management will be communicated directly to partner agencies and organizations,
such as the U.S Forest Service Fire and Aviation Management, National Incident
Management Organization and various state and local wildfire response
organizations. The investigators will also share this work more broadly with the
interested public, as well as professional and academic audiences. Conducting
the research will provide opportunities for student training, as well as expand
research partnerships with leaders in key agencies interested in disaster
scholarship.