* 1161857
* CSR: Medium: Easy PRAM-Based High-Performance Parallel Programming with Immediate Concurrent Execution (ICE)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Uzi Vishkin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2018
* USD 656,001.00

Parallel programming is in crisis: its difficulty dissuades all but the most
determined (and deep-pocketed)&lt;br/&gt;software vendors, and speedups are
often disappointing for all but regular programs. Merely
augmenting&lt;br/&gt;the substantial knowledge-base of parallel computing with
incremental ideas in algorithms, programming&lt;br/&gt;languages, compilers,
hardware, power or applications, interesting as they may be, is unlikely to
change&lt;br/&gt;this reality.&lt;br/&gt;This project advances a powerful idea
for drastically improving ease-of-programming within the context of&lt;br/&gt;a
holistic many-core research architecture called XMT. Our contention is that
without the co-design of&lt;br/&gt;language and architecture, one cannot conquer
the twin challenges of easy programming and efficient&lt;br/&gt;parallelization
of irregular programs. Therefore we are developing a new easy-to-program
language&lt;br/&gt;called ICE as part of ecosystem consisting of XMT, the PRAM
algorithmic model, and ICE, that together&lt;br/&gt;deliver on this twin goal.
The XMT architecture, developed at UMD over the last decade, is capable
of&lt;br/&gt;exploiting fine-grained parallelism in irregular programs. ICE is
based on the successful PRAM algorithm&lt;br/&gt;model, which provides a rich
theory for parallel programming, and has led to published parallel
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for hundreds of problems.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
this project includes (i) much easier parallel programming model leading to
more&lt;br/&gt;succinct and intuitive code; (ii) freeing the programmer of many
complex issues in parallel programming,&lt;br/&gt;leading to greater
productivity and acceptance of parallel programming; (iii) the nearness of ICE
and&lt;br/&gt;PRAM means that programmers would instantly have a rich ?library?
of parallel algorithms without having&lt;br/&gt;to write their own; (iv) a
language especially suitable to an architecture that has
demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;unprecedented speedups on hard-to-parallelize irregular
applications; and (v) a very active outreach&lt;br/&gt;program that has already
seen XMT being used at many research and educational institutions.