* 1161584
* Representation theory of W-algebras, quantum groups, symplectic reflection algebras and quantum Hamiltonian reductions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Ivan Loseu, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2016
* USD 129,999.00

This project studies the representation theory of several different yet related
associative algebras: finite W-algebras, symplectic reflection algebras, quantum
groups and quantum Hamiltonian reductions associated to quivers. The
investigator plans to classify finite dimensional irreducible modules over
W-algebras and cyclotomic rational Cherednik algebras. He is going to relate
various categories of representations of the universal enveloping algebras of
semisimple Lie algebras and of W-algebras and use this relation to compute the
dimensions of irreducible W-algebra modules. Next, the investigator will study a
connection between W-algebras and quantum groups at a root of unity. Another
related topic is the study of Harish-Chandra bimodules over symplectic
reflection algebras and quantum groups at roots of unity. The investigator also
plans to work on a conjecture of Rouquier describing the multiplicities in the
categories O and a conjecture of Etingof on counting finite dimensional
irreducible modules over symplectic reflection algebras. The latter will be
approached in a more general context of quantum Hamiltonian reductions
corresponding to Nakajima quiver varieties.

The area of this project is Representation theory. Roughly speaking,
Representation theory deals with symmetry, in particular, coming from Quantum
Physics. Symmetries are thought as algebraic structures such as groups or
algebras. The main problem is therefore is to understand how a given algebraic
structure can be represented as a symmetry of some other objects, usually vector
spaces. The algebraic structures studied in this project are certain associative
algebras mostly arising in Quantum Mechanics: finite W-algebras, symplectic
reflection algebras or quantum groups. Mostly, the project concentrates on a
fundamental representation-theoretic problem - understanding basic, so called
"irreducible"representations that serve as building blocks for more general ones
with an emphasis on finite dimensional representations. Problems to be studied
include computing the number of such representations, classifying them,
computing their dimensions or finer invariants, called characters.