* 1161260
* Mitigation of Fatigue Induced Effects in Skeletal Muscle Through Closed-Loop Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Warren Dixon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2016
* USD 310,000.00

Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation (NMES) is prescribed by clinicians to aid
in the recovery of strength, size, and function of the muscles of people
suffering from movement disorders to enable improved mobility and activities of
daily living. The research objective of this award is to enable improved
rehabilitative outcomes of the NMES treatment by developing new closed-loop
stimulation methods that prolong the application of stimulation by compensating
for or delaying the onset of muscle fatigue. The research approach progresses
from the development of NMES controllers that can compensate for diminished
muscle force production and decreased responsiveness of the muscle. Developed
controllers will embed a stimulation protocol in the design that indicates how
to vary the intensity and frequency of stimulation to reduce fatigue.
Deliverables include a class of closed-loop control methods, stability analysis
tools, demonstration through human subject testing, documentation of research
results, and engineering student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the results of this research will have the potential to enable prolonged dosage
of NMES therapies by compensating for and/or delaying the onset of muscle
fatigue. Longer rehabilitation sessions enabled by the ability to yield accurate
limb motion from prolonged stimulation can speed the rehabilitation of people
with movement disorders caused by stroke, spinal cord injury, multiple
sclerosis, traumatic brain injury, etc. The mathematics and analysis tools
developed to compensate for decreasing controllability effects and delayed
response in muscles can also be abstracted to other engineering applications
such as networked systems, telerobotics, and fault tolerance. Research outcomes
will be transitioned through a transatlantic degree consortium project focused
on developing engineers and scientists who can work with physicians and surgeons
to develop innovative medical practice. The research challenges will be used to
educate graduate and undergraduate students, and developed solutions will be
disseminated through publications, conference presentations, and workshops.