* 1161196
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Sparse Approximation: Theory and Extensions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Hung Ngo, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 06/30/2016
* USD 305,467.00

In the past ten years the theoretical computer science, applied math and
electrical engineering communities have extensively studied variants of the
problem of ``solving" an under-determined linear system. One common mathematical
feature that allows us to solve these problems is sparsity; roughly speaking, as
long as the unknown vector does not contain too many non-zero components (or has
a few dominating components), we can ``solve'' the under-determined system for
the unknown vector. These problems are referred to as sparse approximation
problems and have applications in diverse areas such as signal and image
processing, biology, imaging, tomography, machine learning and others. The
proposed research project aims to develop a comprehensive, rigorous theory of
sparse approximation, broadly defined. The research proposal entails two
complementary research directions: (1) a robust and more complete view of the
combinatorial, algorithmic, and complexity-theoretic foundations of sparse
approximations (including its generalization to functional sparse approximation
where we want to ``solve" for some function of the unknown vector instead of the
vector itself), (2) coupled with either its interactions or direct applications
in other areas of theoretical computer science, from complexity theory to coding
theory, and of electrical engineering, from signal processing to analog-to-
digital converters. A general theory of sparse approximation that concentrates
both on the optimal tradeoffs between competing parameters and the computational
feasibility of attaining such tradeoffs will not only help explore the
theoretical limits and possibilities of sparse approximations, but also feed
algorithmic techniques and theoretical benchmarks back to its application areas.
Sparse approximation already has been shown to have impact in a variety of
fields, including imaging and signal processing, Internet traffic analysis, and
design of experiments in biology and drug design.