* 1161023
* CSEDI: Integrated Study of H2O in the mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2017
* Anthony Withers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2017
* USD 759,998.00

Cycling of H2O between the mantle and the Earth's surface and between different
reservoirs in the mantle are critical processes governing Earth's geodynamical
and geochemical evolution, influencing everything from plate tectonics to
habitability and climate. However, the distribution and inventory of H2O in the
mantle remains uncertain, the mechanisms of transport between principal mantle
reservoirs are not fully known, and the microscopic mechanisms by which H2O
influences the properties of key Earth materials remain controversial. This
project represents a multidisciplinary effort combining theoretical mineral
physics, experimental petrology, and experimental rock physics to address some
of the key outstanding questions regarding the distribution and behavior of H2O
in the mantle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current proposal will pursue several
broad problems that arise from previous CSEDI funding to this
group:&lt;br/&gt;1) To investigate the conditions required to incite hydrous
melting in the asthenosphere or in the deep upper mantle above 410 km, we will
conduct experimental, theoretical and spectroscopic studies to determine the
mechanism and limits of H substitution in peridotite-saturated nominally
anhydrous minerals, with a focus on garnet and pyroxene, and evaluate the
conditions for hydrous melting of the asthenosphere and the upper mantle atop
the 410 km discontinuity. &lt;br/&gt;2) To resolve seeming contradictions in our
understanding of how H substitutes in olivine and how it influences key
properties such as mantle creep strength, we will combine experiments, first-
principle calculations and infrared spectroscopy to resolve critical
uncertainties regarding the connection between structure, chemical environment,
and minor element substitution on the mechanisms of incorporation of OH in
olivine, garnets, and pyroxene and on the influence of H on diffusivity and
creep strength.&lt;br/&gt;3) We will continue our efforts to use ERDA (Elastic
Recoil Detection Analysis) to improve the accuracy of FTIR and SIMS
determinations of H in nominally anhydrous minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this project includes continuation of a significant inter-
departmental multidisciplinary effort integrating state-of-the-art materials
theory with expertise in petrology and rock physics. The effort includes
involving three faculty, two post-doctoral researchers, and one graduate student
and is facilitated by regular group meetings to ensure that our focus remains on
multidisciplinary approaches and to promote interdisciplinary learning of all of
the participants. For Hirschmann, Kohlstedt, and Withers, the proposed research
dovetails well with the Earth sciences REU undergraduate intern site (Fluids in
the Earth, from the Surface to the Core. Wentzcovitch and Umemoto communicate
results and methods to the broader scientific community through the Quantum
ESPRESSO project and related workshops and tutorials and in the training of
undergraduates through summer internships.