* 1161194
* CRPA: In the Grass, On the Reef: Understanding linkages between coastal ecology and valued ecosystem services
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Randall Hughes, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 06/30/2015
* USD 149,896.00

In this Connecting Researchers to Public Audiences (CRPA) project, the
researchers from Florida State University, in partnership with their local
public broadcasting station (WFSU-TV), will engage the audience in an
exploration of the ecosystem services of coastal habitats. The main content
focus is the important linkages among coastal foundation species (oysters and
salt marsh plants), the human and ecological communities they support, and the
ecosystem services they provide. In particular, the project illuminates the
roles of biodiversity and consume-prey relationships in influencing ecosystem
services, while conveying the excitement of ecological research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complementary target audiences are the general WFSU
viewers and listeners, groups that actively use or promote coastal habitats, and
graduate students at Florida State University and Florida A&amp;M University.
The main deliverables include: 1) a TV documentary, a series of short videos and
radio spots; 2) a research blog; and 3) a science communication three-day
workshop for current and future researchers to converse with the public about
key learning goals. In addition, in year two of the grant, the PIs will deliver
a monthly seminar series focused on effective communication skills for
scientists. The resulting documentaries will be broadcast by WFSU and offered to
other PBS stations via APT and/or NETA. Other materials will be made available
via PBS Learning Media and other portals. Community group project collaborators,
such as SciGirls and the Science Café, will extend the reach and impact of the
project. The project design includes formative evaluation which will focus on
ways to improve the accessibility and usability of the research blog, and
summative evaluation which will review each component of the deliverables.
Results of the summative evaluation will be posted on
www.informalscience.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses the
communication gap between scientists and the public by simultaneously targeting
both audiences with deliverables designed to promote dialogue and understanding.
By highlighting compelling natural history information and key ecological
concepts associated with current research, the project will provide engaging
educational experiences to a wide audience. These activities will not only
educate the public about specific research but also demonstrate the process of
science. Finally, the proposed seminar for students, along with the other
informal learning opportunities throughout the project, will enhance the
communication skills and outreach abilities of a diverse group of graduate
students.