* 1161852
* Temporal Stimulus Segmentation with Spiking Neurons
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Giancarlo La Camera, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2016
* USD 316,236.00

Human beings have an unmatched ability to learn to abstract information from the
environment, use this information to predict the consequences of their actions,
and develop appropriate behavioral strategies. State-of-the-art artificial
devices are far from exhibiting such autonomous learning abilities. This project
focuses on a subset of the skills required for autonomous learning,
specifically, the ability to identify the relevant cues and stimuli from the
environment and establish how to act in their presence. In many situations, such
as speech processing, this problem amounts to extracting temporally extended
segments embedded in a continuous sensory stream of irrelevant stimuli and
noise, a problem of temporal stimulus segmentation. Traditional algorithms for
stimulus segmentation that learn based just on the unsegmented input stream are
unlikely to succeed in this task, especially if the relevant segments do not
exhibit features that are detectable by some standard pre-processing strategy.
As a consequence, existing models typically endow a learning agent with prior
knowledge of what is relevant (the so-called "states" of the agent) and focus on
the problem of relating each state with the outcome they predict. Such models,
of widespread use in computational neuroscience and machine learning, are unable
to form or modify their own relevant states, preventing the development of truly
autonomous learning and decision-making devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a biologically relevant solution to the problem of
temporal stimulus segmentation, with a focus on foundational theory and
principles. In this theory, the states are represented by spatio-temporal
patterns of spike trains and are processed by a network of spiking neurons
capable of online, spike-based learning. The network learns to segment the input
stream by taking appropriate actions at the right time, using a spike-based
synaptic plasticity rule that approximates gradient ascent on the average
reward, and makes use of locally available information about the network's
decision. Importantly, the relevant segments are constructed so as to be
behaviorally meaningful but not statistically different from irrelevant stimuli
and noise, and therefore their boundaries are not detectable by standard pre-
processing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Segmentation performance will be
quantified as a function of the network's properties (such as number of neurons,
connectivity and architecture) in the framework of different neurobiologically-
inspired stimulus-coding schemes, and contrasted to more traditional approaches
such as artificial neural networks and hidden Markov models. The research will
be further enhanced by developing a hard challenge application related to
natural stimuli, with the long-term goal of demonstrating the power and
usefulness of the new approach compared to more traditional ones. This will also
demonstrate that the network can be applied widely, across modalities (e.g.,
vision as well as speech), and in real-life scenarios.