* 1161352
* Destination Problem-Based Learning: A Large Scale Materials Development Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/21/2011,06/30/2015
* Jane Ostrander, Truckee Meadows Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2015
* USD 1,192,948.00

In problem-based learning models, such as scenario-based learning (SBL),
learning activities are situated in contexts that resemble those students would
encounter in the workplace. Yet integrating scenario-based learning into the
community college environment requires change and an understanding of the ways
that this pedagogical approach can be adapted to meet the needs of the faculty
practitioner. Action research is used to engage faculty, under the guidance of
professional researchers, in examining the challenges of implementing SBL
instruction in technician education. An online community of practice is
developed by establishing a library of SBL resources and by linking to ATE
centers and projects, initially in biology and bio-informatics. Three prototype
online wizards are developed and tested to support community college instructors
in editing existing SBL activities, in creating new SBL activities and in
creating principled assessments items using the ideas of evidence-centered
design. An advisory board of industry representatives and educational
researchers in the fields of teaming, problem based learning and collaborative
learning guide the development and validation of the scenarios. The evaluation
determines metrics to measure the extent to which the SBLs prove useful to
faculty and students in technical education.