* 1161542
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Developing a 3D Browser to Explore Genomes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Deepak Bastia, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2013
* USD 355,259.00

New genome technologies enabled us to analyze the spatial conformation and
interaction of chromatin together with their functional implication in important
cellular activities such as gene regulation and cell state determination. With
the influx of new details about the higher-level structure and dynamics of the
genome, novel techniques will be required to visualize and model the full extent
of genomic interactions to gain insight about genome functions. Current genome
browsers are specifically aimed at viewing primary sequence information.
Although supplemental information can be annotated via new tracks, representing
structural hierarchies and interactions is quite difficult in these browsers,
particularly across non-contiguous genomic segments. In addition, in spite of
many recent efforts to measure and model the genome structure at various
resolutions and detail, little work has focused on combining these models or
taken advantage of the large amount of genomic and epigenomic data generated
from new high-throughput approaches. To address these issues, the team has
created a proof-of-concept interactive 3D viewer, Genome3D, to enable
integration and visualization of genomic and epigenomic data in three dimension.
Substantial development is needed to take advantage of the newest genomic
technologies and to enable its integration with analysis pipelines. While
enormous amount of spatial information for eukaryotic chromosomes have been
generated, the size and complexity of these data require the design and
development of new algorithms and methods in data integration and model
construction. The goal is to develop a full-fledged, platform independent system
that enables biologists to build and refine their own 3D genome models to
analyze their data. The intellectual merits of the research include: 1)
Implementing a novel strategy to employ new engines with strong interactive
design element to transform the prototype into a cloud-based 3D genome browser
that can be used on various platforms including web browsers and tablets, making
3D structural genome information available to a broader research community. 2)
Adding integrated tools that can analyze 3D features of genomes and support
model building and validation. 3) Designing and providing robust set of APIs and
scripting for customized data analysis. 4) Collaborating with other researchers
to explore and visualize new three dimensional genome models.

There are a number of broader impacts in this research. A multi-scale three
dimensional genome browser is crucial to achieve fuller understanding of genome
functions and will provide a new way to teach genomics. Exploring genomes
through 3D visualization will significantly advance genome research and will
have a profound impact on comparative genomics and genetics. The use of new user
interaction-intensive engines into scientific research tools and will encourage
researchers in every area to use interactive visualization to analyze data. New
algorithms to analyze models and visualize genomic information can be extended
to problems of similar size in other fields and form the basis for new
computational approaches. This project provides valuable interdisciplinary
training experiences to undergraduate and graduate students and will attract
more students to computational biology research. Results and the new browser
will be disseminated through publications, workshops and tutorials and will
enable customized development by providing detailed APIs and tutorials.