* 1161732
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science Site: Engineering of Polymeric Films and Interfaces
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Kevin Cavicchi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 04/30/2016
* USD 390,921.00

This award provides funding for a three year standard award for a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site Program
at the University of Akron entitled, RET in Engineering and Computer Science
Site: Engineering of Polymeric Films and Interfaces, under the direction of Dr.
Kevin A. Cavicchi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this RET site is to
bring ten high school science teachers from the Akron, Ohio Public Schools and
the Canton, Ohio City Schools, for eight weeks each summer over a three year
period (total of 30 teachers) to the University of Akron campus to participate
in a research program focused on polymeric films and interfaces. Polymers are a
key component of many engineering challenges facing society today and are
therefore an excellent topic to expose teachers to engineering research. A group
of ten University of Akron faculty members has been assembled from the College
of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering and the Departments of Chemical and
Biomolecular Engineering and Biomedical Engineering in the College of
Engineering to mentor the teachers on independent research projects in the
faculty members' laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary result of this
work will be the teachers learning about engineering and engineering research
and effectively disseminating this knowledge in their high school classrooms
through new curriculum developed during the summer RET experience. It will have
a beneficial impact on the teachers, the faculty mentors, and the graduate
student/post-doc mentors. For the teachers they will gain increased confidence
and knowledge in performing and mentoring inquiry based science in their
classrooms. This will help invigorate their classrooms and encourage students to
pursue further science and engineering education in college. The University of
Akron mentors will be exposed to a broader range of science practitioners. This
experience will develop long-term relationships between the University and high
schools that will better serve the education objectives of the United States.