* 1161783
* Local Cohomology and Related Questions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Gennady Lyubeznik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 269,999.00

A large part of the Principal Investigator's research on local cohomology over
the last twenty years has been devoted to the study of a number of striking
connections with several quite diverse areas of mathematics, such as etale
cohomology, topology of algebraic varieties, D-modules, tight closure,
cohomology of groups and others. These connections work both ways. For example
local cohomology provides a way of proving otherwise inaccessible results on the
topology of algebraic varieties while D-modules provide a way of proving
otherwise inaccessible finiteness properties of local cohomology modules. While
considerable progress on this circle of ideas has been made, a lot remains to be
done. It is proposed to continue to study these (and some other) questions by
using methods that have been successful in the past as well as developing some
new methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of a connection between two
different areas of mathematics holds a potential for enriching both of them by
making available new sets of techniques for attacking old problems. This often
yields striking results that even after many years remain inaccessible by old
techniques. The Principal Investigator has discovered quite a few such
connections between local cohomology and other areas of mathematics. As
expected, this has led to solutions of a number of problems where old techniques
were inadequate. The Principal Investigator proposes to continue to study these
connections and discover some new ones. The Principal Investigator has advised
some good students who have now themselves become successful research
mathematicians, mentored some postdoctoral scholars, spoken at professional
conferences and organized some meetings and workshops on topics related to his
research both for experienced researchers and for graduate students. He has
edited a volume of proceedings of one such workshop that includes a lot of
expository material useful in disseminating knowledge. He has collaborated with
non-mathematicians on a joint paper in wireless communication thus (among other
things) raising awareness of basic algebraic geometry techniques among non-
mathematicians. He is most certainly going to engage in similar activities in
the future.