* 1161835
* NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biology FY 2012
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Alberto Stolfi, Stolfi                  Alberto        S
* Fellowship Award
* michael vanni
* 08/31/2015
* USD 189,000.00

Transcriptional regulation of neuronal polarity and morphogenesis

Neurons are highly polarized cells with distinct structures and functions
localized mainly to either end of the cell. They are also intricately shaped and
engage in myriad movements during development. These features and processes are
indispensable for the neuron to engage in its function of transmitting the
directional flow of information through a neural circuit. However, little is
known about how neuronal polarization and morphogenesis is regulated in vivo.
This research will take advantage of the small size and experimental
accessibility of sea squirt embryos to understand how these processes are
regulated. Sea squirts, or ascidians, are the invertebrates most closely related
to vertebrates and have emerged as a model organism for the study of animal
development. More specifically, the research will focus on connecting the gene
regulatory network, the basic blueprint of the embryo, to processes occurring
during neural development such as polarization, migration, axon guidance, and
morphogenesis. The hope is to identify rate-limiting genes involved in such
processes, and their regulation by upstream genes which might be playing a
similar role in vertebrates. Thus, the overall aim is to understand how each
neuron is precisely shaped and formed as dictated by the gene regulatory
network.

The Fellow is dedicated to engaging and inspiring other Latinos as they pursue a
scientific career. Students from underrepresented groups will be provided
opportunities to participate in the research where possible. The project will
take advantage of being located at a visible institution in a diverse city such
as New York to reach out to underrepresented minorities not directly pursuing a
career in science, through lectures, open forums, workshops, group visits, and
other events that will stimulate their interest in science.