* 1161226
* Explicit Approaches to Elliptic Curves, Modular Forms and Modular Abelian Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* William Stein, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 224,557.00

Intellectual Merit: The projects in this proposal would generalize the
highly&lt;br/&gt;influential tables of Cremona to the next (ordered by
discriminant) totally real&lt;br/&gt;number field and to higher dimensional
modular abelian varieties. This would&lt;br/&gt;improve on algorithms available
for computing with elliptic curves and abelian&lt;br/&gt;varieties, and provide
useful data and tools for number theory researchers. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed
research would also advance techniques for constructing points and
coho-&lt;br/&gt;mology classes on elliptic curves, and for understanding the
arithmetic of elliptic&lt;br/&gt;curves over number fields. This project would
have as a concrete deliverable new&lt;br/&gt;publicly available tables and
software that will be of use to many number
theorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The PI is co-authoring a popular
expository book with Barry&lt;br/&gt;Mazur on the Riemann Hypothesis, co-
authoring a graduate level book with Ken-&lt;br/&gt;neth Ribet on modular forms
and Hecke operators, and intends to release a new&lt;br/&gt;edition of his
modular forms book. The PI has tables of data that are freely
avail-&lt;br/&gt;able online, and whose creation has been supported by NSF FRG
grant DMS-&lt;br/&gt;0757627, and the proposed research would expand these
tables further. He will&lt;br/&gt;also continue to organize the development of
the free open source NSF-funded&lt;br/&gt;Sage mathematical software project
that he started. The PI organizes dozens of&lt;br/&gt;"Sage Days" workshops that
involve many undergraduate and graduate students,&lt;br/&gt;and touch on number
theory, algebraic topology, combinatorics, special
functions,&lt;br/&gt;numerical computation, and other areas. The PI is also a
co-PI on the UTMOST&lt;br/&gt;NSF grant (DUE-1020378), whose goal is to make
Sage more accessible to high&lt;br/&gt;school and college teachers and students.