* 1161812
* AF:  Small:  Unconditional Lower Bounds in Approximability and Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2011,07/31/2013
* Luca Trevisan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Maslov
* 07/31/2013
* USD 392,460.00

The focus of this project is on two related research programs, one concerned
with unconditional lower bounds in the theory of approximation algorithms and
one concerned with unconditional lower bounds in the foundations of
cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the study of approximation algorithms,
this project focuses on the complexity of finding approximate solutions to
satisfiable constraint satisfaction problems; an example of such a problem is,
given a 3-colorable graph, to efficiently find a 3-coloring that properly colors
as many edges as possible. The well developed theory of "Unique Games," and its
relationship with the power of Semidefinite Programming relaxations, does not
apply to satisfiable instances. This project explores Khot's "2-to-1 games
conjecture" and its role in such questions, considering issues such as the
existence of integrality gap instances for Semidefinite Programming relaxation
of 2-to-1 games, the existence of approximation algorithms for 2-to-1 games, and
the possibility of a `"universality" results similar to the one proved by
Raghavendra for unique games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the foundations of
cryptography, this project attacks problems in cryptoanalysis with theoretical
computer science methods that have rarely been applied to such problems. The
project will study generalizations and improvements of the Hellman-Fiat-Naor
generic one-way function inverter, the security of Goldreich's one-way function
candidate under various restricted forms of attack, and the security of
efficient constructions of pseudorandom generators and hash functions under
restricted forms of attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in the approximation
algorithms component of the project will further develop one of the most active
and successful current research programs in theoretical computer science, by
clarifying an important but still poorly understood part of the theory. Past
advances in this area have been of broad interest to theoretical computer
scientists and pure mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in the
cryptography component of the project will bring a new connection between
theoretical cryptography and cryptoanalysis, by applying techniques from the
former research community to problems of interest to the latter. The project
contributes to the long-term goal to develop new general tools that can be used
to validate the security of cryptographic primitives.