* 1161880
* Connecting Research and Teaching Through Product Innovation: Quality of Life Technology RET Site
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Christian Schunn, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2016
* USD 583,652.00

This award provides funding for a 3 year continuing award to support a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) in Engineering and Computer Science Site program
at the University of Pittsburgh entitled, "Connecting Research and Teaching
Through Product Innovation: Quality of Life Technology RET Site under the
direction of Dr. Jonathan L. Pearlman. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET Site is a
renewal of a successful RET Site program hosted by the University of Pittsburgh,
which will continue to draw upon the aggregate strengths in the Learning
Research and Development Center (LRDC) and the Quality of Life Technology (QoLT)
Engineering Research Center. This site will recruit a total of up to 39 science
and math teachers, as interdiscipliary pairs from high needs urban high schools,
who will complete: &lt;br/&gt;1) A 12 week experience in engineering labs in
across-district teams of 4 to perform fundamental scientific research and then
translate that research into innovative products, involving QoLT topics.
&lt;br/&gt;2) A course on product innovation that includes design, development,
and evaluation of technolgies in addition to the processes of bringing these
products to market.&lt;br/&gt;3) A redesign of design-based learning (DBL) units
originally developed in the LRDC, and modified via iterative design by RET
teachers over time to incorporate product development economics and other math
concepts related to innovation.&lt;br/&gt;4) A comprehensive professional
development series providing teachers with classroom implementation and
assistance of DBL units. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site will directly impact
approximately 39 teachers and 400 underrepresented students including those from
high need urban high schools in the Pittsburgh region, with a particular focus
on high schools comprised almost entirely of minority and low socio-economic
status students, and girls. In addition, by focusing on QoLT, this site improves
awareness and develops technology for a growing segment of the U.S. population
that is often overlooked-people with reduced functional capabilities due to
aging or disability.