* 1161964
* NeTS: Medium: Cortex: Rateless Wireless Networking Using Spinal Codes
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2015
* Hari Balakrishnan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 09/30/2015
* USD 600,000.00

Worldwide demand for wireless network access is increasing at a tremendous rate,
thanks to the emergence of powerful mobile devices and a large, growing number
of network-intensive mobile applications. To cope with this demand and provide
high throughput and low latency to applications, wireless network protocols need
to solve a fundamental problem: they need combat noise, interference from other
nodes as well as exogenous sources, and channel fading. These factors cause
wireless channel conditions to vary with time, making it&lt;br/&gt;challenging
to achieve high performance. This proposal posits that an ideal solution to this
problem is to design a network architecture over a rateless code. In a rateless
wireless network, the sender encodes data without any explicit estimation or
adaptation, implicitly adapting to the vagaries introduced by noise,
interference, or fading. The receiver processes data (symbols or bits) as it
arrives, decoding it, until the message is received
successfully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The building block for any rateless network
is a strong coding scheme, without which such a vision remains purely
conceptual. This proposal introduces a novel rateless code for wireless
channels, the spinal code, which uses a pseudorandom hash function over the
message bits to produce pseudorandom bits that in turn can be mapped directly to
a dense constellation for transmission or can be used along with the traditional
physical layer. Effectively, the use of a hash function allows for low-
complexity code design without loss of performance. The proposal develops
Cortex, a rateless wireless network built atop spinal codes. The proposed work
will lead to contributions in the following areas: protocols using spinal codes
and algorithms for encoding and decoding them, theoretical results investigating
the rates achievable using these algorithms, and an implementation and
experimental evaluation of spinal codes and higher-layer
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A good rateless system has the potential to
achieve high performance under challenging conditions while also reducing the
complexity of wireless architectures. Over the duration of this proposal, the
PIs plan to interact closely with a few companies that have the ability to
influence standards and build commercial systems using the proposed ideas. The
education plan includes the introduction of rateless ideas into the
undergraduate curriculum, particularly MIT's "Introduction to EECS-II" course
(\url{http://mit.edu/6.02}), which introduces the excitement of CS/EE by cutting
across the layers, going from packets to bits to signals. The graduate-level
education goals are to teach the ideas of rateless wireless architectures and
coding techniques by way of hands-on projects using Airblue, which will
complement the teaching of the theoretical ideas, protocol design, and
architectural thinking. The impact will be felt in courses on networking as well
as hardware design (MIT courses 6.829, 6.263, 6.266, and 6.375). The course
material will be made widely available through MIT OpenCourseWare
(OCW).&lt;br/&gt;