* 1161978
* Friction and plasticity of amorphous metal coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Xinghang Zhang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2017
* USD 283,563.00

The research objective of this grant is to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms
of friction and plasticity in amorphous metal coatings. Certain MEMS/NEMS
devices operated in dynamic mode have long been haunted by tribological issues.
The scale-down of devices leads to large increases in surface force, including
friction. In miniaturized gears manufactured by electrodeposited nanocrystalline
metal, wear becomes an important issue. Environmental issues associated with
electrodeposition of hard Cr coatings also call for commensurate replacement
that can be fabricated by environment benign process. High-strength, amorphous
metal coating is an appealing candidate for these purposes as it has high
hardness, low surface roughness, and compatible elastic modulus and thermal
expansion coefficient in comparison to metal substrates. However its friction
behavior is poorly understood. Plasticity in amorphous coatings is an equally
important subject, as it directly impacts tribological properties of these
coatings. Several hypotheses will be tested, including amorphous metal coatings
may have much lower friction coefficient than their crystalline counterparts,
layer interface may induce unique friction and wear properties in amorphous
multilayers. To examine these hypotheses, the PI will combine nanofabrication of
amorphous films with advanced friction and nanomechanical testing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the project may significantly
improve the reliability and functionality of NEMS/MEMS components, magnetic data
storage devices and wear resistant coatings. The concept and knowledge derived
from this project will be of great scientific interest to metallic glass,
coatings, nanomechanics, NEMS/MEMS, and the tribology community. Additionally
this project will offer research training to graduate and undergraduate students
at Texas A &amp; M University (TAMU). Special effort will be made to recruit
female and other minority students through the "Pathway to Ph.D program" funded
by TAMU. The project will also enhance the materials science and nanoengineering
curricula by incorporating the relevant results into classes when introducing
advanced nanomaterials and benefit the relatively new Materials Science and
Engineering graduate program. The PI will disseminate results to a much broader
audience by involving high school teachers in the research project through NSF-
RET program and through participation in international conferences.
Collaborations with national laboratories will offer graduate students summer
research experiences.