* 1161007
* III: CCF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Combinatorial Analysis of Biological and Social Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Reka Albert, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 272,845.00

In this collaborative interdisciplinary proposal involving a researcher at the
University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) and one at the Pennsylvania State
University (Penn State), the investigators will design and apply novel
algorithmic tools to explore several fundamental graph-theoretic problems that
have significant applications in biological and social interaction networks. The
research problems addressed in the proposal can be broadly classified into graph
partitioning type of problems and graph sparsification type of problems. For
example, one such problem in the context of social interaction networks is to
partition the nodes into so-called "communities of statistically significant
interactions" to study the behavioral patterns of a group of individuals in a
society. The PIs will formulate precise computational problems, study their
properties, use novel algorithmic tools to design efficient algorithms, and
implement the resulting algorithms to test their accuracy and efficiency. The
proposed research will leverage further development of novel combinatorial tools
previously developed by the PIs, in addition to developing new techniques, to
design efficient algorithms for complex optimization problems. The algorithms
developed in the course of this project will be implemented for validation on
simulated and real data, and will lead to open-source software for the life
science and social science communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a broader level,
since this proposal deals with fundamental combinatorial optimization problems
that arise in diverse scientific fields, the proposed research will have a
strong impact on research areas beyond the primary research area, such as in
stability analysis of computer networks and in social network visualization. A
central component of the proposal is the creation of meaningful educational
activities that leverage the proposed interdisciplinary research and build on
the PIs' substantial past experience in teaching, mentoring and outreach and on
the diverse communities in Chicago . Additionally, the PIs plan to integrate
research and education via course and curriculum development, involvement of
undergraduates, minorities and under-represented groups, effective dissemination
of research, mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students, outreach and
community involvement, and promoting diversity in research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the project will be made freely
available through the following websites of the investigators and their labs:
http://www.cs.uic.edu/~dasgupta;
http://www.cs.uic.edu/~dasgupta/professional/algo-lab.html; and
http://www.phys.psu.edu/~ralbert.