* 1161727
* Track 1 GeoEd - High School Summer Internship (HSSI) in the Geo Sciences
* GEO,GEO
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jill L. Karsten
* 06/30/2015
* USD 134,956.00

The University of California-Santa Cruz (UCSC) High School Summer Internship
(HSSI) in the Geo-Science program seeks to familiarize high school students with
the process of scientific inquiry and encourage them to pursue careers in the
geosciences through first hand experience with scientific research and
interaction with role model mentors. The program enhances the process of
learning science, exposes students to the excitement of doing science, and
introduced them to the relevance of the geosciences to real-world problems and
current issues. The summer experience will provide students with a strong
foundation in the process of scientific research. Students participating in the
HSSI program come from the diverse Santa Cruz and Pajaro Valley School
Districts, which support 52% and 95% Latino/Hispanic students, respectively,
many of whom are English language learners and/or students who receive free or
reduced price meals. This two-year Track 1 pilot project is developing an
inquiry-based geoscience education program to engage underrepresented high
school students in a summer long, inquiry-based research program facilitated by
graduate student mentors. During the pilot phase, 20 high school students - at
least half of whom come from groups underrepresented in the geosciences - are
being supported each year, and up to 20 graduate students each year will be
engaged as mentors. Mentors are receiving pre-program training in mentoring and
communication through a 2-day course built on the COSEE Communicating Ocean
Science program. The project leverages resources and commitments to education
and outreach at UCSC, including the Seymour Marine Discovery Center, a marine
science center that communicates and explores ocean sciences research and
societal issues with the public. The HSSI program is testing a new model for
increasing the participation of underrepresented groups specifically in the
geosciences by enlisting direct involvement and ownership of participating
departments and their graduate students in the program and developing
departmental recognition acknowledgment structures to reward graduate student
participants who mentor the interns.