* 1161036
* I/UCRC Phase I: Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2012,02/28/2018
* Randal Beard, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,816,851.00

I/UCRC for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1161036 Brigham
Young University; Tim McLain &lt;br/&gt;1161029 University of Colorado at
Boulder; Eric Frew &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (CUAS) will investigate and develop new algorithms, architectures, and
operational procedures for unmanned aircraft systems. Brigham Young University
(BYU) and the University of Colorado at Boulder (UCB) are collaborating to
establish the proposed center, with BYU as the lead institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of UAS is critical to national security,
and CUAS aims to be the focal point for discovery and disseminating information
about UAS of all sizes, from micro to large. The proposed Center has identified
some of the challenges to overcome in order to establish UAS dominance in the
US. The research led by the Center will lead to new concepts, technologies,
insights, and tools for UAS; and will facilitate the transfer of these ideas to
industry. The proposed center will contribute to the advancement of the UAS
community through cutting-edge, industrially relevant research at the center's
universities and by training the next generation of technical leaders inn the
UAS field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the Center include
curriculum design, community outreach and training the next generation of UAS
researchers. BYU and UCB will work with industry and government sponsors to
provide opportunities to students to work on high-impact, cutting-edge research
relevant to industry and government labs. The Center also plans to attract women
and under-represented minority groups as students in the Center. The center
plans to have a significant impact on UAS curriculum through course design,
textbooks, laboratory exercises, and senor design experiences.