* 1161775
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Marrying program analysis and numerical search
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Armando Solar-Lezama, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2016
* USD 600,000.00

This research project explores ways to solve optimization problems where the
targets of optimization are programs containing general-purpose control and data
constructs. Such optimization questions arise often in the everyday practice of
software engineering. While it may seem that standard optimization packages
could solve these problems, it is often not so. White-box optimization
approaches like linear programming are ruled out here because they only permit
very restricted classes of objective functions. Black-box optimization
techniques like gradient descent and Nelder-Mead search are applicable in
principle, but they work well only in relatively smooth search spaces, and due
to arbitrarily nested branches and loops, even simple programs can have highly
irregular, ill-conditioned behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central insight
guiding this project is that program analysis techniques from the field of
formal reasoning about programs can work together with blackbox optimization
toolkits, and make it possible to solve many more problems of the above sort
than are currently possible. Ultimately, the project will produce a unified
system for optimizing programs that can leverage flexible combinations of
optimization techniques and program analysis strategies. As numerous real-world
problems faced in the development of everyday software are optimization
problems, this system will offer a new range of capabilities to the end
programmer. In addition, the research will foster synergy between two different
research areas customarily housed in different academic departments.