* 1161348
* DMRG studies of frustrated and doped systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Steven White, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2015
* USD 475,001.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational work using the density matrix renormalization group for two
dimensional frustrated magnetic systems and strongly correlated doped electron
systems. An exciting area in materials research is the study of strong
correlation effects in low dimensional systems. These systems exhibit a wide
range of behavior, such as high temperature superconductivity,
antiferromagnetism, striped, and spin liquid phases. Numerical simulation
techniques have become increasingly necessary to understand these systems, as
the systems have strong coupling terms and competition between different types
of order. The density matrix renormalization group is one of the most effective
numerical techniques for studying strongly correlated systems. The PI and his
group will apply density matrix renormalization group to a variety of these
systems, including spin chains, ladders, and two-dimensional clusters, both for
spin systems and with doping. The focus during this period will be increasingly
to large enough clusters that results can be extrapolated to the limit of
infinite size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A substantial effort will be made on
understanding quantum spin liquids, continuing work of the previous period in
which the kagome Heisenberg model was demonstrated to have a spin liquid ground
state. The kagome model will be studied further, particularly in a generalized
form with next nearest neighbor interactions. In addition to mapping out the
phase diagram in the larger parameter space, the nature of the elementary
excitations and topological order will be studied. In addition, other frustrated
spin systems, such as the Heisenberg model on the honeycomb lattice with
frustrated next nearest neighbor interactions, and exchange anisotropies, will
be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will extend and further develop a
publicly available software library appropriate for many different types of
density matrix renormalization group related algorithms. The library is called
ITensor, for Intelligent Tensor. The initial work for this library was begun
with previous NSF support and substantial progress has been made. The work under
this award will focus on making the library easy to use for the non-expert,
while simultaneously increasing its capabilities with a new parallel
algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education aimed at understanding exotic quantum states of matter.
One might think that everything freezes well before absolute zero in
temperature. However, liquid helium remains a liquid even at absolute zero at
atmospheric pressure, but it is the only substance which does so. Liquid helium
does not solidify because unceasing quantum mechanical fluctuations of the atoms
overcome their very weak attraction. Freezing into a solid is one kind of order.
What about magnetism? Do the all the microscopic magnets in a magnetic material
have to align to become a magnet at absolute zero?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A
hypothetical magnetic system which fails to become a magnet at absolute zero is
called a "spin liquid". Spin liquids have been sought, experimentally and
theoretically for some time. A recent excitement shows that an unusual mineral
with the name HerbertSmithite seems to be a spin liquid. The PI has recently
provided evidence for a spin liquid in the theoretical model most appropriate
for HerbertSmithite. The PI aims to continue to explore this model and also look
for other models for materials which might be spin liquids. In addition to
studying spin liquids, the PI will use his numerical techniques to study high
temperature superconductivity and one dimensional magnetic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spin liquids may hold the key toward understanding
frustrated magnetic materials and the discovery of new electronic states of
matter that may lead to new technologies. Spin liquids may also illuminate the
mechanisms for superconductivity, a state of electronic matter that can carry
electric current without loss, enabling superconductivity at higher temperatures
with potential applications to power transmission.