* 1161644
* CAREER: Synthetic Small Molecules as Modulators of Gene Function
* MPS,CHE
* 05/20/2011,01/31/2013
* Bogdan Olenyuk, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Tyrone Mitchell
* 01/31/2013
* USD 132,498.00

With the support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program at the National Science Foundation, Professor Bogdan Olenyuk,
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Arizona, will carry out
fundamental studies aimed at the development of unique, highly specific small
molecule-based regulators of gene expression capable of exploiting gene-specific
and tissue-specific differences in transcriptional machinery composition. The
main hypothesis behind the proposed research is that the process of
transcription could be effectively controlled via a disruption of key
transcription factor-coactivator interactions. Prof. Olenyuk's integrated
research and education program focuses on design, synthesis and study of
biological properties of the new class of small molecules which serve as potent
and specific inhibitors of a contact between cysteine-histidine rich domains of
the coactivator proteins and transactivation domains of transcription factors.
The mechanistic details of such transcriptional inhibition will be explored at
the molecular level by using tools and methods of chemical genetics. The
proposed projects will yield broader impacts by creating a foundation for
development of the unique genomic tools for such emerging fields as genetic
medicine, nanomedicine and tissue engineering. The broad, multidisciplinary
research platform will foster the development of necessary research skills and
scientific knowledge for students at all levels at the fast evolving interface
of chemistry and biomedical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Olenyuk will
establish an innovative approach to introduce topics in chemical biology to
students from diverse backgrounds in the Tucson Public School System. Working in
partnership with the University of Arizona Multicultural Affairs and Student
Success (MASS) group, an educational workshop in instrumentation and methodology
for the Faculty Resource Network will be launched, with the goal to improve the
quality of teaching and learning at its member and affiliate institutions. As a
participant in the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program,
Professor Olenyuk will provide a collaborative research training environment to
female and underrepresented minority undergraduates with the goal of fostering
their aspirations to pursue scientific careers. The combined challenges of
chemical and biological problems implemented as part of the education component
of this CAREER program will provide an excellent educational opportunity for
trainees working at the interface of chemistry and biology.&lt;br/&gt;