* 1161367
* Collaborative Research: Drosophila Ultraconserved Elements: Function and Evolution
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2011,03/31/2015
* Andrew Kern, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 03/31/2015
* USD 326,783.00

Intellectual Merit: Comparative genomics, as a field, aims to identify
functional regions in the genomes of plants and animals by comparing entire
genomic DNA sequences. These bioinformatic comparisons have revealed regions of
genomes that are highly conserved over long evolutionary times, yet little is
known regarding their function. Most of these highly conserved DNA sequences
occur in non-protein coding regions of genomes. This project aims to elucidate
the function and evolution of the most slowly evolving portions of the
Drosophila (fruit fly) genome. Because they are so highly conserved, it is
anticipated these regions of the Drosophila genome have important functions.
Fruit flies will be studied because they can be experimentally manipulated using
sophisticated genetic and molecular methods. This project is a collaborative
effort led by computational biologist Andrew Kern, responsible for the
bioinformatic aspects of the research, and by geneticist Daniel Barbash,
responsible for the experimental studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
Dr. Kern will collaborate with Nancy Serrell, the Director of Dartmouth
College's Office of Outreach, to identify interested high school science
teachers in the local area and coordinate organization of on-site, hands-on
workshops for high school students. The project will use a "cascade" approach to
bring computational biological methods into the high school classroom. Dr. Kern
will collaborate with local high school teachers to develop, test, and refine
lesson plans, which will be implemented in high school classrooms with
assistance from graduate and undergraduate students in the Kern Lab. Lesson
plans will provide students with significant hands-on applications comparing
genomes using bioinformatic programs and web-based analysis tools. Dr. Barbash
will train undergraduate researchers in experimental design, research methods,
and data analysis to participate in the Drosophila genetics research.