* 1161021
* Planning Grant:  I/UCRC for Intelligent Maintenance Systems at The University of Texas at Austin
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* Michael Bryant, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rathindra DasGupta
* 01/31/2013
* USD 13,000.00

Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Intelligent Maintenance Systems (IMS)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1161021 University of Texas-Austin; Dragan Djurdjanovic
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas-Austin (UT-A) is seeking to join
the existing I/UCRC for Intelligent Maintenance Systems (IMS) currently
comprised of the University of Cincinnati (lead), the University of Michigan and
the Missouri University of Science and Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
joining the existing IMS Center, the UT-A will expand the ongoing IMS research
with new ideas and foci grounded in the expertise and research interests of the
UT faculty and students. Those new directions include predictive maintenance in
semiconductor manufacturing, vehicle technologies, oil industry, renewable
energy, power plants and biomedicine. The research in the proposed site will be
realized through the following thrusts: 1) Information-theoretical approaches to
condition-monitoring; 2) Data-driven methods for operating regime-dependent
condition monitoring and prediction 3) Fault-tolerant control of complex
engineering systems; 4) Predictive maintenance methods and paradigms in
biomedicine and 5) System operations based on the information about the
condition of system components. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The US economy spends
more than $1 trillion for maintenance of critical assets, with more than 33% of
these costs being wasted on ineffective maintenance. The UT-A intends to address
this problem by contributing new ideas and leveraging inputs and experiences
from numerous new industries that did not benefit enough from the predictive
maintenance research. Expected advances in the ability to assess and predict the
condition of an engineering system will increase the resilience and improve
operation of machines in the future, with reduced waste of resources due to more
effective maintenance intervention, and improved usage and productivity due to
higher availability of equipment. Broader impacts of the research expected to
take place at UT-A will be realized through regular meetings with industrial
partners, short courses on diagnostics and maintenance open to industry and
academe, regular participation and publication in relevant conferences, and
partnerships with universities in the US and abroad.