* 1161046
* CSEDI: From fine to global scales: Integrated studies of the structure, dynamics, and mineral physics of the lower mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2015
* USD 360,000.00

Located nearly 2,000 miles below the surface of the Earth, the core mantle
boundary (CMB) represents one of the most dramatic layers within our planet
(second only to Earth's surface). Changes across the layer exert a primary
influence on the cooling of the Earth, the dynamics of the core (and hence
Earth's protective magnetic field), and on the dynamics of the mantle (expressed
as plume-related volcanism at the Earth's surface). We aim to answer the
question, how do physical and chemical processes in the core-mantle boundary
region modulate the planet's mass and heat flux, and what are the consequences
for the whole Earth system? This layer is not just physically remote, but the
conditions there are extremely challenging to reproduce experimentally:
pressures over one million times atmospheric and temperatures approaching 6000
degrees Fahrenheit. Although, enormous strides have been made in recent decades
towards understanding the dynamics of the deep Earth system using techniques
from different disciplines (e.g., geodynamics, seismology, mineral physics), no
single method provides a unique answer. Consequently, the project will combine
data, methods, and expertise to attempt to overcome this non-uniqueness. The
project will support (at least partially) three graduate students working in our
multi-disciplinary environment; the students involved with this work will
individually become exposed to state-of-the-art skills that can be applied
within the Earth sciences and more broadly in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major advances in experimental and computational
facilities, instrument resolution, and deployment of the USArray are providing
unprecedented opportunities to understand the processes operating in the deep
Earth. However, we lack a comprehensive knowledge of how the deepest parts of
the Earth operate within the global Earth system. The project will encompass
comprehensive laboratory measurements, ab-initio calculations, seismic
observations, and 4-D models. We will develop an integrated multi-scale
understanding of the chemical and physical processes at the boundary between
solid mantle and fluid core which couple across spatial and temporal scales,
while improving data resolution and modeling capabilities to better predict the
evolution of the earth system. We will apply seismic modeling techniques to
better constrain the structure of the mantle and we will mine and model seismic
waveform data from regional arrays (US, Chinese and Japanese seismic networks).
A host of forward 2-D and spherical dynamic models linked to a new
paleogeographic system will be used to predict and interpret seismic data. We
will perform laboratory experiments under high-PT and determine elastic
properties and equations of state of candidate phases. The geodynamic and
seismic models will use the best constraints from mineral physics, including our
experimental work.