* 1161227
* STEPping Up: An Interdisciplinary Mentoring Network to Recruit and Retain STEM Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2017
* Rose Clark, Saint Francis University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Buckmire
* 08/31/2017
* USD 499,755.00

The premise of the STEPping UP project is that building strong mentoring
networks is not only one of the best ways to recruit and retain STEM majors but
also a successful strategy for transferring best-practices in STEM education
across disciplinary boundaries. Saint Francis University (SFU) faculty, current
undergraduates, and prospective students in chemistry, mathematics, and
environmental engineering have formed into interdisciplinary teams to test this
premise. The teams or, "mentoring networks" conduct cross-disciplinary research
during an 8 week summer session, lead week-long summer STEM academies for rising
high school seniors, and engage in peer-led team-learning (PLTL) to improve
retention in common "gateway" courses.

The chemistry program at SFU has had prior success with each of the initiatives
being pursued in this project. The interdisciplinary mentoring networks provide
ideal incubators for the organic transfer of these initiatives to SFU's
mathematics and environmental engineering programs. At the same time, the effort
to transfer recruitment and retention practices across disciplines allows the
project to identify and correct weakness in its current practices.

To identify successes and "failures" within the project, the PIs are tracking
quantitative measures such as retention/graduation rates for project
participants, enrollment growth for the participating majors, and grade
performance in courses where PLTL is adopted. To provide a rich context for
these numerical data, the project team is also assessing the attitudes of
participants in the mentoring networks using surveys and interviews. The most
up-to-date project results are being made available through SFU's Science
Outreach Center and can be found on the web at www.francis.edu/soc.aspx.