* 1161175
* Logic and Computability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Anil Nerode, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2017
* USD 395,962.00

The research proposed includes a broad range of topics in computability theory
and logic both theoretical and applied to other areas of mathematics and
computer science with some possible commercial or industrial applications as
well. Broadly speaking, the major research proposed by the PI is directed at
analyzing complexity and relative complexity. One area of study concerns
functions on the natural numbers and then more broadly general mathematical
structures. The primary measuring rod for this investigation is Turing's notion
of relative computability which captures our usual intuitions and corresponds to
computations by idealized versions of standard computing machines and program
languages. The other major thrust of the proposed research is directed at an
analysis of the complexity of mathematical theorems and constructions. Here, one
compares the complexity of the inputs/hypotheses to that of the
outputs/conclusions of the constructions/theorems. Strength is measured both
computationally and in terms of the axioms needed to prove the theorem or
correctness of the construction. The co-PI has proposed directing research in
areas of logic with applications to computer science including the study of very
simple machine models as well as logical languages useful for verifying that
computer programs do what they are designed to do and not other (perhaps
dangerous) things. He is also involved in developing and patenting methods for
quantum control of ordinary (macro)processes. While this work has been
influenced by his previously supported theoretical work, it now lies outside the
scope of this proposal.

At a more technical level, the PI's proposals deal with analyzing the structure
of the Turing degrees (of relative complexity of computation) and of
particularly important substructures. The emphasis here is on questions of
definability and nondefinability as well as (bi)interpretations of arithmetic in
the relevant structures. Particular emphasis will be placed on relations to
external notions such as rates of growth for functions and the complexity of the
definitions in arithmetic or other languages of the functions or structures. His
other major focus is on reverse mathematics. In particular, the analysis of
theorems that, in terms of their proof theoretic and computational strength, lie
outside the scope of the standard systems studied. Thus it demonstrates that
there are many truly distinct types of construction principles occupying
different levels of complexity with involved relations among them. Problems to
be studied come from the realms of combinatorics, algebra, model theory and
determinacy. The co-PI's proposals primarily deal with automata theory,
particularly as related to control theory, and modal logics used to capture
notions of awareness and belief.