* 1161571
* Spin Tunneling, Decoherence, and Collective Effects in Nanomagnetic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Dmitry Garanin, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2015
* USD 192,171.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research
and education in the field of quantum magnetism. Research is focused on
collective quantum effects, entanglement and decoherence in nanomagnetic
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thrusts include:&lt;br/&gt;1) Collective
quantum effects in molecular magnets, such as propagating fronts of spin
tunneling, electromagnetic and acoustic superradiance. The PIs will use the idea
of self-organization of the dipolar field to study these systems. Self-
organization provides a resonance condition for spin levels in a large volume of
the crystal regardless of disorder. It can lead to coherent radiation of photons
and phonons by a macroscopic number of magnetic molecules. A model of dipolar
field self-organization recently developed by the PIs will be extended to
describe this effect in bulk crystals of molecular magnets. The possibility of
photon and phonon superradiance generated by propagating spin-tunneling fronts
will be investigated. Theoretical and related experimental research will
interact closely to investigate spin-tunneling fronts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Coherent states and decoherence of spins coupled to mechanical nanoresonators.
The PIs will study the entanglement and decoherence of spins by analytical and
numerical methods within a fundamental microscopic model of spin-lattice
interaction. The role of geometry will be elucidated and the effects of nuclear
spins will be investigated. This research will address the quality factor of
small resonators, as well as the prospect of using spins coupled to
nanoresonators as qubits and ultra-sensitive magneto-mechanical probes.
Entanglement of quantum spin states with coherent phonon states of an elastic
solid, dictated by the conservation of angular momentum, will be investigated.
This research will advance understanding of the limits of spin sensors and
nanomechanical actuators, as well as the role of conservation laws in
decoherence of spin-based qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral, undergraduate,
and high-school students, including women and minorities, will be involved in
the research. The Nanomagnetism Group at CUNY Lehman College collaborates with
researchers in the U.S. and abroad, organizes workshops on nanomagnetism, and
participates in the community outreach by maintaining contacts with local
schools. Young researchers seeking careers in industry and academia will be
trained in traditional and modern magnetism, as well computational methods.
Students associated with the group will acquire cross-cultural experiences
through international symposia organized by the Nanomagnetism
Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education on magnetism with an emphasis on the role of
quantum mechanical effects and on magnetic systems and magnetic phenomena which
involve a length scale of the size of large molecules, nanomagnetic systems. It
is focused on collective quantum effects and spin relaxation in nanomagnetic
systems. The two main directions of the research are collective quantum effects
in spin systems and quantum dynamics of nano-mechanical systems containing
spins. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Studies of collective acoustic and electromagnetic
relaxation in molecular magnets will explore recent ideas of principal
investigators on self-organized moving fronts of spin tunneling and relaxation.
Analytical and numerical work, partially based on methods of laser physics, will
be peformed to understand collective quantum effects in spin systems. This
research may influence other areas of physics that deal with the two-level
systems. It will help understand spin relaxation rates in paramagnets, as well
as the prospect of obtaining coherent sub-Terahertz radiation from crystals of
molecular magnets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic relaxation and decoherence due
to spin-orbit effects in solids is among most fundamental, largely unsolved,
problems of condensed matter theory. They are related to such important
applications of spin physics as magnetic resonance, magnetic recording,
spintronics, quantum computing, and nanomechanical actuators. Progress made in
manufacturing and measurements of individual nanomagnets has ignited novel
interest to this set of problems. They will be studied via analytical and
numerical models involving realistic magneto-mechanical coupling that accounts
for the conservation of the total angular momentum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral, undergraduate, and high-school students,
including women and minorities, will be involved in the research. The
Nanomagnetism Group at CUNY Lehman College collaborates with researchers in the
U.S. and abroad, organizes workshops on nanomagnetism, and participates in the
community outreach by maintaining contacts with local schools. Young researchers
seeking careers in industry and academia will be trained in traditional and
modern magnetism, as well computational methods. Students associated with the
group will acquire cross-cultural experiences through international symposia
organized by the Nanomagnetism Group.