* 1161070
* Free Standing Flexible Lithium-Ion Polymer Electrolyte Membranes formed by Photopolymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Thein Kyu, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2016
* USD 410,000.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objectives of this
project are (1) to demonstrate how the fundamental understanding of ternary
phase diagrams may provide guidance to facile fabrication of free-standing
flexible polymer batteries and (2) to elucidate governing principles for
creation of periodic arrays of ionic channels aligned homeotropically via
photolithography and having well defined domain size and periodicity. These
aligned channels produced by photopolymerization-induced phase separation will
not only serve as ion conducting wires (or micro-channels), but also increase
the ion concentration without sacrificing the mechanical strength and integrity
of the free-standing battery membranes. Such periodic arrays of channels with
perpendicular orientation have been highly sought for enhanced electron/exciton
transport in the development of organic materials for solar cell applications as
well as for efficient Li+ ion transport in rechargeable polymer batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on determination of the eutectic
phase diagram as a means of suppressing and/or eliminating undesirable
constituent crystals in the binary and ternary mixture of polyethylene glycol
diacrylate (PEGDA)/succinonitrile (SCN)/lithium
bis-(trifluoromethylsufonyl)imide (LiTFSI). The uniqueness of the present system
is that photolithographic crosslinking of PEGDA not only affords improved
mechanical strength and integrity of the networks, but also increases the ion
transport through the unperturbed channels. Moreover, the aligned oriented
channel structure will also increase the ion storage capacity due to increase in
interface areas and complexation with nitrile groups of SCN. Another advantage
is that SCN can effectively ionize the ionic salts and also completely eliminate
the undesirable LiTFSI crystals. More importantly, the fabricated polymer
electrolyte membrane is a free-standing film that requires no organic solvent
and has a high conductivity (7.1x10-3 S/cm) at ambient temperature. The
fabricated polymer electrolyte membrane may be operated over a wide temperature
range, from 40-80 deg C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study and develop
lightweight and rechargeable free-standing polymer lithium ion batteries for
"green" electric vehicles. Unlike conventional electrolyte batteries, the
present polymer electrolyte membrane contains no toxic or flammable organic
solvent and thus the safety issue such as solvent leakage or battery combustion
may be avoided. The present polymer electrolyte is moldable in any shape or
form, and thus it should find broader utility. The strategy of the perpendicular
alignment of cylindrical columnar morphology along the film thickness direction
will further improve ion transport through the channels and enhance ion storage
capacity due to increase in surface/interface areas. The knowledge thus acquired
can be transferred beyond the scope of the current project, specifically to
development of organic materials for solar cells and photo-optical switching in
information technology. This project will educate graduate and undergraduate
students who will be exposed to multi-disciplinary research in polymer materials
science, engineering mathematics, and electrochemistry. The research outcomes
will be disseminated to the public through the PI's website or distance-learning
programs of the Akron Global Polymer Academy, which conducts workshops for high-
school science teachers and their students.