* 1161439
* Forecasting and Control Methodology for Monitoring and Management of Chronic Diseases
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2015
* MARK VAN OYEN, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Diwakar Gupta
* 04/30/2015
* USD 280,000.00

The research objective of this award is to develop broadly applicable methods to
improve monitoring and management of patients with chronic diseases. The systems
engineering based modeling methodology will generate effective predictions of
disease progression over time. Further, they will be integrated with real-time
feedback-driven forecasting and control/optimization algorithms to help
clinicians determine the interval of time until a particular chronic disease
patient should be monitored next or an intervention should be considered by a
physician. The research links population-based knowledge to patient-specific
information measurements taken sequentially to determine the optimum monitoring
intervals. Preliminary research indicates that linear Gaussian system models are
effective for modeling progression, but existing theory will be extended to
include controlled observations that optimize the tradeoff between intervals
that are too short or too long. By using data to generate partially observable
state space models, and by using higher dimensional state spaces, we bring a new
perspective to this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this
study is open-angle glaucoma, a major cause of blindness worldwide. If
successful, the results of this research will indicate to clinicians when
glaucoma progression has occurred and how chronic diseases such as glaucoma are
likely to progress. In addition, our results will provide a recommendation on
when to next monitor the patient. Such knowledge will improve the health
outcomes of the population and also result in cost containment. The co-PIs will
integrate these new methods into their courses and mentoring to impact graduate
and undergraduate engineering students and medical students. Outcomes will be
disseminated to engineering, public health, and medical communities through
presentations and publications targeting highly visible journals in engineering
and healthcare.