* 1161154
* Harmonic Analysis and Homogenization of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,12/31/2016
* Zhongwei Shen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 12/31/2016
* USD 193,438.00

This project concerns elliptic partial differential equations and systems with
rapidly oscillating periodic coefficients, which arise in the theory of
homogenization. Shen and his collaborators will focus on several challenging
problems in the area. Resolution of these problems will provide better
understanding of some fundamental issues in homogenization, including uniform
sharp regularity estimates and rates of convergence of solutions of boundary
value problems, asymptotic behavior of eigenvalues and uniform estimates of
eigenfunctions, boundary layer phenomenon, and uniform controllability and
stabilization for distributed systems. Elliptic equations with periodic
coefficients are considered as a model case in homogenization. New techniques
and approaches developed for this case will be useful in studying homogenization
in other important settings, such as non-uniformly oscillating coefficients,
almost periodic coefficients, perforated domains, and evolution operators with
highly oscillating coefficients. The proposed research lies at the interface of
harmonic analysis and partial differential equations. Existing and new
techniques from harmonic analysis are expected to play a significant role in the
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partial differential equations with rapidly
oscillating coefficients are used to describe various processes in materials
with rapidly oscillating microstructures, such as composite and perforated
materials. The theory of homogenization shows that such materials may be
approximately described via a homogenized or effective homogeneous material. As
such the theory of homogenization of partial differential equations with rapidly
oscillating coefficients has many important applications in physics, mechanics,
and modern technology. The proposed research will develop new methods and
techniques that will provide theoretical foundation and guidance for numerical
simulations in strongly inhomogeneous materials. The findings from the research
will be disseminated in the scientific community by Shen and his collaborators
through lectures in conferences, workshops, and graduate courses as well as
publishing in mathematical journals and websites. Shen is committed to the
training of future generations of mathematicians; graduate students and junior
researchers will be involved on the project.