* 1161078
* Ideals and Equivalence Relations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Jindrich Zapletal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2016
* USD 135,915.00

The project aims to further develop the connection between the fast developing
area of Borel equivalence relations and forcing theory within the broader
context of set theory and mathematical analysis. The driving idea is contained
in the book "Canonical Ramsey Theory on Polish Spaces", coauthored by the PI, to
appear in 2013. Given a Borel or analytic equivalence relation on a Polish
space, is it possible to find a large subset of the space on which the
equivalence is as simple as possible? Here, the largeness is to be interpreted
in the sense of some sigma-ideal on the space, and the simplicity in the sense
of the Borel reducibility rating of complexity of equivalence relations. This
question, stated in terms similar to canonical Ramsey theory, uncovers a broad
landscape indexed by sigma-ideals and equivalence relations, generalizing such
results as the Proemel-Voigt theorem on canonization of smooth equivalence
relations on Ramsey cubes, or Blass theorem on canonization of analytic graphs
on perfect sets. The overarching general theme is a correspondence between Borel
equivalence relations and models of set theory. The applications include
nonreducibility results with the strongest possible statements and Silver type
theorems for various sigma-ideals encountered in mathematical analysis. The
project offers numerous other offshoots as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project follows the general theme of classification of equivalence problems in
mathematics. Most areas of mathematics start with a class of objects and a
notion of similarity between them. It is often of paramount importance to that
branch of mathematics to evaluate the complexity of that notion of similarity.
It turns out that there is a natural rating of complexity of such similarity
problems that ties together most branches of (infinitary) mathematics. In order
to evaluate the complexity correctly within this rating, one needs, among other
things, tools for showing that one such notion of similarity is not reducible to
another. The project offers a novel way for doing that: certain notions of
similarity greatly simplify when one is allowed to restrict attention to a
smaller, but still significant, class of objects--while others do not. Results
of this type may not have immediate practical applications, but they do help
with the understanding of methodology of mathematics. As is typical for this
field, they also tie the fabric of mathematics closer together, showing that
concerns of one field may reduce to questions solved by another field.