* 1161872
* A Comprehensive Approach Towards Adaptive Multiscale Modeling of Biopolymers Using Highly Parallelizable Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Kurt Anderson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Massimo Ruzzene
* 08/31/2015
* USD 306,000.00

The principal objective of this work is to research and extend methods which can
provide a comprehensive framework for the efficient adaptive modeling and
simulation of the dynamic behavior of highly complex bio-polymeric (e.g. RNAs,
DNAs, proteins, etc.) systems where important phenomena take place at multiple
spatial and temporal scales. In order to alleviate the computational burden of
these complex problems it is often required to change the system resolution
locally or globally. This research utilizes efficient, highly parallelizable
Divide and Conquer Algorithm (DCA)-based methods to model different domains of
large systems simultaneously in different resolutions (from atomistic to
continuum), as well as, adaptively switching between these resolutions (as
guided by internal metrics) so to realize a near optimal combination of
simulation speed and accuracy. This research if successful will allow the
modeling and detailed dynamic simulation of these systems to a level greatly
beyond (in system size, fidelity, and simulation duration) that which is
currently possible. Framework components and basic mechanisms will be
researched, designed, fabricated, and tested to validate the underlying methods
and models as well as demonstrate performance. Deliverables will include a
catalog of fundamental modeling model types and model-type transitioning tools,
source code, demonstration and validation files, documentation of research
results, engineering student education, and engineering research experiences for
area STEM teachers.

If successful, the impact of this work will be a great increase in the rate and
extent to which such complex systems may be modeled and analyzed. This will
allow the analyst to treat far more complex systems (not just bio-polymers) in a
more cost, time, and resource effective manner than is currently possible. This
will provide greater insight into and understanding of key biomolecular
processes, which may contribute greatly to our learning to modify and control
such essential processes in the future. Such understanding and ability could
significantly impact human health in many positive respects. Key aspects of this
work will be presented as appropriate in undergraduate and graduate level
courses in dynamics, and computation, demonstrating how this research relates to
the course topics, and familiarizing the students with the advanced analysis,
multiscale, numerical, and adaptive methods available. Related instructional
aids and web-based tools will be developed, with the associated open source
programs being freely distributed (this work will also become and integral part
of the POEMS, LAMMPS, and SimTK computational tools). More direct undergraduate
involvement by some students will be achieved through Undergraduate Research
Program (URP) participation, targeting students from under-represented groups.