* 1161469
* Conference: 2012 Ion Channels Gordon Research Seminar being held July 8-13, 2012 in South Hadley, Massachusetts.
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* William Kobertz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory W. Warr
* 04/30/2013
* USD 10,000.00

The Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Ion Channels is a newly developed two day
conference organized and presented by graduate students and post-doctoral
associates immediately preceding the well-established Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) on the same topic. The 2012 Ion Channels GRS meeting topics will focus on
the structure and dynamics of membrane-embedded macromolecular complexes that
mediate cellular ion transport. Investigators that attend this meeting are
making use of novel live-cell EPR and FRET spectroscopy methods combined with
single molecule approaches to understand the structure, organization, and
molecular interactions (e.g. membrane protein-protein and proteinlipid) that
define the function of these membrane-embedded proteins. The GRS will give early
career investigators working in the ion channel field a unique opportunity to
present and discuss their data and career experiences with their peers from the
top laboratories around the globe. Such an experience is invaluable for the
development of projects, stimulation of innovative ideas and the establishment
of collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;A primary objective
of the Ion Channels GRS is to provide a venue for graduate students and post-
doctoral associates to hone their science and networking skills in an
approachable atmosphere, which will provide them the confidence to fully
participate in the 2012 Ion Channels GRC. The understood requirement for all the
speakers and poster presenters to showcase new and unpublished data truly sets
this meeting at the leading edge of new research. This formula has, for more
than 20 years, resulted in the parent Ion Channels GRC providing the most in-
depth and important scientific interchange ideas enjoyed by the ion channel
community. By utilizing this formula for the Ion Channels GRS, this meeting will
shape these early-career investigators into interactive, internationally-savvy
agile researchers. The scientific program will focus on leading-edge areas of
ion channel research of broad significance with emphasis on molecular mechanisms
and biophysics of ion channels function. Such talks generate discussion that
shapes the direction of the field as a whole, defining the central issues and
specific questions that need experimental resolution and providing a conceptual
framework that propels ion channel research.&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impact&lt;br/&gt;An important and traditional aspect of the "GRC experience"
that we intend to foster for the 2012 Ion Channels GRS are the interactions
between young investigators and more senior colleagues. While all the speakers
and poster presenters for the GRS will be graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows, each session will be co-chaired by a mentor from academia, industry or
government who has a track record of training young investigators. This small
cohort of prominent and established investigators will provide a depth and
history to the presentations and discussions that are critical for a successful
meeting. In addition, the presence of these leaders in the ion channel field
will serve to attract the most talented graduate students and post-docs to the
inaugural Ion Channels GRS. However, unquestionably the most valuable
contribution of these established researchers and professionals will be their
role as mentors. All meeting participants will have the opportunity to interact
and discuss career strategies with the mentors during the poster sessions as
well as informally during breaks and meals which are taken communally.
Furthermore, it is our goal to have &gt;90% of the participants at the GRS (Ion
Channels) meeting go on to actively participate in the Ion Channels GRC
immediately following, which is organized by leaders in the field, and will host
an additional 100 - 120 senior research faculty. This is a reasonable goal since
historically 40% of the 170 total attendees at the Ion Channels GRC have been
graduate students and post-doctoral associates. We hope, like the parent Ion
Channels GRC, the GRS will become the premier meeting that all the future
leaders in the Ion Channel field will have attended during their formative
years.