* 1161480
* AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Uncertainty Aware Geometric Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Leonidas Guibas, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2016
* USD 300,000.00

Most scientific and engineering disciplines today have enormous opportunities
for creation of knowledge from massive quantities of data available to them. But
the lack of appropriate algorithms and analysis tools for processing,
organizing, and querying this data deluge makes this task extremely challenging.
A large portion of the data being acquired today has a geometric character, and
even non-geometric data are often best analyzed by embedding them in a multi-
dimensional feature space and exploiting the geometry of that space. This data
is invariably full of noise, inaccuracies, outliers, is often incomplete and
approximate, yet most of the existing geometric algorithms are unable to cope
with any data uncertainty in relating their output to their input.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to fill this void by investigating
uncertainty-aware geometric computing, with an express goal of designing
algorithmic techniques and foundations that will help extract ``knowledge'' from
large quantities of geometric data in the presence of various non-idealities and
uncertainties. It focuses on a number of fundamental geometric problems, all
dealing with uncertain data. A unified set of models will be developed for
modeling uncertainty that can deal with multiple uncertainty types, and
attention will be paid to handling noise/outliers in heterogeneous and dynamic
data. Algorithms will be investigated for understanding how input uncertainty
carries over to output uncertainty (e.g. by associating a confidence level or
likelihood with each output, or computing certain statistics of the output) and
how the input uncertainty impacts the quality of the output (e.g. by defining
and computing the stability of the output in terms of the input uncertainty).
Since exact solutions are likely to be computationally infeasible, the emphasis
will be on simple, efficient approximation techniques (e.g. computing a compact,
approximate distribution of geometric/topological structures such as Delaunay
triangulations and their subcomplexes of uncertain data).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key ingredient of the award is to address a variety of
computational issues that arise in the presence of uncertainty using a few key
problems, and to develop a core set of techniques that illuminate algorithmic
design under uncertainty not only on these key problems but that can also be
transferred to other geometric problems, as needed. This research touches upon
many topics in theoretical computer science and applied mathematics including
discrete and computational geometry, discrete and continuous optimization,
estimation theory, and machine learning. This study will strengthen connections
of computational geometry with a variety of disciplines, including machine
learning, probabilistic databases, statistics, and GIS. Since so many problems
require geometric data analysis, the project has the potential of enhancing the
capability of various government, commercial, and civic units to make informed
decisions that impact the society at large.