* 1161220
* STEMWAY: Comprehensive Academic Support for STEM students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2012,07/31/2018
* Peter Murray, Foothill-De Anza Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 07/31/2018
* USD 902,929.00

STEMWay is a comprehensive outside-the-classroom academic support program
designed to increase graduation of STEM students at 2-year institutions. STEMWay
combines four key elements, consistent with recent research on STEM student
success: academic support services that closely parallel STEM courses and
pathways; analytical management to enable comprehensive support with limited
resources; comprehensive mentoring services for progressive student success
within an active learning community; and continual involvement by all STEM
faculty members for collaborative improvement. STEMWay academic student support
applies a scaffolding model, which includes multi-dimensional skills readiness
assessment to improve placement of students into appropriate courses and to
identify knowledge gaps, and anticipatory booster instruction to give students
the necessary skills for success in each course. A full-service emporium
supplies assessments and instruction, coordinates with faculty and courses,
monitors students' pathway progress, and assesses success of each program
element. STEMWay's initial target is 482 additional student graduations (a 95%
increase beyond baseline) in a 2-year mathematics progression, which has been
shown to be foundational for success in all STEM areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEMWay evaluation includes formative analysis of multiple
program factors for continual feedback, to be followed by summative evaluation
of STEMWay as a full system to promote STEM retention, and dissemination of
STEMWay assessment of effective strategies to positively impact nation-wide STEM
graduation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: STEMWay is a
testable model of "intensive intervention", reflecting a theory of student
retention that has been proposed but not yet fully implemented, according to its
theorists Tinto and Seidman. STEMWay combines early and continuous assessment
and intervention with strategic management optimization practices, and with
academic community construction. STEMWay methods produce improved pedagogical
models and strategies for STEM success. The experiences of the full program and
of each of its parts inform colleges of effective practices for STEM student
progression, retention, and graduation. STEMWay defines and applies a system of
wrap-around services for students' academic needs outside the classroom. STEMWay
adapts multiple external and internal resources for assessment, placement, and
scaffolding. The combination of a comprehensive solution for complementary
academic support with longitudinal implementation and improvement, and applied
management science to add adaptive allocation of resources, is
new.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The STEMWay project is expected to
increase the number of graduates with associate degrees and to prepare more
students for advanced 4-year studies leading into STEM careers. As many Foothill
College graduates continue on to receive baccalaureate degrees at local
universities or are employed in Silicon Valley, increasing the number of STEM
graduates immediately benefits the local community and further benefits the
nation. Because Foothill College currently supports teacher preparation and STEM
teacher recruitment, its efforts lead to more K-12 STEM teachers, especially
among underrepresented groups. A successful STEMWay program changes not only the
lives of participating students for the better but also those who benefit from
the successes of STEM companies and corporations who hire qualified STEM
graduates.