* 1161423
* Chemomechanical Stimulation of Adventitial Fibroblast Remodeling of Collagen
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jay Humphrey, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 06/30/2015
* USD 394,956.00

The research objective of this award is to use a unique combination of cell and
tissue culture approaches and nonlinear biomechanics to quantify and model the
rates and extents of production and cross-linking of fibrillar collagens by
adventitial fibroblasts in response to chemo-mechanical stimuli that are
relevant to arterial biology and pathology. Specifically, aortic fibroblasts
will be subjected to three different classes of biaxial loading and their
responses quantified as a function of exposure to two potent vasoactive
molecules that are released by vascular endothelial cells in response to changes
in blood flow and two potent enzymatic cross-linkers of collagen to elucidate
effects of these four biomolecules on overall tissue pre-stress, anisotropy, and
stiffness. These responses will be compared to those of aortic smooth muscle
cells to delineate differences in the ability of these two allied cell types to
remodel collagen. &lt;br/&gt;If successful, this study will yield a unique
growth and remodeling computational model that should help elucidate mechanisms
of arterial repair and disease progression in cases where the function of smooth
muscle cells is lost (e.g., in aortic aneurysms). Smooth muscle cells and
fibroblasts similarly work together to promote the function of many other
tissues, including airways, the gastrointestinal tract, and the urinary tract,
and they can be used separately or together in building tissue engineered
constructs. Understanding responses by these two cell types to coupled
chemomechanical stimulation will thus have broad implications. The impact of
this work will be broadened by publishing the findings in diverse journals, in
an undergraduate biomechanics and biotransport textbook that is in advanced
preparation, and on the IUPS Physiome website. One Ph.D. student and multiple
undergraduate researchers will receive unique interdisciplinary training in
experimental and computational mechanobiology.