* 1161629
* Semi-monotone sets and triangulation of definable families
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Saugata Basu, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Andrei Gabrielov and Saugata Basu propose to extend some fundamental geometric
operations on the sets definable in an o-minimal structure to one-parametric
definable families of such sets. In particular, given a one-parametric monotone
(increasing) definable family of subsets of a definable compact K, the goal is
to construct a definable triangulation of K such that, inside each simplex of
the triangulation, the family is equivalent to one of the "standard" families,
classified by lex-monotone Boolean functions. Other classical geometric
constructions that can be extended to definable families include cylindrical
cell decomposition and Whitney stratification. Existence of such geometric
constructions would allow one to investigate the "fine structure" of a definable
family, and to compute its topological invariants, such as vanishing homology,
intersection homology and the homotopy type of its Hausdorff limit. A monotone
one-parametric definable family can be alternatively viewed as the family of
sub-level sets of a definable function, so the proposed research can be viewed
as a topological resolution of singularities of definable functions. The
original motivation for the proposed research comes from the theory of
approximation of definable sets by homotopy equivalent definable families of
compact sets developed by Gabrielov and Vorobjov. Triangulation of a definable
family would provide a crucial tool for the proof of the main conjecture of that
theory.



The proposed research would substantially enhance our understanding of geometry,
topology and combinatorics of the sets definable in an o-minimal structure, and
of the families of such sets. It suggests a new approach to the resolution of
singularities of definable functions. The expected results would be new even for
real semi-algebraic sets, the most basic (and the most important in
applications) of all o-minimal structures. The proposed research will have
impact in several different areas of pure and applied mathematics. Firstly, it
will introduce fundamental new tools in the areas of real algebraic and
o-minimal geometry, which will have direct impact in the the study of geometric
and topological properties of definable sets in arbitrary o-minimal structure,
including topological resolution of singularities in this context. It will also
potentially have impact in certain areas of currently active interest in
algebraic geometry and topological combinatorics. Finally, it is very likely the
theory of semi-monotone sets and monotone maps will find applications in the
extremely active areas of discrete and computational geometry (around the theory
of persistent homology), as well as in control theory and dynamical systems. One
such application to "toric cubes" emerged recently. These semi-algebraic sets
which are related to edge-product sets in phylogenetics are closures of graphs
of monotone maps, thus they are topologically closed balls. At a higher level,
the proposed research will bring ideas and techniques developed originally in
the context of o-minimal geometry, to currently important problems in several
other areas - in particular, algebraic geometry, discrete and computational
geometry and control theory.