* 1161038
* CSEDI: Structure and Dynamics of Large-Scale Lower Mantle Compositional Heterogeneity
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2012,04/30/2015
* Edward Garnero, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2015
* USD 220,326.00

This two-year proposal focuses on seismological imaging of lower mantle
heterogeneity beneath the Pacific Ocean, and numerical convection simulations to
put the seismic imaging into a dynamically consistent framework. Our approach is
multidisciplinary, and combines seismological analyses by PI Garnero with
geodynamical convection simulations by PI McNamara. Recent seismological work
has added great detail to deep mantle structure beneath the Pacific, with
evidence for large low shear velocity provinces (LLSVPs) that are denser than
and chemically distinct from the surrounding mantle. Smaller scale structure
includes ultra-low velocity zones (ULVZs) that may preferentially reside at
LLSVP margins. Our high resolution seismological experiments aim to better
resolve sharp LLSVP edges that appear to extend well up off the core-mantle
boundary (CMB), and associated phenomena that depend strongly on LLSVP and
mantle properties, including: ULVZ location and structure, CMB topography in
vicinity of LLSVP edge, strong heterogeneity within the LLSVP, and relationship
to plume upwelling off the LLSVP top. We are focusing on seismic data from
southwest Pacific subduction zones recorded in North American, since they
densely sample the LLSVP beneath the Pacific Ocean, especially beneath Hawaii.
This is a focus area of the proposed work. The seismic findings will inform and
be informed by geodynamic simulations that include LLSVP structures. Particular
attention will be given to LLSVP morphology and internal structure in the
dynamical calculations, as these features will be seismically imaged. Better
imaging and modeling LLSVPs will help move us forward in understanding Earth's
thermal and mass transport mechanisms, and hence the driving forces in
convection that shape the deep structures. Better understanding the nature of
convective flow in Earth's deep mantle, how that flow shapes plausible deep and
dense compositional reservoirs, and return flow mass transfer that includes
plumes is an underlying motivation in this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
is important for understanding the structure and dynamics of Earth's deep
interior. The nature of convective flow in Earth?s deep mantle, how that flow
shapes plausible deep and dense compositional reservoirs, and return flow mass
transfer that includes plumes is of interest to the vast spectrum of Earth and
planetary scientists. The funding is for a geodynamics graduate student who will
be trained on an interdisciplinary research project, and a postdoctoral
researcher focused on seismic imaging and geodynamics computations. The PIs are
experienced at co-mentoring students and postdocs in a cross-disciplinary
fashion.