* 1161799
* NeTS: Medium: Characterizing Enterprise Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2016
* Vern Paxson, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 04/30/2016
* USD 593,493.00

The Internet is a global ``network of networks,'' connecting a broad range of
edge networks together into a fabric that enriches the lives and businesses of
millions of people every day. Study of the Internet---from routing behavior to
traffic characteristics to inferring operator policies to security properties
and beyond---has blossomed over the past two decades. A large literature now
exists of studies undertaken by the research community, producing much
empirically-based insight into the Internet's operation. However, the edge
networks that the Internet weaves together---from cellular to enterprise to
residential to data center networks---have received far less empirical study.
The complexity of these networks grows ever-increasing, yet our understanding
has failed to keep pace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their widespread use and
major roles in facilitating modern economic productivity, networks at this scale
have received at best fleeting examination in the research literature. Part of
the issue with studying these types of networks is that general availability of
analysis tools is nearly non-existent. While tools to analyze packet trace data
from wide-area networks are plentiful, this is not the case for enterprise
networks. For instance, there are many application layer protocols that manifest
inside enterprise networks, but rarely transit the shared Internet, for which no
packet trace analysis tools exist. In this project we will develop such tools in
the context of the Bro intrusion detection system.&lt;br/&gt;These tools will
form a capability that enables deep analysis of enterprise networks by the
research community at-large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit: Enterprise
networks are vastly complicated entities that have been significantly
understudied by the community. This project will dramatically broaden and deepen
our capability to soundly measure these critical
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impact: By building enterprise network
analysis techniques directly into the open-source Bro network monitoring system,
we will enable broad access to these new capabilities, aiding both researchers
conducting investigations of enterprise networks, and security operators who
deploy Bro to protect their networks. As Bro has hundreds of users, providing
this latter group with new analysis capabilities will have a significant real-
world impact on network security.&lt;br/&gt;