* 1161292
* Collaborative Research:  Wood Fiber Reinforced Polymers using Ring-Opening Polymers for Structural Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 07/31/2016
* USD 201,000.00

The focus of this collaborative research project will be on the effectiveness of
wood fibers to reinforce alternative plastics. A long-standing goal for research
on natural-fiber composites has been to replace glass-fiber, reinforced plastics
with natural-fiber composites. Natural fibers have excellent mechanical
properties and should be able to replace glass-fiber applications in the built
environment with a more sustainable material. Unfortunately, the transformation
to natural fibers has been slow, in part due to an overemphasis of prior work on
"exotic" fibers and on reinforcement of incompatible plastics. Wood fibers are
being combined with a polyamide matrix, which has excellent mechanical
properties and is likely to be compatible with wood fibers. The composites will
be made via ring-opening polymerization of novel oligomeric cyclic amides. This
approach avoids the high temperatures in polymer processing that can damage
natural fibers. The composites will be characterized for mechanical and
interfacial properties. Wood fibers are readily available in commercial wood
pulp products. The effect of pulping process on composite properties will be
evaluated. All wood-fiber composites will be compared to glass-fiber controls to
verify their suitability as a replacement material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global
demand for glass-fiber, reinforced plastics is increasing, but those products
are neither renewable nor sustainable. The development of wood-fiber, reinforced
plastics will define a new, cost-effective, sustainable, bio-composite material.
The deployment of wood-fiber, reinforced plastics would involve collaborations
between the wood pulping and the plastics industries. Although the wood pulping
industry is larger than the glass fibers industry, it is currently in decline.
The introduction of wood-fiber, reinforced plastics could impact the future of
this declining US industry and could impact society by providing more
sustainable materials. The novel processing methods developed may also lead to
new opportunities for using engineering polymers with bio-based materials. This
project will train two graduate students in sustainable materials development.
Oregon State University has recently transformed its undergraduate curriculum
for wood science and engineering department into a "Renewable Materials
Program." This project will involve undergraduate researchers, which will
enhance an emerging program on sustainable materials. Oregon has many
underrepresented forestry students and Southern Mississippi has a sizable
minority student population. These students will benefit from training in the
broad area of sustainable materials engineering.