* 1161039
* Collaborative Research:  Assessment of Optimization as a Structural Framework for the Detailed Design of Large-Scale Engineered Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2011,05/31/2016
* Paul Collopy, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2016
* USD 171,000.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to assess
multidisciplinary optimization (MDO) methods as coordinating frameworks for the
systems engineering process during the detailed design of large-scale complex
systems. Systems engineering is the process that coordinates the integration of
many design teams within a large project. The research addresses simultaneous
optimization of the system design and the systems engineering process itself.
The emphasis of the work is on the detailed design phase, in which an
organization is divided along component lines rather than by engineering
discipline, and the design of thousands of components occur in parallel. The
research will first investigate payoff measures of the system in a relevant
context and formulate these measures into optimization objectives and
constraints. Next, several MDO methods will be examined for their potential to
facilitate systems engineering process coordination, and formal metrics will be
established to measure effectiveness of the methods. These methods will be
assessed using a simulation of the design of a gas turbine engine as a
representative example of a large-scale complex system. The simulation will
include both physics-based analyses and behavioral models that describe the
action of component design teams in response to different process coordination
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The engineering effort devoted to detailed
design in systems such as aircraft significantly exceeds the effort expended on
the earlier phases of conceptual and preliminary design. If successful, this
research can potentially introduce improved ways of organizing the detailed
design of large-scale complex systems to reduce cost overruns and schedule
delays. The research program may also reinvigorate the study of MDO in a new and
meaningful way. To encourage continued research in this area, a graduate seminar
course on the applicability of MDO to systems engineering management will be
created, employing the simulation as a pedagogic aid.