* 1161427
* Design and Operation of Bi-Modal Urban Networks: System-Optimum Strategies to Accommodate People's Day-Long Decisions
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2015
* Carlos Daganzo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* elise miller-hooks
* 03/31/2015
* USD 339,720.00

The research explores how buses and cars can serve a city's travel needs more
effectively. To this end, the research (i) reexamines how people make their
travel choices, recognizing that a day has two peak travel periods and that
commuters make decisions by jointly considering both peaks; (ii) evaluates city-
wide policies in regard to bus fares, parking prices, etc, to induce system-
optimum travel patterns; and (iii) develops adaptive operating strategies (such
as metering and turning bans) to ensure that the city's optimum ratio of bus and
car traffic is accommodated with the least possible congestion, both when buses
enjoy priority treatment and when they don't. The tasks are feasible because of
recent advances at Berkeley with respect to city-scale modeling. The models are
tested, both, with simulations and real-world experiments.&lt;br/&gt; If
successful, this work will be the first generic analysis to recognize that
commuters schedule their trips and select their travel modes, accounting for
conditions that occur over the course of an entire day. With the insights that
result from this, the work will unveil how these commuter decisions impact both
travel peaks together, and how these impacts can best be managed by a city's
transportation agency. The research is expected to explore new issues in
transportation network design and management, and provide more realistic
blueprints for greener, more sustainable urban transport systems. By considering
day-long decisions, the research challenges current thinking and may influence
future research directions. The research results are integrated into the
curriculum at U.C. Berkeley. This will benefit women and under-represented
minorities because roughly half of the graduate students in Berkeley's
transportation engineering program belong to these demographic groups. Course
notes that are developed will be used at other schools by Berkeley graduates and
will magnify the long-term benefits of the research.