* 1161681
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Ultra-Responsive Architectures for Mobile Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2012,02/29/2016
* Milo Martin, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* tao li
* 02/29/2016
* USD 296,250.00

Conventional microprocessors are designed primarily for sustained performance;
they can operate at near-peak performance essentially indefinitely until their
energy source is exhausted. In battery and cooling constrained environments such
as mobile devices, sustained power (and, consequently, peak performance) must be
limited to at most a few watts so that the device can dissipate heat using only
passive convection. However, many interactive mobile applications (such as
handwriting/speech recognition or image-based search) instead call for bursts of
intense computation in response to user input, creating the need for a new
ultra-responsive operating regime: rather than limit peak power assuming
sustained operation, systems should instead exploit heat storage to enable brief
computation bursts that greatly exceed sustainable thermal limits without
overheating. This project investigates an approach called "computational
sprinting", the central essence of which is to compute at unsustainable rates
but only briefly so that temperatures do not reach unsafe levels.

The goal of this project is to address the architectural, thermal, electrical,
and software barriers to ultra-responsiveness via computational sprinting. In
particular, the project explores: (1) architectures and memory systems that
sprint via parallelism (activating tens of reserve functional units/cores) and
voltage boosting (overdriving cores for single-thread performance) while
facilitating fast burst onsets; (2) thermal designs that improve thermal
response behavior to enable longer and more intense sprints; (3) mobile-
optimized electrical designs that provide stable supply voltages despite current
surges of an order-of-magnitude or more; and (4) software mechanisms that
explicitly manage limited thermal budgets and anticipate and stage data needed
during the sprint. The project includes the fabrication of an experimental
testbed to approximate the computational, thermal and electrical capabilities of
a future many-core mobile device and to provide practical experience with
sprinting. Project impacts include (1) developing and advancing techniques for
improving the responsiveness of mobile devices and (2) integrating the
discoveries into a new cross-departmental course on computer system design.