* 1161923
* Qualitative studies of solutions of nonlinear elliptic and parabolic equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peter Polacik, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2016
* USD 197,998.00

The project is devoted to qualitative studies of partial differential equations
(PDE). Building on recent developments, the principal investigator will study
symmetry properties and the nodal structure of nonnegative solutions of elliptic
PDE. The main goals are to classify spatial domains on which solutions with
nontrivial nodal sets can exist and to determine whether such solutions can
exist at all for spatially homogeneous equations. In parabolic equations, a
tendency of positive solutions to "improve their symmetry" as time increases to
infinity is a remarkable example of how parabolic flows can reduce spatial
complexity. The principal investigator will continue his study of this
interesting asymptotic symmetry phenomenon, while bearing in mind applications
of asymptotic symmetry theorems in convergence results for parabolic equations.
Other methods will also be employed to address several long-standing problems
concerning the convergence of solutions of parabolic PDE to equilibria. Another
topic in this project concerns positive solutions of elliptic PDE on the whole
Euclidean space that decay to zero in some variables but do not decay in other
variables. The symmetry of the solutions with respect to the decay variables and
their behavior with respect to the remaining variables will be examined. The
principal investigator will also continue his research concerning Liouville-type
theorems on the nonexistence of nontrivial solutions for specific classes of
nonlinear equations. Scaling techniques based on Liouville theorems have a wide
range of applications in the theory of parabolic PDE, which will be further
explored in the project. Results of the above projects will be applied in
studies of threshold solutions in various parabolic problems. Such solutions
occur as separatrices between solutions exhibiting two different kinds of
behavior, such as the decay to zero and blow-up in finite time. They have been
studied for purely theoretical reasons as well as in connection with quenching
and propagation phenomena in applied sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In less
technical terms, the project can be characterized as qualitative or geometric
analysis of solutions of nonlinear partial differential equations. Such
equations are widely used in models in the applied sciences, in particular,
chemical engineering, combustion theory, and ecology. Understanding qualitative
properties of solutions is important for the internal development of the
mathematical theory of partial differential equations as well as for the
improvement of their modeling relevance. For the interpretation of models
involving nonlinear partial differential equations, rigorous analysis maintains
its indispensable role even in presence of the high computing power currently
available for numerical analysis. Not only does it provide guidelines for and
simplifications of otherwise formidable computations, but in many situations
qualitative analysis is the only way to deal with difficult problems concerning
general solutions of nonlinear equations. The present project addresses
questions that concern geometric properties of solutions (such as their
symmetries when viewed as functions of spatial variables) as well as their
behavior with respect to time (periodicity properties, stabilization to
equilibria, so-called blow-up in finite time). Development of new mathematical
techniques for addressing such questions is an integral part of the project.