* 1162367
* Studies in moduli theory and birational geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Dan Abramovich, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 320,574.00

Abramovich will continue studying problems in moduli theory; the main focus of
the project is moduli spaces of stable logarithmic maps and associated Gromov-
Witten theory. Additional topics include deformations of wild p-covers, and
problems which also bear on birational geometry of varieties, including the
study of pseudoideals as differential graded schemes, and the tropicalization of
moduli space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of study of this project lies within
algebraic geometry, the branch of mathematics devoted to geometric shapes called
algebraic varieties, defined by polynomial equations. Algebraic geometry has
significant applications in coding, industrial control, and computation. But the
topics of this project are more closely related to applications in theoretical
physics, where physicists consider algebraic varieties as a piece of the fine
structure of our universe. This is especially true with the first topic, moduli
theory. This theory studies a remarkable phenomenon in which the collection of
all algebraic varieties of the same type is often manifested as an algebraic
variety, called a moduli space, in its own right. Thus in algebraic geometry,
the metaphor of thinking about a community of "organisms" as itself being an
"organism" is not just a metaphor but a rigorous and quite useful fact. The
other topic studied in this project is birational geometry, which is devoted to
a certain abstract relationship, called birational equivalence, among algebraic
varieties, which lies at the foundation of algebraic geometry.