* 1162438
* Diaspora Advocacy Coalitions and Networks: A Focus on Haiti's Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Alka Sapat, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 08/31/2016
* USD 299,983.00

This research focuses on Haitian diaspora groups and their networks within the
U.S. and transnationally to understand their role in fostering disaster
resilience and recovery after the 2010 Haiti earthquake. We focus on two main
questions: 1) How do diaspora groups influence long-term post-disaster recovery
and resilience through transnational advocacy efforts? 2) How do diaspora groups
function as organizational and social networks in the context of disaster
recovery? The study area will focus on areas with large concentrations of
Haitian-American populations and diaspora groups: South Florida, New York,
Boston/MA, and the Atlanta area in Georgia. These areas are where approximately
80 percent of the Haitian-American diaspora reside and are also where most
Haitian-American diaspora coalitions and groups are based. In-depth interviews
and online surveys will serve as the primary research method, and will be
conducted with members of Haitian-American community groups, as well as other
key stakeholders including: non-profit organizations, local, state, and federal
officials, international aid organizations, and immigration officials and
advocates. We will also conduct secondary data analysis of pre-existing plans
and policies and relevant government documents. Social Network Analysis (SNA)
will be used as a tool to map the structure and type of diaspora networks,
including familial, kinship, and social networks, along with formal coordination
and cooperation patterns with government and non-governmental organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will transform and extend knowledge and
theories related to the international dimensions of recovery. Studying diaspora
networks in host countries and in the international community is also new and
unique and will advance scholarly and practical understandings of transnational
social capital, capacity, and coordination in the continuum of disaster response
to long term recovery and rebuilding. Potential contributions span and benefit
those in disciplines that are involved with disaster planning and recovery,
social network ties and related analyses, emergency management, homeland
security, infrastructure planning, post-disaster economic development,
evacuation, sheltering, and housing recovery. This research will ultimately help
host communities, advocacy groups, governmental and non-governmental
organizations, and international aid agencies in developing mechanisms to foster
disaster recovery, development, and for effective resource allocation, along
with informing responses to future disasters and disaster-induced migration.