* 1162082
* Propagation of Frictional Fractures under Complex Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2017
* Laura Pyrak-Nolte, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2017
* USD 449,000.00

One of the most important challenges in rock mechanics is the development of
tools and technologies that provide accurate information about damage, i.e. new
cracks produced inside the rock mass as a result of activities that change
existing conditions. Recent laboratory experiments conducted at Purdue
University show that it is possible to detect the formation of new cracks inside
a rock by monitoring changes in amplitude of compressional and shear waves
propagating through the rock. The experiments have also detected the presence of
precursors to failure. These precursors have the form of a dramatic drop of
amplitude of transmitted waves, which occurs at stress levels well below the
stress at which damage/failure occurs. These findings have the potential of
providing a methodology to predict impending failure, to detect new cracks, and
to provide information about engineering properties of the new cracks such as
stiffness and possibly shear strength. The focus of the project is on the
experimental verification of such potential. A comprehensive series of
experiments will be performed on pre-cracked anisotropic rock subjected to
biaxial and cyclic compressional loads to determine: (1) fracture initiation and
coalescence processes in the rock; (2) geophysical signature of these processes,
in particular the presence of precursors to damage; and (3) coupling between the
mechanical and geophysical response of rock under complex loading. The
experiments will be conducted on granite, Austin Chalk Cordova Cr√®me, a soft
rock that exhibits seismic anisotropy, and sandstone. The work is multi-
disciplinary as it combines the expertise of the two principal investigators in
fracturing in brittle materials and in geophysical methods applied to fractured
rock. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential for impact of the research in science
and society is very high. First, the work will be instrumental in improving our
ability to scrutinize the interior of the rock for the presence of cracks and to
infer engineering properties of the cracks. This is an important problem that
limits advancements in fields such as rock mechanics, stiff soils, and other
materials because of the limitations that exist in observing cracking processes
under complex loading in the interior of geomaterials. Second, the early
detection of failure, by monitoring precursors, may bring benefits to society by
providing new technologies to detect damage and failure early. It will also
provide a significant benefit to science by probing the link between mechanics
processes and geophysical signatures.