* 1162405
* CSR: Medium: Enriching Mobile User Experience Through The Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Jon Weissman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2017
* USD 732,000.00

Mobile devices, such as smart phones and tablets, are increasingly used for
multitasking, data access, and computation, while on-the-go. However, mobile
devices are typically constrained in terms of their compute power, energy, and
network bandwidth, making it a challenge to support the full array of desired
applications and behavior in terms of performance, fidelity, reliability, and
energy usage. To enhance mobile user experience, this project is investigating
how the mobile platform can be extended into the cloud to provide needed
resources on-demand. It is exploring the potential of the cloud as an
outsourcing platform for mobile applications and developing new techniques for
managing cloud resources as the number of applications and users scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project adopts a user-centric approach guided by the
actions of users, including their patterns, preferences, and activities. The
research thrusts include user preference-driven optimization of context-based
user activities, enhanced cloud provisioning based on cross-user resource
sharing, and user activity-based optimization of collaborative applications. The
research is based on a close synergy between systems and data mining techniques.
The broader impact of this proposal is to enhance the experience of the mobile
user, increasing their productivity, and expanding the range of mobile
applications. This project will demonstrate how the cloud is central to
realizing this vision. All source code developed and data collected as part of
this project will be released. This project is also providing students with
greater exposure to the areas of cloud computing, mobile computing, and data
mining, both in courses and research experiences.