* 1162016
* 2012 Correlated Electron Systems GRC and GRS; Mount Holyoke College; South Hadley, MA; June 23-29, 2012
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2012,08/31/2012
* Steven Kivelson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Daniele Finotello
* 08/31/2012
* USD 10,000.00

NSF funds will be used to support (registration and travel) the attendance of
junior and early career scientists at the 2011 Gordon Research Conference on
Superconductivity. This biennial conference brings together world experts and
young scientists to discuss open questions in the physics of superconductors and
to disseminate the latest theoretical and experimental research results in these
novel materials. It represents a training ground essential to maintaining U.S.
leadership in this technologically important area. The 2011 conference will mark
the 100th anniversary of Heike Kamerlingh Onnes' discovery of superconductivity
and will focus on key unanswered questions in high-temperature superconductors
including the cuprates and the iron-based superconductors as well as topological
superconductors and heavy-electron superconductivity. The discovery of new
materials and novel technological applications for electronic devices and for
energy transmission and storage will be emphasized. Two special sessions will be
reserved for breaking discoveries in both theory and experiment, so that the
latest research results may be presented. The format of the conference will
include both formal presentations by experts and informal "brainstorming"
sessions where free-ranging discussions will be stimulated. The conference will
provide an ideal environment for advanced graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers to explore the latest theoretical and experimental methods to
investigate challenging questions in the physics of materials having tremendous
importance to both fundamental science and technological applications. Members
of underrepresented groups have been recruited as conference speakers to provide
role models and potential mentors for the young scientists who will participate.