* 1162271
* Feasibility Study to Develop a Large Aperture Lidar/Optical Facility for Observations of the Upper Atmosphere from 30-1000km
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2014
* Chester Gardner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2014
* USD 148,099.00

The investigators will examine the broad scientific rationale and develop
detailed design requirements for a major new lidar/optical facility to study the
chemistry and dynamics of the Earth's atmosphere from the middle stratosphere
(~30 km) to well into the thermosphere (~1000 km). The objectives are to
identify the key scientific problems currently challenging the middle and upper
atmospheric sciences communities and determine what new observational
capabilities, especially large aperture lidar systems, could facilitate
significant progress in addressing those problems. It is envisioned that the
centerpiece of the new lidar/optical facility would be a ~100 square meter
collecting aperture that would consist of a 3-4 meter diameter fully steerable
telescope in combination with a large array of smaller fix-pointed telescopes.
In addition the facility would include important correlative instruments such as
radars, imagers, spectrometers and perhaps in situ measurement capabilities
using balloon and rocket probes. The specific project objectives are: 1. To
determine the key scientific problems currently challenging the middle and upper
atmosphere communities (with emphasis on those problems that could potentially
benefit from the measurements achievable by a large aperture lidar/optical
facility), 2. To determine what new observational capabilities could facilitate
significant progress in addressing those problems, 3. To develop the top level
design and operational requirements for the large optical telescope that would
serve as the centerpiece of the new observatory, 4. To determine the design and
operational requirements for the lidar systems that would utilize the large
telescope, 5. To determine the key correlative instrumentation that would be
essential to realize the full potential of the new observatory, and 6. To
determine where the facility should be located to make the greatest contribution
to science and to insure maximum operating productivity. The outstanding
challenge in terrestrial upper atmosphere research is specifying the state of
the space-atmosphere interaction region. There is growing recognition that
meteorological sources of wave energy from the lower atmosphere are responsible
for producing significant variability in the upper atmosphere. Furthermore,
energetic particles and fields originating from the magnetosphere regularly
alter the state of the ionosphere. These influences converge through close
coupling between the ionosphere plasma and neutral thermosphere gas to produce
emergent behavior in the space-atmosphere interaction region (SAIR). To fully
explore neutral-ion coupling in the critical region above 100 km requires
measurements of the neutral atmosphere to complement radar observations of the
plasma. Lidar measurements of neutral thermospheric winds, temperatures and
species can enable these explorations, an objective of highest priority for the
upper atmosphere science community.