* 1162096
* Critical State of Sands Revisited: Fabric Effects
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Yannis Dafalias, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 05/31/2016
* USD 344,189.00

Critical State Soil Mechanics (CSSM) is the paradigm of a framework for soil
constitutive modeling. This paradigm will be constructively challenged from the
perspective of one important missing factor: the effect of soil fabric, in
particular sands, on the premises and conditions characterizing critical state.
The hypothesis that the fabric, characterized by an appropriately defined fabric
tensor representing the orientational distribution of particles, contact normals
or void vectors, evolves towards a critical state value will be investigated by
means of discrete granular mechanics (DEM) and continuum mechanics methods. The
main objective will be the enhancement of the critical state conditions for
stress and void ratios by one additional condition for critical state fabric,
the incorporation of the results into a new fabric-enhanced CSSM constitutive
framework, and the illustration by examples of fabric effects on constitutive
and numerical modeling of Geomechanics boundary value problems.

Understanding the sandy soil response when deformed and stressed, is of
fundamental importance for the safe design and analysis of geotechnical
structures. The existing famework of the most predominant theory, Critical State
Soil Mechanics, is in need of an enhancement to account for particular aspects
related to the way the soil particles are oriented during their natural
deposition process. The project will adress these issues by means of discrete
particles modeling simulations and ensuing continuum mechanics methodologies.
The successful outcome will drastically change the way CSSM theory is taught at
Universities and applied in geotechnical practice, a field of increasing social
impact in regards to hazard mitigations related to earthquakes and landslides.
It will also offer an engineering perspective to the neighboring fields of
granular physics and material sciences, where a continuum engineering approach
to fabric effects can be very useful. Such findings will be integrated into an
educational program leading to seminar presentations of the simplest aspects to
young students and the development of graduate courses. The results of the
proposed study will be disseminated through workshops, publications in archival
journals and presentations at conferences.