* 1162095
* RI: Medium: Automated Calibration of Ultrasound for Image-Guided Surgical Procedures
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Louis Whitcomb, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 06/30/2017
* USD 1,024,444.00

This project, developing advanced mathematical and computational methods for the
online calibration of ultrasound probes that takes into account a probabilistic
version of the well-known AX = XB sensor-calibration problem that has been
overlooked in the robotics and computer vision literature, will advance current
capabilities in computer-integrated surgical interventions, leading to lower
radiation exposure to patients and better outcomes for minimally-invasive
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasound has many benefits for minimally-
invasive surgical procedures, including cost, ease-of-use, and patient/doctor
radiation exposure. But ultrasound images are fuzzy and require extensive
training for proper use during surgical procedures. As a result, outcomes are
heavily dependent on an individual surgeon's skill with the device.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Beyond the potential benefits to surgical
procedures, the Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics (LCSR) at JHU
has an established summer program for visiting undergraduate students that will
facilitate involvement of undergraduates in the proposed research. In addition,
the PI continues to mentor high school students from Baltimore Polytechnic High
School through research experiences both during the academic year and the
summer. The hands-on and visual nature of ultrasound image acquisition together
with the mathematical problems of registration and calibration make this an
ideal project to introduce students to the importance of mathematics.