* 1162409
* Web-Based Interactive Technologies and the Response to Warnings for Extreme Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2012,12/31/2014
* William Wallace, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Wenger
* 12/31/2014
* USD 99,703.00

The project is investigating the diffusion of emergency relevant actionable
information, such as warnings, through social media. Specifically, the research
will assess warning models from social sciences in the context of social media,
determine the contribution of social media to warnings of extreme events, and
develop an algorithmic approach for processing voluminous amount of social media
data in order to extract relevant and actionable information. The research
combines on site interviews of emergency management personnel with processing
and analyzing social media data. The algorithmic approach incorporates various
data processing techniques with classic social network analysis methods.
Additionally, a content analysis is used to evaluate the information hidden in
social media data. The specific event that serves as an organizing focus of the
research is a magnitude 9.0 earthquake and the resulting tsunami in Sendai,
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this research will enrich our
understanding of the role of social media in the communication of warnings
during extreme events. Additionally, this effort will provide suggestions on
ways to incorporate social media in emergency management. Emergency managers
will have a faster and more effective means to reach the public with emergency
information. Moreover, this research offers an opportunity for new members of
the research community, such as graduate student researchers from Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute and first generation undergraduate research assistants
from Le Moyne College, to participate in a project whose results will offer
recommendations for improving emergency management, and most importantly,
provide insights for practice that can save lives.