* 1162116
* RUI: Multiple Polylogarithms, Multiple Zeta Functions and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Jianqiang Zhao, Eckerd College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2015
* USD 107,255.00

Dr. Zhao will work on a number of problems in arithmetic algebraic geometry and
number theory. His main focus is on the study of arithmetic, geometric and
analytic properties of the multiple polylogarithms and the multiple zeta
functions which are generalizations of the classical polylogarithms and the
Riemann zeta function, respectively. In recent years, these objects and their
various generalizations have appeared prominently in a lot of areas of
mathematics and physics. The theory of their special values, in particular, has
provided and will continue to provide answers to important and far reaching
problems such as those in algebraic geometry involving motives over number
fields. Dr. Zhao will utilize the theory of motivic fundamental groups of
Deligned and Goncharov, Hopf algebra techniques and Rota-Baxter operators
developed by Guo, Kreimer and their collaborators, (quasi-)shuffle algebras
studied by Hoffman, and computer-aided computation to investigate the fine
structures of these special values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Number theory is one of
the foundations of mathematics since the beginning of recorded human history,
and it serves nowadays as the basis for many applications, including
cryptography and coding theory.&lt;br/&gt;Arithmetic algebraic geometry, one of
the newest and most active fields of modern mathematics, studies the arithmetic
nature of geometric properties of solutions to systems of polynomial equations
in several variables. Its application in number theory has both enriched
algebraic geometry and revolutionized the study of number theory. The proposed
research considers questions involving objects that deeply reflect some
fundamental information about fields of algebraic numbers over which these
objects are defined. Such questions have their genesis in the work of Goldbach,
Euler and Gauss, and mathematicians in generations continue to invent new
techniques to try to solve their mysteries. Many parts of the project offer
significant research opportunities for undergraduate students through both
advanced course works and the summer research programs. Dr. Zhao plans to
utilize these opportunities to attract more advanced undergraduate students to
study math by involving them in mathematical research in all the stages, from
the initial computation to the final presentation of their results in various
professional meetings.