* 1162131
* HCC: Medium: Collaborative Research: Haptic Display of Terrain Characteristics and its Application in Virtual and Physical Worlds
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2017
* Peter Willemsen, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2017
* USD 194,681.00

The PIs' goal in this research is to realistically display terrain in an
immersive Virtual Reality (VR) locomotion interface, based upon modification of
the foot/terrain interaction coupled with graphical and auditory display of the
terrain and user interaction. Project outcomes will include novel "smart shoe"
technology capable of sensing and modifying the terrain perceived by the wearer
at each step so that terrain slope, surface stiffness, height variations, slip
and balance can be actively controlled. The approach is based upon an
instrumented shoe sole with a directionally compliant structure using
controllable bladders and embedded sensors to regulate terrain effects as the
user walks. The design and control of the shoe will be based upon dynamic
biomechanical and terrain interaction models. Subject data will provide a
baseline for design, verification, and validation of the system. A robotic test-
bed will validate shoe response characteristics prior to subject
evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The platform for this work will be the
existing TreadPort Active Wind Tunnel (TPAWT), which is capable of realistically
displaying locomotion environments on varying slopes as well as providing
controllable wind, heat, and odor display. The cave-like display of the TPAWT
will be converted to a three dimensional stereo graphics system with seamless
floor projection in order to present local terrain features such as shape,
height variations, and surface texture. Combined representation, interpretation,
and coordination of the graphical and physical artifacts will be considered with
the aim of creating an immersive and realistic locomotion experience with the
end goal of achieving practical application. This combined system is termed the
TPAWT Terrain Display System (TPAWT-TDS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target test
group for the new technology will be patients with Parkinson's Disease, (PD),
for whom VR training has already shown some promising results for improving gait
characteristics and reducing the likelihood of falls. Survey data from PD
patients will motivate selection of the specific terrain. Regular and PD users
will first be evaluated on physical mockups of the terrain, which will then be
recreated and evaluated in follow-up trials in the VR environment. Once
validated, the VR terrain display will be used for PD training. Users will again
be evaluated on the physical mockups to evaluate gait and balance performance,
which will also be compared to untrained subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: The "smart shoe" technology to be created in this project will allow
exploration of new and sophisticated methods for combining 3D graphical terrain
cues with an actively changing physical terrain in a novel VR interface. The
resulting environment will have myriad potential applications as a
rehabilitation and training tool, not the least of which is improved locomotion
and fall prevention (since falls are the single most costly form of injury
today). Development of the new technology will be combined with rigorous human
participant studies. Research findings will be disseminated via websites and at
major conferences, and also integrated into the robotics, virtual reality,
ergonomics, and physical therapy curricula.