* 1162309
* Independence and dichotomies in dynamics and operator algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* David Kerr, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2016
* USD 171,228.00

The project will consist of a number of research and educational activities
centered around the study of randomness, symmetry, paradoxicality, and
dimensionality in dynamical systems. The goal is to understand the way that
combinatorial, geometric, and topological phenomena interrelate within a newly
broadened scope in dynamics that has been opened up by recent advances in
entropy theory, the theory of infinite groups, and the classification program
for nuclear C*-algebras. The investigations will be rooted in the combinatorial
and probabilistic notions of independence and the various dichotomies to which
they relate either as a source or as a counterpoint. Both the research and
educational components of the program will bridge to several other branches of
mathematics including geometric and combinatorial group theory, algebraic
topology, convex geometry, and descriptive set theory.

The mathematical theory of dynamics seeks to establish a rigorous framework for
understanding the kinds of behavior that one might observe in a physical system
as it evolves in time. In a chaotic system our ability to make predictions about
the future state of the system is limited or null, and there are different ways
in which this unpredictability can be made mathematically precise, for example
via the notion of entropy. These concepts are all tied to the probabilistic
notion of independence, which is exhibited in its most basic form by the
repeated tossing of a coin. A general system will typically combine both
deterministic and indeterministic aspects, often in an intricate way. This
project aims to develop new tools for identifying the presence of independence
in its various dynamical guises and its effect on associated mathematical
structures such as operator algebras. On the practical side, the interest in
such an endeavor lies in its significance for the study of problems in
information theory involving code transmission and error correction.