* 1162296
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integrated Dynamic Spectrum Access for Throughput, Delay, and Fairness Enhancement
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Bechir Hamdaoui, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 06/30/2018
* USD 203,613.00

The central theme of this project is to investigate methodologies and theories
to enhance throughput, delay, and fairness of cognitive radio networks via
integrated dynamic spectrum access. The research will develop new methods to: 1)
Extend spectrum sensing beyond just the presence and absence of the primary
spectrum users' activities at certain spectrum bands/channels, but also their
locations and transmit powers 2) Predict the primary spectrum user's activity
and its interval using game theoretic and statistical learning approaches 3)
Perform delay-aware spectrum management with a very comprehensive delay model
considering all the factors that may affect the delivery latency of a packet,
including the spectrum sensing delay, the transmission delay, the queuing delay,
and the spectrum negotiation and scheduling delay 4) Share spectrum in a fair
manner considering the tradeoff between fairness and throughput 5) Propose a
delay-aware fair routing protocol for throughput optimization which jointly
considers throughput, delay, and fairness along with dynamic spectrum
management.

The project's focus on dynamic spectrum access is of high national interest and
can create significant impact on spectral usage policies and related industries
in the telecommunication and information technology sectors. The project will
also encourage and include under-represented and minority students to be part of
this activity, while extending education and outreach plans to undergraduates
and K-12 students.