* 1162616
* Multihazard Performance and Design of Ecoroofs
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2017
* Armin Stuedlein, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 06/30/2017
* USD 335,000.00

The proliferation of "green roofs" or more generally, ecoroofs in the United
States has increased dramatically in the last ten years and has radically
expanded the historical function of a roof. Ecoroofs offer new opportunities to
provide environmental, economical, and social benefits. However, ecoroofs carry
higher gravity loads and must support long-duration transient fluid loading
compared to traditional systems. This shift in roof design demands has outpaced
building codes and regulations, and more importantly exceeded our fundamental
understanding of roof structural behaviors under these nontraditional loads.
Regrettably, conventionally engineered roofs account for a disproportionately
large number of structural failures with over $1 billion in damages since 1990
for a single insurer. Proper design of ecoroofs to ensure structural safety and
serviceability of these relatively "sensitive" structural components requires
research to address these three critical questions: &lt;br/&gt;1.Under
earthquake induced roof shaking, does the ecoroof planting material mobilize? To
what degree is the ecoroof planting material coupled to the structure? Can roof
dead load imbalances be expected after an earthquake?&lt;br/&gt;2.During rain
events, what are the load effects produced on ecoroofs and over what time-
scales? How loads are distributed in ecoroofs and will traditional design
approaches ensure ponding stability and prevent overloading? &lt;br/&gt;3.What
are the engineering properties of typical ecoroof planting materials? Which
properties are most critical to achieving ecoroof performance during seismic and
rain events?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to examine the
structural, geotechnical, and planting interactions on ecoroof seismic
performance. The research focuses on system response to demonstrate the
important interactions of the design elements. An ecoroof structural simulator
will be developed to test full-scale laboratory ecoroof prototypes and will be
integrated with field survey and component laboratory data to produce new
knowledge on fluid-structure interaction at the roof including: planting
material mobility during lateral shaking, water retention and drainage
characteristics, and long-term service performance. These will provide
background material for development of a structural guide for ecoroof designs in
seismic zones.