* 1162606
* RI: Medium: Advances and Applications in Submodularity for Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2018
* Jeffrey Bilmes, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 06/30/2018
* USD 814,509.00

Submodularity is an intuitive diminishing returns property, stating that adding
an element to a smaller set helps more than adding it to a larger set.
Submodularity allows one to efficiently find provably optimal or near-optimal
solutions to discrete problems. Submodular minimization has found use, e.g., in
graphical model inference and clustering, whereas maximization has been applied,
e.g., to variable/feature selection and active learning. Submodularity, however,
is still only beginning to show applicability in machine learning and its
applications. Moreover, work on submodular optimization in the combinatorics and
operations research literature has been primarily unaware of unique problems
arising in machine learning. Therefore, existing standard algorithms do not
exploit certain structures or variants of the submodular problems arising in
machine learning. Studying novel machine learning problems involving submodular
objectives can thus lead to advances in the pure combinatorics literature. We
propose to pursue activities that bring together research in machine learning
and combinatorial optimization to solve problems which neither of the
communities can solve alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, we propose to
use insights from machine learning to enable scaling up typical submodular
optimization problem sizes (by focusing on problem instances arising in
learning). We also propose to further chart the territory that submodularity
plays in machine learning. In this grant, we will introduce new submodular
structures specifically related to submodularity. We will introduce submodular
learning problems for machine learning. We will introduce new submodular
optimization problems with constraints. And lastly, we will apply these
submodular instances to real-world applications in computer vision, speech
recognition, and natural language processing.