* 1162063
* SHF: CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Hierarchical On-Chip Millimeter-Wave Wireless Micro-Networks for Multi-Core Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2018
* Emmanouil Tentzeris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

Multi-core processors with hundreds of embedded functional blocks are designed
to achieve unprecedented performance benefits for a wide variety of applications
such as graphics, financial and scientific modeling, networking, multimedia and
wireless infrastructure. The Network-on-Chip (NoC) is an enabling methodology to
integrate many embedded cores on a single die. However, with growing levels of
integration traditional NoCs suffer from high latency and energy dissipation in
on-chip data transfer due to conventional metal/dielectric based interconnects.
The wireless NoC (WiNoC) simultaneously addresses the latency, power consumption
and interconnect routing problems of conventional NoCs by replacing multi-hop
wired links with high-bandwidth single-hop long-range wireless channels. Recent
investigations have characterized silicon integrated on-chip antennas operating
in the millimeter (mm)-wave range of 50-110 GHz, and this is now a viable
technology. Coupled with significant advances in mm-wave transceiver design,
this development opens up new research opportunities for designing high
bandwidth and low power WiNoCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
develop a cross-layer design methodology for an on-chip wireless micro-network.
Suitable physical, data link and network layer protocols will be developed for
the WiNoC. The expected contribution of this work is the development and
demonstration of broadband and integrable mm-wave WiNoCs. The transformational
aspect of this proposal lies in addressing the on-chip interconnect problem from
a fundamentally new perspective, namely by developing a broadband millimeter
wave wireless network at the micro/nanoscale, as opposed to pursuing incremental
improvements in traditional wired interconnects. By bringing wireless networking
to the on-chip environment, the proposed research will introduce a paradigm
shift in the design of multi-core chips. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will facilitate the education of undergraduate and graduate students by
allowing them to apply classroom knowledge to a research problem requiring
hardware, software and theoretical expertise. Such expertise will be developed
in both university and industrial laboratory settings using state-of-the-art
test equipment and computing facilities, and will ultimately be necessary to
maintain the technological leadership of the United States. Students from
various underrepresented groups, including women, African Americans and
Hispanics, will be engaged in this project. The project's educational impacts
will be complemented by the positive effect that the research outcomes are
expected to have on society as a whole.