* 1162459
* SHF:Medium:Collaborative Research:Scaling Up Programmable and Algorithmic DNA Self-Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Peng Yin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2016
* USD 200,000.00

The dominant manufacturing paradigm for human technology has been ?top-down?
construction of objects, in the sense that a large entity manipulates smaller
entities to put them together into a functional device. For example, in an
automotive factory, parts such as doors, windshields, wheels, seats, engines are
separately manufactured and then brought together and assembled into a car by
either humans or robots that know where each part should go and how it should be
attached. In contrast, for billions of years biological organisms have
constructed objects using a ?bottom-up? technology, in the sense that the pieces
self-assemble or grow without outside assistance. For example, to make a complex
molecular machine, enzymes within the cell might synthesize a number of proteins
that then diffuse randomly until they bump into each other and click into place;
while on a larger scale, a single cell might grow into an elephant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bottom-up manufacturing paradigm has advantages that
top-down methods are unlikely ever to achieve, such as the ability to create
meter-scale objects from components with atomic-scale (nanometer) resolution and
chemical functionality ? but it requires a level of exquisite control over
molecular structure and function that human science and technology has not yet
attained. We believe that the primary missing ingredient is information science
and technology: information must be encoded within synthetic molecules to
control their behavior and to create programmable molecular systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, the aim is to push the frontiers of
information-based molecular self-assembly using DNA nanotechnology. The past
fifteen years have seen the development of an abstract theory of algorithmic
self-assembly (initiated by Winfree) that merges the mathematical theory of
geometrical tiling, the statistical mechanical and kinetic theories of crystal
growth, and the algorithmic theory of Turing machine computation. This theory
shows how, in principle, synthetic DNA molecules called ?tiles? can be designed
to carry information that directs their assembly into complex and sophisticated
shapes and patterns. Just as a small program can produce a large and intricate
output, a small tile set can result in the self-assembly of a large and
intricate object ? the tile set is a ?program? for controlling the molecular
self-assembly process. Laboratory experiments in the past fifteen years have
demonstrated the foundations of this theory using DNA tile sets on the order of
two dozen tile types, i.e. very small molecular
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past year, a new molecular motif for DNA
tiles (developed by Yin) has been used to self-assemble molecular structures
using up to 1000 distinct tile types that each has a unique target position
within the structure, like a self-assembled molecular-scale jigsaw puzzle. This
is the simplest type of molecular program. A major goal of the proposed work is
demonstrating that the new ?single strand tile? motif can be used to create
significantly more complicated self-assembly programs than have been seen to
date by reusing distinct tile types in many locations and in an algorithmic
fashion, much like living systems that reuse the same molecules in many
different ways. Sophisticated algorithmic tile reuse of two dozen to perhaps
1000 or more distinct components vastly expands the capabilities of self-
assembly programs. To achieve this, proposed work will (a) improve techniques
for an important ?subroutine? for controlling molecular growth, a binary
counting process that terminates after growing a pre-specified distance; (b)
develop methods and molecular structures for nucleating the growth of single-
strand tiles with pre-specified information that serves as ?input? to the
molecular program; (c) demonstrate algorithmic growth of single-strand tiles
that perform Turing machine and/or cellular automaton computations; (d)
investigate proofreading techniques for reducing the rate of errors during self-
assembly; and (e) create software tools that facilitate the design and analysis
of these complex molecular systems.