* 1162085
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: 3D Integration of Heterogeneous Dies
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Andrew Kahng, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 365,809.00

The dramatic improvements in electronic devices in the last 40 years have
substantially drawn on Moore's law which predicts a steady increase in
transistor density in semiconductor chips, with implied improvements in cost and
power. But Moore's law is now slowing, while cost improvements now rely on very
large production volumes to justify billion-dollar in investments in
manufacturing infrastructure. Among alternative chip design methodologies,
three-dimensional chip design currently shows significant momentum and promise
for commercial products. Three-dimensional chips can be produced by vertical
stacking of conventional two-dimensional chips and connecting them with through-
silicon vias. Despite a number of unsolved technical problems, such three-
dimensional chips reduce the form-factor and interconnect, while improving
yield. This research explores heterogeneous 3D chip design seeking the
flexibility to combine different types of two-dimensional chips (different types
of memories, fast logic, low-power logic, FPGAs, analog circuits, micro- and
nano-electromechanical components, etc.), which cannot be reliably manufactured
on a single conventional die. This research will reduce cost of 3D designs and
make them more practical by exploiting heterogeneity in all its aspects: (1)
from dies fabricated in different process nodes to interconnects realized with
TSVs, silicon interposers and wire bonds; (2) from system performance (macro
blocks with different frequency requirements) to system activity (blocks that
are standby-dominant vs. actively-switching); and (3) at the physical design
level, from criticality (performance slack) to connectivity (bisection
bandwidths or netcuts) across the physical hierarchy from block-level down to
gate-level. Our research scope spans three main axes -- 3D IC implementation
architectures, technology and design aspects of heterogeneity, and algorithmic
optimizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being able to combine heterogeneous
semiconductor dies in a working electronic system promises significant
competitive advantage in price, performance and functionality. Such ability
facilitates new types of electronic products, with clear benefits to design and
manufacturing companies, as well as to the society. An example application here
is a cellular phone, which integrated several micro-processors, analog circuit
components and antennas, signal-processing units, accelerometers etc. Being able
to revise one of these blocks without altering the supply chain for other blocks
reduces the risk and cost of improvements to successful designs. Students will
be trained to contribute to the design and revision of such designs, and to
perform further research on alternative chip design techniques.