* 1162501
* Collaborative Research: Code Design and Analysis to Approach Capacity with Short Blocklengths Using Feedback
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2016
* Richard Wesel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* richard brown
* 08/31/2016
* USD 710,000.00

This research characterizes the benefits of feedback in communication and
develops techniques to achieve those benefits. Today's communication systems
seek to move information as rapidly as possible from transmitter to receiver.
This research involves using feedback (messages sent from the receiver back to
the transmitter) to allow communication systems to approach the highest possible
communication rate (the channel capacity) using less transmission time (latency)
and lower-complexity decoding. A key aspect of this research is the development
of new error control codes and new techniques to use those codes to facilitate
transmissions that approach capacity with much lower latency than systems that
do not use feedback. Broader impacts include training high school students
through the UCLA Engineering (HSSEAS) High School Summer Research program and
training undergraduates through the UCLA Engineering undergraduate research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional techniques approach capacity without
feedback by using long block lengths and complex decoding. However, information
theory indicates that feedback permits capacity to be approached with shorter
block lengths and simpler decoding. This research employs a rate-compatible
sphere-packing analysis to provide a quantitative analysis of the latency
reduction possible with feedback. This analysis provides decoding error
trajectories that guide the development of rate-compatible code families needed
to approach capacity with feedback. Practical benefits of these rate-compatible
code families with feedback will be characterized in the context of a typical
wireless communication system operating in additive white Gaussian noise. These
techniques are extended to fading channels and higher-order modulations. The
overall goal of this research project is the development and promulgation of a
fundamental understanding of how code families should be designed to work with
feedback to achieve capacity with very short block lengths.