* 1162312
* Direct Self-Assembly of Large Area, High Crystallinity 2D Graphene on Insulator: An Integratable Carbon Platform
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2012,09/30/2016
* Eric Eisenbraun, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 399,999.00

The objective of the research is to demonstrate direct growth of 2D carbon
(graphene) sheets on insulator via an innovative chemical process, laying the
foundation for integrated, scalable carbon-based manufacturing. Aiming at
removing the known barriers to preparing "integratable" carbon nanostructures,
the research is composed of the following parts: (i) developing a chemical
growth process for controlled assembly of single-layer graphene on an insulating
substrate and discovering key mechanisms and pathways towards an integrated
manufacturing process, and (ii) demonstrating two representative circuit
elements on the carbon platform, graphene transistors and graphene nanowire
interconnects, and correlating critical electrical performance and reliability
metrics to material configurations, extrinsic effects (e.g., material
imperfections), and nanofabrication processes. The ultimate goal is to
demonstrate a seamlessly integrated material-processing platform with
compatibility with the existing semiconductor integrated chip manufacturing. If
successful, the research would overcome several major difficulties in the
implementation of "integratable carbon-based manufacturing", challenging the
present-day dominance of silicon electronics. The research could be potentially
important in closing the big gap between science-driven research on 2D
nanomaterials and commercial development in the microelectronics industry. In a
broader view, the proposed integrated processing strategy could be extended to a
broad family of emerging 2D/3D nanostructures. The integrated material platform
has major potential impacts in a wide variety of arenas, including computing,
broad-band/low-noise RF communication, high-speed interconnects, photovoltaics,
distributed sensing networks, and heterogeneous integration of multifunctions
via innovative engineering design. The research opens unique opportunities for
students to acquire interdisciplinary research experience in material sciences
and engineering, physics, devices, nanofabrication, and wafer-fab processing.