* 1162182
* EAGER:  Ionic Liquid Ion Sources and Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2014
* Paulo Lozano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2014
* USD 129,411.00

The objective of this EArly-Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to
study the fundamental science and engineering of nano-ion emitters based on room
temperature molten salts (ionic liquids - ILs). The context of this project is
related to applications in nanomanufacturing, space propulsion and other fields.
It is possible with ionic liquid ion sources (ILIS) to field-evaporate nearly
monochromatic positive or negative ion beams from a virtual point. These
characteristics are ideal for applications at the nano-scale as these ions
potentially can be focused to sizes commensurate with the source, which
according to recent estimates is a few nm. In addition, the high efficiency and
brightness enables micro and nanoengineered propulsion devices for very small
satellites (0.1-10 kg). Many of these ions are chemically reactive, in principle
enhancing etching rates without recurring to chemical assistance in wafer
processing applications. With the vast number of available ILs it should be
possible to tailor ion beam composition to specific applications. The main goal
is to improve our understanding of ILIS sources through theory and experiment.
Particular attention will be given to (1) the determination of the focusability
of ion beams, (2) their reactive etching characteristics and other interactions
with materials, (3) their potential for nanomanufacture in dense arrays for high
throughput and (4) contribute to the theory of molecular ion emission. The
research objectives and methods are centered around a series of challenges and
missing knowledge described in this proposal. The uniqueness and novelty of
ionic liquid ion sources open up a number of relevant research avenues, ranging
from the design of the source and its implementation in arrays to the theory of
molecular ion evaporation and the interaction of ions with materials. Few
advances in field evaporation ion sources have been made beyond the invention of
the liquid metal ion source more than 30 years ago. The introduction of ILIS has
the potential to revitalize the field and is expected that important scientific
and engineering contributions will result from NSF support in this new
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that ILIS sources will have
relevant impact on industrial applications, such as nanomanufacturing, ion
microscopy, lithography and implantation on a variety of solid-state materials,
and in propulsion applications for small satellites. It is also expected that
relevant collaborations will emerge as research results are documented in
scientific journals. This research will have an important impact on the
educational curriculum of undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in
interdisciplinary programs at MIT. In addition, this NSF support will be pivotal
in continuing involvement in outreach programs, such as MIT's Summer Research
Program (MSRP), which supports education in science and engineering of under-
represented groups and the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program (UROP).
Coordinated outreach activities will be organized with local educators and
research institutions at all levels, inviting them to participate with their
students in laboratory demonstrations, lectures and other scientific activities
with the objective of encouraging young students to pursue an education in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics.