* 1162619
* Theoretical and Experimental Investigations of Coupled Mechanics and Electrochemistry in Silicon Anodes Lithium Ion Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2014
* Hanqing Jiang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Siegmund
* 08/31/2014
* USD 75,000.00

The research objective of this award is to understand the fundamentals in
coupled mechanics and electrochemistry in lithium (Li)-ion batteries. Silicon is
an attractive anode material being closely scrutinized for use in Li-ion
batteries because of its highest-known theoretical charge capacity of 4,200
mAh/g. However, the development of silicon anode Li-ion batteries has lagged
behind because of their large mechanical deformation, i.e., up to 400 percent
volumetric change, during electrochemical reactions, which results in fracture,
pulverization and early capacity fading. In other words, this coupled mechanics
(e.g., volumetric change) and electrochemistry problem is a bottleneck to the
development of silicon anode Li-ion batteries. The objective of this project is
to understand the fundamental mechanical properties of the lithiated silicon
anodes using combined experimental and theoretical methods. Specific studies
will focus on i) nanoindentation experiments to obtain the influence of
lithiation on mechanical properties as a function of depth; coupled with ii)
continuum modeling to extract the stress-strain curve of lithiated silicon
anodes under different state of charges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the
results of this research will help facilitate the fundamental understanding of
the coupled mechanics and electrochemistry of silicon anodes in Li-ion
batteries, specifically the mechanical behavior of lithiated silicon. The
theoretical and experimental methodology can be also applied to other electrodes
and materials in Li-ion batteries, such as the cathode. The successful
implementation of the proposed research will contribute to a new area of
mechanics of materials, namely, coupled mechanics and electrochemistry, which
will potentially lead to a range of transformative applications in battery and
energy-related fields. The graduate students involved in the research will be
trained in a multidisciplinary environment.