* 1162057
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Integrated Dynamic Spectrum Access for Throughput, Delay, and Fairness Enhancement
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Xiuzhen Cheng, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Wenjing Lou
* 06/30/2016
* USD 695,932.00

The central theme of this project is to investigate methodologies and theories
to enhance throughput, delay, and fairness of cognitive radio networks via
integrated dynamic spectrum access. The research will develop new methods
to:&lt;br/&gt;1) Extend spectrum sensing beyond just the presence and absence of
the primary spectrum users' activities at certain spectrum bands/channels, but
also their locations and transmit powers &lt;br/&gt;2) Predict the primary
spectrum user's activity and its interval using game theoretic and statistical
learning approaches&lt;br/&gt;3) Perform delay-aware spectrum management with a
very comprehensive delay model considering all the factors that may affect the
delivery latency of a packet, including the spectrum sensing delay, the
transmission delay, the queuing delay, and the spectrum negotiation and
scheduling delay &lt;br/&gt;4) Share spectrum in a fair manner considering the
tradeoff between fairness and throughput&lt;br/&gt;5) Propose a delay-aware fair
routing protocol for throughput optimization which jointly considers throughput,
delay, and fairness along with dynamic spectrum
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's focus on dynamic spectrum access
is of high national interest and can create significant impact on spectral usage
policies and related industries in the telecommunication and information
technology sectors. The project will also encourage and include under-
represented and minority students to be part of this activity, while extending
education and outreach plans to undergraduates and K-12 students.