* 1162014
* EAGER: A New Approach to Synthesizing Inorganic-Organic Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2013
* April Brown, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael J. Scott
* 01/31/2013
* USD 111,230.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program, aims to provide a new means of synthesizing and
designing functional and stable inorganic-organic interfaces for exploitation
across a wide range of applications, such as selective, high-sensitivity
chemical and biological sensors and efficient photon harvesting platforms. The
traditional synthesis approach for attaching molecular overlayers to
semiconductors creates minimal modifications to the inorganic support except to
1) remove any surface oxide present pre-attachment, and 2) attach appropriate
molecular linking groups, if needed. A key requirement for device exploitation
is therefore the creation of a highly - dense overlayer that impedes re-
oxidation of the interface. The goal of this project is to demonstrate the
feasibility of using oxides designed as chemical templates that impact molecular
attachment by inhibiting or enhancing different chemical reaction pathways. This
approach will be used to ultimately create a stable, functional interface. An
emphasis on determining the key chemical reactions governing cysteamine and
succinic acid attachment to InAs, a model III-V semiconductor, is the focus of
this effort with the goal of developing a follow-on application-focused
materials/device proposal to NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Inorganic-organic interfaces are the heart of a new generation
of electronic and photonic devices. This research project aims to create more
stable and higher performance interfaces designed for devices used in energy and
sensing applications. The core of the effort is to design oxide interface
materials that control the attachment of molecules to device surfaces yielding
new performance regimes and higher reliability. The project marries the critical
disciplines of chemistry, materials science, and engineering and, as such,
students will derive considerable educational benefit from the experience gained
working across these boundaries. This project involves collaboration between
Prof. April Brown, Duke University, Dept. of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, and Dr. Maria Losurdo, CNR-Bari,
Italy. The exchange of students between Duke and CNR in this multidiscipline
effort also provides significant enhancements to their education.