* 1162385
* AFFINE CRYSTALS: COMBINATORICS, ALGEBRA AND GEOMETRY
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,10/31/2012
* Peter Tingley, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 10/31/2012
* USD 149,252.00

The proposed research studies affine Kac-Moody algebras using Kashiwara's theory
of crystals. A crystal here is a combinatorial object (a set along with some
operations) associated to each highest weight representation of a symmetrizable
Kac-Moody algebra. Kashiwara's construction makes heavy use of the associated
quantized universal enveloping algebra, but the crystals themselves can often be
realized by other means. Some such realizations are purely combinatorial, and
others use non-trivial geometry. In finite type, one realization which has
generated a lot of interest uses the Mirkovic-Vilonen (MV) polytopes developed
by Anderson and by Kamnitzer. Along with his collaborators, the P.I. is
currently developing a version of this combinatorics for symmetric affine types,
using quiver varieties. Affine MV polytopes have been sought since the finite
type polytopes first appeared, so their construction is itself an important
development. The P.I. will investigate the connection between these new
polytopes and various algebraic and geometric structures related to affine
algebras. This work may also lead to a notion of MV polytope in all (not
necessarily symmetric) affine types. The proposed research also considers ways
of extracting other combinatorial realizations from the geometry of quiver
varieties, and develops applications of crystal theory to Macdonald polynomials
and Demazure characters.

This proposal addresses important questions in the theory of affine algebras,
and will be of interest to a number of people in that field. Affine algebras are
important in mathematical physics, so there is potential for cross-disciplinary
impact. The proposal will also fund undergraduate research projects, and more
generally contribute to the training and developing of young mathematicians.
There are several questions related to this research that can be studied in
terms of explicit realizations of crystals. These are ideal for undergraduate
research projects, as only a limited amount of background is required in order
to approach the questions, yet they can provide an entry point into a rich
representation-theoretic story. The proposal will also support student seminars
which are designed both to train students in advanced subjects and to develop
their skills as presenters. Finally, the P.I. will continue to work with
programs such as math circles aimed at high school students.