* 1162538
* Hierarchical Testing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2012,06/30/2015
* Susan Holmes, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 06/30/2015
* USD 300,021.00

Evaluation of biological data often needs statistical insight to detect whether
apparent treatment effects are real and useful. Typical applications are to
personalized medicine and drug resistance. Standard statistical methods rely on
unrealistic assumptions (data is supposed to be independent and identically
distributed). This project will provide biologists with new tools for detecting,
quantifying and leveraging hierarchical dependencies in areas of microbiology
currently revolutionized by the emergence of new sequencing technologies. The
PIs propose to tailor new ``treeness'' and ``clustering'' indices incorporating
relevant distance and structural information computed from sequence and
contingent information. The investigators will also use the treeness indices to
provide improved multiple testing programs that improve the power of corrected
multiple testing procedures in the case of hierarchical dependencies between
variables. This will enhance the power in detecting significant functional
differences between different conditions. The methods will first be developed
and calibrated on data simulated according to known tree structures. Calibration
will evaluate the indices under various types of perturbations and thresholding.
The methods will then be used on real data generated, as part of the proposed
work by directed evolution experiments in microbial
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is an application-driven
project for providing useful multiple testing correction under hierarchical
dependencies. The goal is to tailor statistical methods to the exact needs of
biologists working in bacterial ecology and in HIV/HCV drug resistance. This
project provides the integration of a broad range of cutting edge mathematics,
probability and statistics with computational advances that cater to the
realities of data collection and analyses in the fields of phylogenetics,
metatranscriptomics and metagenomics. Advances in the study of evolution, in
microbial ecosystems (the human gut, sewage treatment plants) or virus evolution
(HCV/HIV in a human host) would have repercussions on overall health practices
at both the individual and epidemiological levels. Quantitative estimates of
confidence in `entero-types' or other inferred clusters would be important in
the cost analysis of personalized medicine. Students and Postdoctoral fellows
will be trained both in biology and statistics, so they can understand the
biologist's requests and constraints. Consulting workshops will be organized
regularly where the effectiveness of planned experiments and applied statistics
can be discussed. During the academic year, classes targeted to molecular
biologists and microbiologists teach multivariate visualization and geometrical
statistics methods using R. These will be open source and available from the
class web pages. The PIs will offer several Summer schools in Microbiology and
Metagenomics where they teach both multivariate statistics, phylogenetic
analyses, metagenomic analysis, metatranscriptomics as well as experimental
techniques for studying evolution in action.