* 1162177
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Building Critical Systems with Verifiable Properties Using Gate Level Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2015
* USD 448,000.00

Computer performance has doubled many times over during the past 40 years, but
the very techniques used to achieve these performance gains have made it
increasingly difficult to build systems that are provably safe, secure, or
reliable. This fact significantly impedes progress in the development of our
most safety-critical embedded systems such as those found in medical, avionic,
automotive, and military systems. A transformation in the way that these systems
are created is needed, one that uses new hardware design techniques, computer
architectures, and programming languages to create classes of hardware/software
systems with formal and provable safety properties that are verifiable all the
way down to the implementation level of bits and logic
gates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will change the way that hardware and
embedded systems designers approach the problem of provable properties, enabling
them to directly control and analyze the system at the lowest level and to
statically determine if their designs are in compliance with a given policy. For
example, if a system must be real-time this property can be verifiable for a
full system, from gates to software, by ensuring that the architecture design
carefully manages interference through a set of new hardware primitives,
software designed to exploit these new primitives, specialized hardware analysis
tools, and new design languages. To ensure this technology will have impact
beyond academia the PIs are making these new technologies available and
accessible through easy to use tools, continuing to include undergraduates at
all levels of research to help train a new generation of engineers capable of
designing safety-critical systems, and integrating concepts from information
assurance into their extensive outreach activities. Over the long term this
research will help create the skills and tools that embedded system engineers
need to evaluate the trustworthiness of their systems, and it will ease the
development of those critical systems on which we all depend on for our safety
and livelihood.