* 1162429
* Conference: 2012 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics conference.  University of Minnesota, May 20-22, 2012
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2013
* Yiannis Kaznessis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eddie Chang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 7,000.00

Kaznessis, Yiannis N.&lt;br/&gt;CBET -
1162429&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests for partial support of registration
costs for participating undergraduate students, graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and faculty members to attend the 2012 Midwest Thermodynamic and
Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) conference, to be held on the Minneapolis campus of
the University of Minnesota, May 20-22, 2012. This conference has drawn
attendees from all over the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Midwest
Thermodynamic and Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference will likely continue
the longstanding tradition of promoting research and collaborations in
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics as participants take advantage of the
small attendance (approximately 80 people) to establish contacts in the
community. This conference will be a venue where the latest research on
computational, theoretical and experimental thermodynamics and statistical
mechanics are presented, discussed and debated. Thermodynamics is a major pillar
of scientific and engineering disciplines. Statistical mechanics provides an
additional, necessary molecular understanding of thermodynamic properties. The
MTSM Conference provides a great vehicle to learn thermodynamics in the context
of statistical mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting participants range from established senior
faculty members to undergraduate and new graduate students. An attractive
feature of MTSM is its focus on graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
junior faculty members. By design, the majority of presentations are given by
young scientists and engineers. These meetings are wonderful learning
experiences for young researchers. As done in the past, the organizers will
attempt to keep the costs at a minimum for students to encourage participation.
This proposal, combined with funds committed by the University of Minnesota?s
College of Science and Engineering, the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute and
the Digital Technology Center, will provide funding to help defray meeting
expenses.