* 1162600
* Linguistic Ethnography: Gwich'in Caribou Anatomy and Cultural Ecology [ISO 639 gwi]
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2012,12/31/2015
* Craig Mishler, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 12/31/2015
* USD 259,924.00

Vadzaih (Rangifer Tarandus) is a staple of Gwich'in subsistence and
spirituality. Over the millenia, the Gwich'in have developed a detailed
knowledge of caribou body parts: not only sundry names and uses for these parts
but an encyclopedia of traditional stories, songs, games, family names,
foodways, and ceremonies associated with them. The project's research objective
is to discover what the Gwich'in Athabaskan people, as a small-scale subarctic
society, can teach the nation through their language and world view about living
in harmony with the land and with the wild game animals they share it with. To
realize this goal the researchers will interview active hunters and elders in
their home communities of Arctic Village, Venetie, and Fort Yukon in northeast
Alaska, and Old Crow, Tsiigehtchic, and Fort McPherson in northwest
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental question for the research is not only
what do the Gwich'in know about caribou anatomy, but how do they see caribou and
what do they say and believe about caribou that defines themselves, their
dietary and nutritional needs, and their subsistence way of life? Language is
the key. Gwich'in, an endangered language with four living dialects, is a member
of the Na-Dene language family, and the fieldwork plan includes speakers of all
four of those dialects. An important part of the plan is to train young speakers
and language learners in basic transcription and translation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recording the traditional ethnoscientific knowledge
Gwich'in elders have about caribou in their corpus of oral narratives and in
their lexicon has farreaching implications for zooarchaeology, for applied
linguistics, and for folklore and cultural anthropology. It is an empirical
approach which essentially weds natural science with the humanities, osteology
with verbal art.