* 1162270
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Architecting Performance Sensitive Applications for the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* T. S. Eugene Ng, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 400,000.00

Cloud computing offers IT organizations the ability to create&lt;br/&gt;geo-
distributed, and highly scalable applications while
providing&lt;br/&gt;attractive cost-saving advantages. Yet, architecting,
configuring, and&lt;br/&gt;adapting cloud applications (latency-sensitive web
applications and&lt;br/&gt;bulk data processing applications) to meet their
stringent performance&lt;br/&gt;requirements is a challenge given the rich set
of configuration&lt;br/&gt;options, shared multi-tenant nature of cloud
platforms, and dynamics&lt;br/&gt;resulting from activities such as planned
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing novel
methodologies, algorithms, and&lt;br/&gt;systems that can enable application
architects to (1) judiciously&lt;br/&gt;architect applications across multiple
cloud data-centers while&lt;br/&gt;considering application performance
requirements, cost saving&lt;br/&gt;objectives, and cloud pricing schemes guided
by performance and cost&lt;br/&gt;models of cloud components; (2) automatically
learn effective&lt;br/&gt;application configurations and configuration-to-
performance prediction&lt;br/&gt;models through statistical machine learning
techniques; and (3) create&lt;br/&gt;applications that can adapt to ongoing
dynamics in cloud environments&lt;br/&gt;through transaction reassignment over
shorter time-scales, and&lt;br/&gt;application migration over longer time-
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this research is multi-fold: (1)
Enable IT organizations&lt;br/&gt;to significantly reduce costs by optimally
moving their operations to&lt;br/&gt;the cloud; (2) create benchmarks based on
operationally deployed&lt;br/&gt;applications and collecting workload traces
which will be made&lt;br/&gt;available to the research community; (3) make
developed algorithms and&lt;br/&gt;systems widely available as open source
software; (4) inform the&lt;br/&gt;design of a nation-wide health-care cloud in
Thailand; (4) introduce&lt;br/&gt;cloud computing related topics in the
undergraduate and graduate&lt;br/&gt;curriculum; and (6) train multiple Ph.D.,
M.S., and undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students, with explicit effort to recruit and
train students from&lt;br/&gt;under-represented minority groups.