* 1162240
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Systematic Analysis of Protocol Implementations
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Ramesh Govindan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* John Brassil
* 08/31/2017
* USD 487,305.00

Systematic Analysis of Protocol Implementations&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internet
protocol development and standardization has long been driven by the philosophy
of 'rough consensus and running code.' The downside to this approach is that
protocol specifications are rarely rigorously verified, even for properties that
fall within the capabilities of protocol verification techniques. Further, the
'rough' nature of the approach means that some important design decisions are
inevitably omitted from the specification or are defined ambiguously. Therefore,
in practice the correctness, performance, and resilience of network protocols
are implicitly defined by vendor and open-source implementations of the protocol
specification, and these implementations are based upon the developers' varying
interpretations of the standards document. This leaves developers in a bind:
they are unsure of the properties of the protocol specification, and do not have
tools to reason about the properties of complex protocol
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit. This project will
develop a general approach and an associated tool that will enable developers
and expert users to systematically analyze a variety of properties on a range of
protocol implementations. The approach builds upon recent advances in program
analysis techniques in novel ways that are tailored towards the special
properties and requirements of protocol implementations. Moreover, the project
will instantiate the general approach with new analyses for important tasks that
are largely manual and highly error-prone today, including interoperability
testing and precise tracking of state changes over time (e.g., to identify
anomalous state sequences or characterize protocol
complexity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the observation that
protocol implementations have an implicit internal structure, in the form of a
state machine that embodies the key behavioral properties of the implementation.
Due to the complexity of protocol implementations, this state machine will
typically not be completely inferable by program analysis. To address this
problem, the project will develop operators on a protocol implementation that
allow developers to specify scalable and precise views of the underlying state
machine. Developers can additionally use these views to perform a targeted
concrete execution of the protocol on a real topology in order to investigate
the particular property under consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of
the project will be a software system called Spa. Developers will provide
protocol implementations and use their expertise about the protocol and its
properties of interest to specify appropriate operators and guide targeted
concrete execution. The project will evolve Spa operators using experiences
gained from applying Spa to several protocol analyses that have not been
previously considered, and will start with a set of operators that have been
informed by the PIs' preliminary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact.
The protocols that underlie access to our networked world must be reliable,
robust to attacks, and must perform well over a range of conditions and in
dynamic environments. This project will equip developers and experts to
systematically analyze the behavior of their protocols, and will result in an
overall improvement in the reliability, robustness, and performance of deployed
protocols. The project will accelerate the adoption of the research by making
Spa available to researchers and developers, publishing its research results in
top networking and programming language conferences, and educating students on
the developed research methods by incorporating them in curricula. It will also
engage underrepresented groups and undergraduates in research.