* 1162440
* Reduced-Order Dynamical Models for Effective Power Management in Computer Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Elizabeth Bradley, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Atul Kelkar
* 07/31/2016
* USD 311,698.00

This project concerns reduced-order modeling and forecasting techniques for
reducing power use in microprocessor chips. Modern power management solutions
for these systems employ extremely simple control strategies---e.g., lowering
the clock frequency by a fixed, pre-determined amount if a processor's load
crosses some threshold. The methods developed by the control theory and
nonlinear dynamics communities have long since moved beyond this level of
sophistication. Model-based prediction, in particular, could enable vastly
improved power management, but only if the models involved are accurate. If one
could predict that a particular thread of computation would be bogged down for
the next 0.6 seconds waiting for data from the computer's memory, for instance,
one could put that thread on a low-power hold for that time period. Prediction
of the future behavior of a complex nonlinear dynamical system like a modern
computer is a serious challenge, however---and it is all but impossible if one
uses mathematics that assumes linearity and/or time invariance, as has been the
rule until recently in the computer systems community. The approach proposed
here uses a novel reduced-order modeling strategy that first transforms the
time-series data into a 2D representation called a tau-return map. The power of
this representation is that it brings out temporal relationships explicitly,
`unfolding' the temporal patterns in the time series into a spatial dimension.
Forecast models working on this transformed data can be used to create accurate
predictions of processor and memory loads in multicore processors: information
that can be used to dynamically adapt the computation to the resources, and vice
versa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reducing the power use of microprocessor chips, one
of the most critical classes of engineered systems in use today, is an important
challenge in the modern world of ubiquitous computation. In order to manage
power use effectively, one must be able to dynamically adapt the computation to
the resources. Monitoring is one key element in solving that problem: if one
knew which processing units in a multi-core processor were busy and which ones
were idle, for instance, one could re-route work from the former to the latter.
Forecasting is another key element: doing that kind of reallocation reactively
is good, but doing it PROACTIVELY---based on a prediction of those loads and
levels---would be far better. The complexity of modern computer systems makes
prediction very difficult, however. These systems have large numbers of internal
variables that interact in complex, nonlinear ways, and only a few of those
variables can be monitored. The approach proposed here uses a mathematical
mapping to tease the important temporal relationships out of these narrow
streams of data that can be measured from a running computer. It builds forecast
models in that new space using mathematics that fully respects the complexity
and nonlinearity of the underlying system---unlike traditional approaches, which
generally treat computer systems as linear and time-invariant. It uses those
forecast models to save power by tailoring the computational load to the
available resources, and vice versa. The potential impact of this work is
significant, particularly in view of the recent design evolution of multicore
processors and the rapid proliferation of mobile devices. Because computers are
so common and so critical, this work has the potential to contribute to science,
engineering, and well beyond.