* 1162299
* Langlands Correspondence, L-functions and Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2012,05/31/2016
* Freydoon Shahidi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2016
* USD 345,000.00

Local Artin root numbers whose existence were established by Langlands and
Deligne (in some cases earlier by Dwork) are crucial objects in establishing the
local Langlands correspondence between n-dimensional continuous representations
of the Weil-Deligne group over a local field F and irreducible admissible
representations of GL(n,F). In fact, a unique correspondence is obtained only
after the root numbers and L-functions attached to tensor products of
representations of Weil group are shown to equal to those defined by Rankin
product factors for corresponding representations of two GL(.,F). There are some
other instances where these objects are defined for representaions of GL(n,F)
such as exterior square and symmetric square representations of GL(n,C), as well
exterior cube when n is less than or equal to 8 by means of the Langlands-
Shahidi method. As the first topic in this proposal, the investigator will study
a robust technique which can be used to prove the equality of these factors by
those defined for Weil group through the correspondence. Techniques involved are
a deformation argument as well as a generalized Shalika germ expansion for
Bessel functions by Jacquet and Ye which seems to be amenable to generalization
to other groups. He will also use Arthur's results in his upcoming book to
resolve certain questions concerning the Langlands packet attached to an Arthur
packet, as well as certain arithmetic questions (Weyl laws) for classical
groups, and their generalizations to general spin groups. Computing the residues
of intertwining operators for classical groups in terms of endoscopy which he
has been pursuing in collaboration for many years, should also benefit from
Arthur's character indentities which he will explore as part of this project. He
will also study certain representation theoretic consequences of functoriality.
Next he will continue his joint work on studying p-adic L-functions through the
Langlands-Shahidi method, and pursue Langlands new ideas on Beyond Endoscopy and
Reciprocity, as well as the possible generalization of the method to loop groups
and covering groups.

The proposal involves training of graduate students and postdocs and includes
specific problems for them. The investigator expects several new students to
join him and other members of the Number Theory group at Purdue and is involved
in teaching high level courses (e.g.,p-adic L-functions, automorphic forms,
representation theory of real Lie groups) to train them. Theory of Artin
L-functions and its connection with reciprocity law (correspondence) of
Langlands is one of the most beautiful parts of number theory which the
investigator hopes can be studied by students of different level in different
seminars. On another level, he is involved in organizing conferences as well as
serving in editorial boards of several prominent journals as well as panels.
Moreover, he remains involved in mentoring and minority hiring and currently
serves on the Department's Graduate Recruitment Committee with emphasis on
recruiting women and minority students.