* 1162304
* Maurice Auslander International Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2012,01/31/2015
* Gordana Todorov, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Victoria Powers
* 01/31/2015
* USD 48,000.00

The 2012 Maurice Auslander International Conference will be held at the Marine
Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole Massachusetts, USA on April 25-30, 2012, and
the 2013 conference is also planned for April.

Maurice Auslander was an influential mathematician at Brandeis University,
widely known for his creation, together with Idun Reiten, of Auslander-Reiten
theory. In the twenty first century, Auslander's work has become even more
popular with the many fields that are applying and using this theory;
particularly important is the fact that the cluster theory of Zelevinsky and
Fomin, which is connected to so many different fields, is also intimately
related to the representation theory of finite dimensional algebras. The
proposed Maurice Auslander International Conference plans to bring together
mathematicians from representation theory and related areas of combinatorics,
invariant theory, non-commutative algebra, commutative algebra, homological
algebra, etc. With support from the National Science Foundation, this successful
yearly event will expand its participation, extend support to more graduate
students and be extended to six days. There will be expository and research
lectures about such topics as generalized cluster categories, including those
related to surfaces, Poisson structures and their relation to cluster algebras,
Brauer-Severi variety of Sklyanin algebras, universal deformation rings, quiver
Grassmannians, Calabi-Yau algebras, Christoffel words and Markov numbers, Hopf
algebra actions, twisted Plucker coordinates and combinatorial perfect
matchings, higher Auslander algebras, MV polytopes and Nakajima quiver
varieties. Many breakthrough have been presented at this conference, for example
a proof of the well-known Strong No Loop Conjecture was presented for the first
time in 2010.

The proposed Maurice Auslander International Conference is intended to be a
center of activity for this area of algebra in the United States. The conference
will be a combination workshop/conference/student presentation event. Each day
of the conference will start with an expository lecture by known international
experts in various fields of algebra. This will be followed by at least one
student presentation explaining results related to their PhD theses. The rest of
the lectures will be traditional conference talks. The goal of the expository
talks and student talks is to make current research in algebra accessible to
graduate students and postdocs and to give beginning researchers a platform to
display their achievements. We also want to introduce international leaders in
our field to the young talent that we have in the US. The intent is that our
young researchers will become better known in the world and will make outside
contacts. Also, there is a strategic national goal that will be furthered. The
US is already the leading country in many areas of mathematical research.
However, it is lagging in new branches of algebra which are being developed
largely in other countries. The proposed conference will help to reverse this
trend. We will make these current topics more accessible and more popular.

The 2012 conference will be held April 25-30, 2012, and the 2013 conference is
also planned for April. More information about the Maurice Auslander
International Conference can be found at
http://www.math.neu.edu/~martsinkovsky/p/MADL/MADL.html