* 1162215
* SHF: Medium: Title: Idempotent Processing and Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2012,01/31/2017
* Daniel Jimenez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 01/31/2017
* USD 600,000.00

For many decades, Moore's Law has allowed exponential growth in computing
capability while simultaneously reducing the power consumed by digital devices.
Due to fundamental material properties and engineering challenges, in the future
the power and energy efficiency of transistors that are the building blocks of
digital devices will not improve significantly. Thus to continue providing
performance improvements without increasing power consumption, new techniques to
design microprocessors are required. This research project looks at a new
approach to build microprocessors to make them more energy efficient. The main
idea in this research project is to develop techniques allowing microprocessors
to efficiently predict without having to expend power-hungry resources to
recover in case the prediction is wrong. The research leverages the mathematical
principle of idempotence (doing something multiple times producing the same
result) in a novel way. In this project, this principle is applied to
microprocessor design to develop a class of processors called Idempotent
Processors. The research addresses formal theoretical analysis of the technique,
ways to build software compilers, and microprocessor designs spanning CPUs to
GPUs to exploit this principle.

The core idea of this project is to use the property of idempotence: performing
an idempotent operation many times produces the same result. The research builds
upon the following insight: applications naturally decompose into a continuous
series of idempotent regions; i.e., their execution can be broken down into a
set of regions, where each region is idempotent - re-execution has no side-
effects. The research develops the idea of Idempotent Processors, whose
fundamental abstraction is executing idempotent regions of code. This allows
novel modifications to the microprocessor pipeline and allows many forms of
speculation without the need to restore any state prior to re-execution. This
design approach unifies speculation for performance, reliability, and energy
efficient execution under one principled approach. The static analysis research
formalizes the notion of idempotence and investigates mechanisms for determining
idempotent regions. The compiler implementation for various ISAs (instruction
set architectures), CPUs (central processing units), and GPUs (grahics
processing units) evaluates the approach quantitatively.

The project's end-to-end solutions across multiple synergistic directions have
potential for disruptive impact. The project involves collaborative work between
UW-Madison and UT-San Antonio and involves under-graduate researchers, exchanges
visits between institutions, and explores integrated curriculum enhancement and
outreach across UW and UTSA. The project's multi-disciplinary and multi-
institution collaboration provides distributed impact.