* 1162073
* Applications of Ergodic Theory to Combinatorics and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,07/31/2016
* Vitaly Bergelson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Taylor
* 07/31/2016
* USD 451,830.00

The project is focused on the problems of multiple recurrence in ergodic theory
with emphasis on the mutually enriching connections with combinatorics and
number theory. The problems considered may be viewed as far reaching extensions
of classical recurrence results in dynamics. At the same time, these problems
lead to strong applications of ergodic theory to combinatorics, number theory
and algebra which are inaccessible, so far, by conventional methods. Some of the
polynomial results obtained by the proposers in recent years served as an
impetus for further developments in the theory of multiple recurrence. These
developments provide better understanding of the phenomenon of multiple
recurrence along polynomials and bring new vistas of research to light. Some of
these vistas lead to interesting new connections with and applications to the
theory of prime numbers and finitary combinatorics. The new problems considered
in this proposal reflect entrance of new methods and techniques into the
picture. These include the geometric method utilizing dynamical systems on
nilmanifolds and methods involving the topological algebra in Stone-Cech
compactifications. Not only are most of the familiar results dealing with
commutative groups naturally extendible to the nilpotent setup, but also it
turns out that nilpotent dynamics allows one to get new information about
convergence and recurrence properties of abelian groups of measure preserving
transformations. Some of the conjectures formulated in the proposal shed new
light on the connections of nilpotent dynamics with important problems of
ergodic theory and combinatorics. Another group of conjectures deals with
refining of the recurrence results with the help of the topological algebra
techniques. Yet another group of conjectures is based on new results and ideas
which link together ergodic theory, number theory in function fields of finite
characteristics, and combinatorics.

The area of Ergodic Ramsey Theory with its diversity of problems, techniques and
applications is an excellent medium for attracting undergraduates to mathematics
and graduate students to an area of active research. The problems and
conjectures that are posed in this proposal connect diverse areas of mathematics
(ergodic theory, combinatorics, algebra, number theory) and contribute to each.
For example, in recent years the methods, results and ideas originating in the
theory of multiple recurrence (some of which are due to proposers) have brought
spectacular advancements in the theory of prime numbers. Another interesting
direction of research that have emerged in recent years links together ergodic
theory of multiple recurrence with combinatorics in finite fields. These
developments have connections with the theoretical computer science. The
proposed study aims at better understanding of the regularity of the behavior of
dynamical systems sampled at moments of time corresponding to values of
polynomial (and more general) functions. While the proposal focuses on
applications of this phenomenon in combinatorics and number theory, it may be of
interest to a physicist as well.