* 1162196
* SHF: AF: Medium: Collaborative Research: The Pochoir Stencil Compiler
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2012,09/30/2014
* Rezaul Chowdhury, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2014
* USD 173,584.00

Many high-end scientific applications perform stencil computations in their
inner loops. A stencil defines the value of a grid point in a d-dimensional
spatial grid at time t as a function of neighboring grid points at recent times
before t. Stencil computations are conceptually simple to implement using nested
loops, but looping implementations suffer from poor cache performance on
multicore processors. Cache-oblivious divide-and-conquer stencil codes can
achieve an order of magnitude improvement in cache efficiency over looping
implementations, but most programmers find it difficult to write cache-oblivious
stencil codes. Moreover, open problems remain in adapting these algorithms to
realistic applications that lack the perfect regularity of simple examples. This
project's investigation of cache-oblivious stencil compilation enables ordinary
programmers of stencil computations to enjoy the benefits of multicore
technology without requiring them to write code any more complex than naive
nested loops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is developing a language
embedded in C++ that can express stencil computations concisely and can be
compiled automatically into highly efficient algorithmic code for multicore
processors and other platforms. The Pochoir stencil compiler compiles stencil
computations that exhibit complex boundary conditions, such as periodic,
constant, Dirichlet, Neumann, mirrored, and phase factors; irregularities,
including macroscopic and microscopic inhomogeneities, as well as irregular
shapes; general complex dependencies, such as push dependencies, horizontal
dependencies, and dynamic dependencies.&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, the
researchers are developing provably good algorithms for complex stencil
computations; exploring how domain-specific compiler technology can achieve
speedups from efficient cache management, processor-pipeline scheduling, and
parallel computation; investigating how to run stencils efficiently on a wide
variety of architectures such as multicore, distributed-memory clusters,
graphical processing units, FPGA's, and future exascale machines; demonstrating
the effectiveness of their research by developing a production-quality stencil
compiler; developing a benchmark suite and benchmarking system for evaluating
Pochoir.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research enables scientific researchers and
others to easily produce highly efficient codes for complex stencil
computations. The codes make good use of the memory hierarchy and processor
pipelines endemic to multicore processors and run fast on a diverse set of
hardware platforms. This research eases the development and maintenance of a
wide variety of stencil-based applications ? ranging across physics, biology,
chemistry, energy, climate, mechanical and electrical engineering, finance, and
other areas ? benefiting these application areas, as well as society at large.