* 1162548
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of Odor-triggered Neuronal Dynamics and Experience-induced Olfactory Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2012,08/31/2015
* Aaditya Rangan, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2015
* USD 133,092.00

This research project will uncover neuronal network mechanisms that allow
animals to recognize, and learn to recognize, different odors in their dynamic
environment. The early stages of the hawkmoth Manduca sexta's olfactory system
generate odor-specific responses which are spatiotemporally complex.
Electrophysiological experiments, in conjunction with conditioning trials, will
be carried out to determine which features of the complex response are in fact
relevant to the moth's adaptive encoding of its olfactory environment, and how
these features are resculpted when the moth learns to appreciate a new odor.
Specifically, we will direct experiments measuring (a) high-order dynamical
structures associated with odor-response in the hawkmoth's antennal lobe and
other synaptic centers including the lateral protocerebrum and mushroom bodies,
and (b) the plasticity-induced shift in these structures following a
conditioning paradigm. These experiments will facilitate development of both
computational and theoretical models of neuronal networks. Specifically, we will
develop (c) a large-scale spiking network model of the hawkmoth olfactory system
which will be benchmarked using the experiments mentioned above, and (d) a
theoretical framework capable of analyzing the rich dynamics found in these
networks.

An abundance of recent experiments indicate that insects as well as other
animals such as mammals, primates and humans, exhibit brain states that are
incredibly rich, some directly induced by stimuli and some born from learning
processes, all possessing dynamic properties on a variety of scales. The
intricacies of these dynamic regimes are still a mystery. We currently do not
know what these brain states are capable of, nor how they are used to drive
decision making or learning. The hawkmoth -- "Manduca sexta" -- has a brain
which is considerably simpler than a human's, but nevertheless has an olfactory
system not too dissimilar from our own. By investigating the link between
neuronal network dynamics, behavior and learning within this animal, we will
draw conclusions relevant to some of our basic cognitive functions.