* 1162067
* CGV: Medium: Collaborative Research: Visualizing Comparisons
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2017
* Steven Franconeri, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2017
* USD 300,445.00

Comparison is an essential part of data analysis and, therefore, of many
visualization tasks. While the published literature provides a wealth of
visualization tools for looking at individual objects (graphs, volumes, time
series, gene sequences, molecular motions, etc.), there has to date been less
consideration of support for comparison. The PIs argue that comparison tasks are
best supported by tools explicitly designed for that purpose. The problem is
that visual comparison becomes more challenging as the number of objects, their
size, and the complexity of the objects and/or of the relationships among them
increases. The difficulty is further compounded by our rapidly growing ability
to collect and generate data. In prior work the PIs have developed some
encouraging initial examples of comparison tools, but these are specialized
successes that offer little guidance for future endeavors. Addressing a wider
range of comparison problems at greater scale with our present limited
understanding thus largely remains an art that requires considerable effort. The
PIs' goal in this project is to move towards a science of visual comparison. By
studying visual comparison as a general problem, they will establish a domain-
independent foundation for the field that facilitates the design of future tools
which allow the creation of more effective and scalable comparisons. To these
ends the team will pursue three interconnected research threads. They will
define theories that are grounded upon principles of visual cognition. They will
explore case studies (derived from real problems suggested by domain
collaborators) that challenge and extend these theories, provide examples for
empirical study, and suggest or use general concepts. And they will identify
common tasks, designs, and strategies that enable development of generalized
techniques, guidelines, and software components. This approach uniquely combines
empirical studies, design explorations, and software development to take the
field of visual comparisons to a new level that is both rooted in theory yet
viable in practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Because visual
comparison plays a key role in diverse domains (including essentially all of the
sciences, engineering, and medicine), the potential benefits from an improved
science of visual comparison tools are far reaching. To ensure maximum
applicability for project outcomes, the PIs are directly collaborating with
physical, biological, social, educational, and medical scientists, as well as
with engineers and scholars in the humanities. The project will generate
visualization tools, software components, and resources for visualization
development by others. Visual comparison will serve as a mechanism to expose
students at all levels to issues in data understanding. This project will also
provide training for visualization specialists, engage non-technical students in
visualization, and explore the role of visualization in public outreach efforts.