* 1162114
* HCC: Medium: Enhancing Social Translucence in Systems to Support Virtual Teaming
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2012,03/31/2018
* Mark Zachry, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2018
* USD 890,659.00

This project investigates the nature and work of self-managed, voluntary teams
operating in virtual spaces. The investigation is designed to provide a research
basis for designing systems that will support advances in voluntary virtual
teaming, and social computing more generally. The research addresses four high-
level, interrelated questions: (1) How can social translucence be realized in
systems to support the work of virtual teaming? (2) How can current models of
self-organized and self-managed work teams be extended to address key features
of voluntary teams working in virtual spaces? (3) What inter-group and intra-
group characteristics of voluntary virtual teams enable meaningful understanding
of a team's collaborative work and activities? (4) How can these characteristics
be composed into socially translucent, system-generated views of
teams?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of rich data associated with
voluntary project groups operating in Wikipedia provides the basis for this
investigation. The research will combine model development, model testing,
system design, and deployment to develop an understanding of virtual teaming in
support of a larger vision of social translucence in online communities. The
research focuses on broad, rich categories of interaction - within team and
outside team - to elaborate the dimensions of virtual teaming that can
productively be exposed through socially translucent design. The research is
inherently structured as cycles of basic research and exploration, followed by
design activities, design evaluations, development, and deployment. Through this
process, the research will identify features of group interactions that can
support views of project teams that are inspectable in a visualization system,
which will be made available to the community itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project lies in the elaboration of models of volunteer
virtual teams and in the design and development of principles for group-
oriented, socially-translucent systems. The research will extend social
translucence as a framework for the development of systems in which virtual
teaming occurs, and it will develop a robust model of voluntary virtual teaming,
realizing relevant sociotechnical dimensions for potential community members,
project managers, and social analysts. The broader impacts of this project
include research-based improvements to systems supporting the interaction,
contribution, and sensemaking activities engaged in by an ever increasing
population of people collaborating online. The approach deploys socially
translucent tools in the systems where people work collaboratively, allowing
those who will benefit from such views to manipulate, extend, and refine such
tools to realize greater potential in their endeavors.