* 1162624
* Workshop on Catalytic Mechanisms and the Emergence of Metabolic Networks in Biogenesis, May 23-25, 2012
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2013
* Shelley Copley, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 04/30/2013
* USD 49,903.00

The three-day Workshop on Catalytic Mechanisms and the Emergence of Metabolic
Networks in Biogenesis to be held in May, in Arlington, VA will address one of
the longstanding problems in understanding the origin of life. The problem is
that contemporary biocatalysts are macromolecules made of monomers which require
biocatalysts for their synthesis. The past twenty years have pointed to the way
out of this difficulty; catalysis is not confined to macromolecules but may be
found in relatively small organic molecules as well as in complexes of
transition metals coordinately bonded to ligands that may also be small organic
molecules. The relative sparseness of metabolomes, especially for prokaryotes,
suggests the necessity of autocatalytic networks that act as global attractors
in the networks of small molecules. In order to develop a theory of metabolic
networks that gave rise to the biosphere it is necessary to understand catalytic
mechanisms and their role in generating metabolic networks. The background for
these studies is the work of material scientists, industrial chemists, organic
chemists, enzymologists, and quantum physical chemists. These are mature
disciplines that often have little to do with each other and even less to do
with biologists interested in the emergence of the biosphere. Since it is not
yet clear as to which aspects of pre-macromolecular catalysis are of most
significance, it is important to have experts in all of these to get a full view
of the problem. The meeting will involve experts in these disciplines to address
the questions related to autocatalysis during the emergence of life.