* 1162633
* SHF: Medium: A Collaborative Framework for Developing Green Electronics for Next-Generation Computing Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2016
* Kaustav Banerjee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2016
* USD 400,000.00

The information technology (IT) industry is confronting an acute problem in the
form of increasing power and energy consumption by electronic products, which is
projected to have dramatic impact on the global energy crisis. This is partly
due to the fact that a significant fraction of the energy consumption in the IT
industry results from the computing components? (such as servers) energy need,
which in turn, depends on the power consumption of the various integrated
circuits in these components. Hence, designing low-power and energy-efficient
integrated circuits or Green Electronics constitutes a key area for sustaining
the irreversible growth of the global IT industry. Achieving energy-efficiency
is also of critical importance for all electronic circuits used in mobile
applications for increasing the battery life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy-
efficiency can be achieved by lowering both dynamic and leakage power
consumption. However, lowering of power using traditional techniques becomes
increasingly difficult beyond the 22 nanometer technology node. This is due to
the fact that in such nanoscale devices, the most effective knob used for
lowering power, namely the power supply voltage, cannot be scaled as rapidly as
in earlier technology generations without incurring significant performance
penalty arising from the inability to simultaneously reduce the threshold
voltage. Simultaneous scaling of threshold voltage, which is essential for
maintaining a certain ON to OFF ratio of the device currents (that is essential
in digital circuits where the transistors are used as switches), leads to a
substantial increase in the sub-threshold leakage (OFF state) current, owing to
the non-abrupt nature of the switching characteristics of MOSFETs, thereby
making the devices very energy inefficient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to address this critical issue at the most fundamental level by designing
circuits and systems enabled by novel electronic devices whose switching
behaviors are near-ideal, that is, they can move from ON to OFF state and vice-
versa, almost instantly. In particular, the PIs plan to design and fabricate
ultra energy-efficient heterojunction Tunneling Field-Effect Transistors
(T-FETs) that employ a fundamentally different injection mechanism in the form
of band-to-band tunneling (BTBT) to achieve near ideal switching. They also plan
to develop necessary modeling/simulation, and optimization techniques for these
devices, and explore circuits and systems specifically enabled by these devices
to demonstrate unprecedented power and energy savings in electronic products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative four-year project brings together an
outstanding team of scientists for addressing one of the fundamental limitations
of MOSFETs and is expected to have wide implications for the semiconductor and
electronics industries. The project is expected to help digital switches and
circuits (including high-performance microprocessors) to attain their ultimate
limits (in terms of density and performance) and also open new opportunities in
embedded memories (including DRAMs and Flash) and remote sensors, thereby
maintaining U.S. competitiveness in the worldwide semiconductor market. Broader
impact of the proposed research is also well recognized, particularly in the
light of emerging 3-D ICs, where integration of low leakage and relatively
temperature insensitive T-FETs could be exploited to build next-generation high-
performance and low-power integrated circuits. The overall program also ties
research to education at all levels (K-12, undergraduate, graduate, continuing-
ed) partly via participation in programs designed by education professionals,
besides focusing on recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups in
nanoscience and engineering.