* 1162614
* CSR: Medium: Highly Scalable and Accurate System Support for Detecting Misbehaving Users and Mitigating Criminal Activities in Realtime Online Video-Based Services
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2016
* Qin Lv, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 700,000.00

The main goal of this proposal is to understand the safety problems introduced
by realtime online video-based services, and to develop highly scalable and
accurate solutions and systems that protect the safety of interactive video
users. While realtime, online video-based services are newly emerging services,
they have already gained tremendous popularity with millions of users. These
services introduce new ways for people to interact and have the potential to
significantly impact, even revolutionize, pervasive computing and online social
networking services. Unfortunately, the presence of misbehaving users may
jeopardize the entire utility of these services and bring harm to minors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal investigates innovative ideas including
fine-grained cascaded classification and a rule-based pre-classifier with
logistic regression to improve scalability while preserving accuracy,
incorporating contextual information from smartphone sensors and application
scenarios to improve accuracy, and mechanisms to evaluate and circumvent cyber-
bullying. The complete system will be deployed and evaluated using real-world
data. With the growing popularity of realtime, online video-based services and
the threat to minors of being exposed to unsuitable content or cyber-bullying
attacks, developing effective techniques for detecting misbehaving users of
these services will have significant and far-reaching beneficial impacts on
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software developed from this project will be
released as open source. The project will develop and integrate educational
course modules on Internet safety topics into relevant middle and high school
courses via an on-going NSF GK-12 project. Undergraduate and minority students
will be recruited via the Colorado Diversity Institute and annual REU
supplements.