* 1162211
* The Global Analysis of Fluids in General Relativity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2015
* Jared Speck, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2015
* USD 147,379.00

The focus of this proposal is the study of the global nonlinear behavior of
solutions to the relativistic Euler equations, which are the fundamental PDEs of
relativistic fluid mechanics. In particular, the principal investigator will
study the effect that spacetime expansion has on the global behavior of fluids.
A primary goal is to understand the minimal expansion rate that is capable of
suppressing the formation of shocks in solutions that are launched by small,
smooth initial data. A related secondary goal is to find conditions on smooth
initial data that guarantee the evolutionary formation of shocks. In a broader
context, this work will advance our understanding of the global behavior of
solutions to quasilinear hyperbolic PDEs on expanding Lorentzian manifolds.
Attacking these problems requires the development and application of
mathematical techniques lying at the interface of geometry, analysis, and fluid
mechanics. Specifically, the principal investigator will use geometric energy
methods to derive dissipative and dispersive estimates for solutions to
hyperbolic PDEs.

The projects in this proposal are expected to help provide rigorous mathematical
justification for some of the most fundamental predictions of cosmology, many of
which are based on the behavior of explicit solutions to the relativistic Euler
equations; in cosmology, much of the "normal matter" content of the universe is
assumed to be effectively modeled by a fluid. It is especially important to
understand the effect that spacetime expansion has on the behavior of fluids,
for experimental observations indicate that our own universe is undergoing
accelerated expansion. Although the physical picture of the fluid behavior set
forth by the standard cosmological model is by now well-established, a full
mathematical justification of its predictions has yet to emerge. In particular,
in order for the explicit fluid solutions to have predictive value, it is
essential to show that they are globally stable under small perturbations of
their initial conditions; this is one of the major proposal goals. On the other
hand, the principal investigator's investigation of shock formation may expose
some limitations of the fluid model in cosmology. In addition to conducting
research, the principal investigator will also supervise undergraduate research
projects connected to the main themes of this proposal.