* 1162333
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Architecting Performance Sensitive Applications for the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2012,07/31/2017
* Mohit Tawarmalani, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2017
* USD 400,000.00

Cloud computing offers IT organizations the ability to create geo-distributed,
and highly scalable applications while providing attractive cost-saving
advantages. Yet, architecting, configuring, and adapting cloud applications
(latency-sensitive web applications and bulk data processing applications) to
meet their stringent performance requirements is a challenge given the rich set
of configuration options, shared multi-tenant nature of cloud platforms, and
dynamics resulting from activities such as planned maintenance.

This project is developing novel methodologies, algorithms, and systems that can
enable application architects to (1) judiciously architect applications across
multiple cloud data-centers while considering application performance
requirements, cost saving objectives, and cloud pricing schemes guided by
performance and cost models of cloud components; (2) automatically learn
effective application configurations and configuration-to-performance prediction
models through statistical machine learning techniques; and (3) create
applications that can adapt to ongoing dynamics in cloud environments through
transaction reassignment over shorter time-scales, and application migration
over longer time-scales.

The impact of this research is multi-fold: (1) Enable IT organizations to
significantly reduce costs by optimally moving their operations to the cloud;
(2) create benchmarks based on operationally deployed applications and
collecting workload traces which will be made available to the research
community; (3) make developed algorithms and systems widely available as open
source software; (4) inform the design of a nation-wide health-care cloud in
Thailand; (4) introduce cloud computing related topics in the undergraduate and
graduate curriculum; and (6) train multiple Ph.D., M.S., and undergraduate
students, with explicit effort to recruit and train students from under-
represented minority groups.