* 1162328
* A Metric for Measuring and Quantifying Wind Power Variability
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2012,08/31/2015
* David Morton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2015
* USD 296,727.00

The objective of this research is to develop a robust metric for measuring and
forecasting short-term intra-hour variability of wind power with the ultimate
goal of managing the variability to the desired level. The proposed metric uses
the statistical range as a measure of dispersion for the varying wind power
output. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The merit of the proposed work lies in a
novel metric to quantify and forecast intra-hour wind power variability and
methods to manage it to the desired level. The new metric, appropriately termed
conditional range metric, provides the largest wind power excursion over given
duration, wind power production level, and coverage rate. New methods for
allocating system reserve and sizing and control of distributed energy storage
systems will be developed to demonstrate the efficacy of the metric in managing
variability at the transmission and distribution system levels,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: The outcome of the proposed work is
expected to provide fundamental understanding of wind power variability. The
novel conditional range metric makes possible the analysis of factors and
conditions such as time (season) of interests, duration of observation, level of
wind power production, and coverage rates affecting variability. The new metric
is expected to aid system planners and operators to quantify variability
accurately, and thus allows for better integration and management of variable
wind power. The proposed work also provides additional resources to develop new
undergraduate- and graduate-level learning materials. Examples include but not
limited to undergraduate-level class projects and hands-on senior-design level
projects in simulating and managing variability using a battery system, as well
as development of a new graduate-level course in wind power integration.