* 1162165
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: On Closed-Loop and Cross-Layer Design and Implementation of Data Storage Systems Utilizing Extremely Scaled NAND Flash Memory Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2012,06/30/2014
* Xiaodong Zhang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2014
* USD 225,000.00

This project is developing efficient solid-state data storage device and system
design solutions. Although solid-state data storage has shown a high potential
to significantly advance storage systems to achieve ultra-high performance with
low energy consumption, continuous semiconductor technology scaling makes it
increasingly challenging to realize efficient and reliable solid-state data
storage devices and systems for the storage hierarchy in large-scale systems,
such as data centers and cloud systems. The intellectual merit of this proposal
lies in the theme of developing solid-state data storage design techniques from
both software and hardware. Major solid-state data storage device architecture
functions, including error correction coding, wear-leveling and garbage
collection algorithms, are being developed. Workload and device-aware solid-
state data storage system design solutions are also being developed for large
data center applications. Design solutions will be evaluated using an
experimental hardware platform and the Linux operating system. The broader
impact of the proposed research is that it will enable the development of highly
reliable and low-cost solid-state data storage devices and systems for large-
scale computing and storage systems. The adoption of the design methodology by
solid-state data storage architects, system designers, and data-intensive
practitioners may provide a direct benefit to this strategically important high
technology sector critical to the economic health of the nation. This team will
also introduce new research results into courses.