* 1162267
* SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: AgELESS: Aging Estimation and Lifetime Enhancement in Silicon Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2012,04/30/2017
* Chris Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2017
* USD 560,000.00

As CMOS technologies scale down to smaller geometries, integrated circuits
become more sensitive to aging-driven variations. Such variations can cause a
manufactured part to become unreliable in the field over a period of time due to
aging-induced circuit failures. To guard against this problem, it is essential
to build design-time and run-time techniques that can model and optimize CMOS
circuits. The AgELESS project brings together expertise in circuit design,
computer-aided design, and test techniques, which together are expected to
provide a more complete set of solutions to the overcome the reliability hurdle.
This work explores several major aging-related failures, and develops a toolbox
of techniques that can be used to enhance circuit reliability, while ensuring
that the circuit meets all specifications on power/energy and performance. While
AgELESS will not make a circuit ageless, it is expected to ensure that it will
age less. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed in this research will
be applicable to a range of applications of interest to the semiconductor
industry, including enterprise-class for high-end computing systems, mobile and
wireless communication applications, and embedded electronics, and will be made
available to industry through multiple avenues, including industrial
collaborations and active dissemination of research results. The educational
impact of this project will involve new course materials on reliability for the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum, and will train future
scientists/engineers to learn creative problem-solving skills.