
* 0070567
* Rational Landen Transformations
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,07/28/2000
* Victor Moll,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 105,000.00

Moll 0070567

The problem of integration of rational functions was considered by J. Bernoulli
in the 18th century. He completed Leibniz's original attempt at a general
partial fraction decomposition of the function. The main difficulty associated
with this procedure is to obtain a complete factorization of the denominator. In
the middle of the 19th century Hermite and Ostrogradsky developed algorithms to
compute the rational part of the primitive for the function without factoring
its denominator. More recently Horowitz rediscovered this method and discussed
its complexity. The problem of computing the transcendental part of the
primitive was finally solved by Lazard and Rioboo. This algorithm has been
implemented in the current versions of the most widely used symbolic integrators
such as MATLAB, Maple V and Mathematica 4.0. Modern developments in the theory
of integration of rational functions have been concentrated in the development
of algorithms that reduce the cost of operations, thereby extending the range of
problems that can be solved using realistic amounts of machine time. In spite of
the fact that the problem of integration of rational functions appears to be
solved both from a theoretical and symbolic point of view, the reality is that
much more work remains to be done. Among the difficulties encountered in the use
of symbolic integration packages is that the performance is dependent upon the
way the rational function is entered into the algorithm. The immediate goal of
this project is twofold: to develop and implement an efficient and robust
symbolic algorithm for the evaluation of definite integrals of rational
functions; and to investigate the dynamical and geometrical properties of the
rational Landen transformations. The long term goal of this project is to
develop a complete solution to the problem of definite integration in finite
terms. This will complement the work done by Lazard-Rioboo, Rioboo, Risch, and
Trager in the case of indefinite integration. Implementation of this solution
will have a profound impact on the current symbolic integrators.

Many problems in physics and engineering require the exact evaluation of
integrals in terms of the parameters appearing in those integrals. These
integrals come up in the study of particle physics and classical mechanics.
While it is not always possible to find such an expression, an efficient and
robust symbolic software package should give the result in closed form, or
decide whether such an expression is achievable. The goal of this project is to
develop algorithms that will expand upon the capabilities of existing software
packages that are widely used in industry and universities.
