
* 0070641
* Nonlinear Equations and Optimization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 08/01/2000,05/08/2003
* Carl Kelley,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2005
* USD 185,000.00

DMS 0070641 ABSTRACT.

The principal investigator will continue his research program in the numerical
solution of large systems of nonlinear equations and noisy optimization
problems. In the area of nonlinear equations the PI will continue his research
program on pseudo-transient continuation methods for nonlinear equations to the
partial differential algebraic equation (PDAE) setting and design and analyze
multilevel methods for fully iterative algorithms for parameter-dependent
families of compact fixed point problems. In the area of optimization, the
principal investigator will extend his work on sampling methods to problems with
``hidden constraints'', i.e. constraints whose violation can only be detected by
failure of the objective function to return a value, continue his development of
the implicit filtering with the design of a Levenberg-Marquardt form of the
algorithm, and investigate the performance of the DIRECT method both from the
theoretical viewpoint and as a way to identify hidden constraints. This aspect
of the PI's research involves undergraduates in a significant way.

Many processes and models in engineering and science are expressed as nonlinear
equations. Numerical simulation of these processes requires the rapid and
accurate solution of these equations and a clear understanding of the methods
and their limitations. With a high-quality simulator in hand, optimization can
be used in design. The optimization problems that arise in industrial design are
often noisy because of measurement or simulation error. The principal
investigator will continue his work on the computational solution of nonlinear
equations and optimization problems. The work will consist of study of
algorithms, needed to ensure robustness and reliability of simulations,
implementation on distributed memory computers, which is important for for rapid
turnaround, and applying the methods in collaborations with scientists and
engineers in industry, national laboratories, and academia. The work will be
used in (a) environmental modeling, measurement, and remediation, (b)
simulation, optimal design, and control in the aerospace industry, and in (c)
optimization of gas pipeline networks.


