
* 0071937
* Wave Turbulence in Atmospheric and Oceanic Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG, PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
* 09/01/2000,08/28/2000
* Leslie Smith,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 200,000.00

Smith 0071937 The investigator studies the mechanisms responsible for the
generation of slow, large-scale motions from fast, small-scale motions in
stratified turbulence and rotating, stratified turbulence. Because the earth's
atmosphere and oceans are stratified fluids in a rotating frame, the work is
highly relevant to geophysical applications. Many aspects of wave-turbulence
interactions are yet to be understood. For example, it is not clear if, when and
how small-scale 3D turbulence in the presence of waves can organize into large-
scale coherent structures (as in 2D flows). In purely rotating flow, the
investigator previously showed that white-noise forcing at small scales leads to
the generation of slow, large-scale, cyclonic vortical columns, if the Rossby
number is below a critical value of order one. This is surprising because recent
work using multiple scales analysis shows, at first order, decoupling between
fast, small-scale motions and slow, large-scale motions for a variety of wave-
turbulence systems including rotating flow. Several second-order mechanisms may
be responsible for the upscale energy transfer to slow modes in rotating
turbulence. This project goes a step further towards understanding the large-
scale dynamics in geophysical flows, by investigation of upscale energy transfer
in 3D stratified and rotating, stratified turbulence. The investigator explores
the necessary conditions leading to such upscale transfer and seeks to identify
the underlying mechanisms. Simplified systems of dispersive wave turbulence are
used to test understanding and for the development of statistical models. To
complement numerical simulations and analysis, she has also planned laboratory
experiments in a rotating tank, where the turbulence is driven by
differentially-rotating, rough top and bottom plates. Over relatively short time
periods in rotating and/or stratified flows, there is both experimental evidence
and mathematical support for the decoupling of slow, large-scale motions from
fast, small-scale motions. This means that, on time scales of perhaps days in
the atmosphere and weeks in the oceans, large-scale eddies and currents evolve
independently from small-scale turbulence. Another implication is that short-
term climate change is independent from rapid fluctuations of the conditions in
the atmosphere and oceans. Our numerical simulations for longer times, however,
show the generation of large-scale, coherent structures from small-scale
turbulence, and this coupling may be important for long-term weather prediction,
ocean circulaton and climate change. In the context of the atmosphere, one might
ask, can small-scale cumulus convection at length scales of about ten kilometers
generate large-scale eddies of several thousand kilometers in extent? The
transfer of energy from fast, small-scale motions to slow, large-scale motions
in three-dimensional, wave-turbulence systems such as rotating and stratified
flows has only recently been discovered, even though such transfer has been
studied for decades in two-dimensional flows. The present study involves
numerical simulations, modeling and analysis, and laboratory experiments in a
rotating tank. The goals are to deepen our understanding and improve our
capability to predict geophysical phenomena.
