
* 0072873
* Experiment-Based 3-D Computational Studies of Blood Flow in Stenotic Carotid Arteries with Dynamic Wall Properties
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
* 09/15/2001,09/12/2001
* Dalin Tang,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 163,000.00

The principal investigator and his colleagues use an experiment-based
computational approach to model blood flow in large stenotic arteries and
investigate critical flow and artery wall behaviors that may lead to artery
compression, plaque cap rupture, stroke and heart attack. Dynamic properties of
the stenotic arteries with plaque stiffness and geometry variations are
determined experimentally using hydrogel tubes whose mechanical properties are
close to those of bovine carotid arteries. This leads to a series of 3-D
nonlinear computational models with fluid-wall interactions based on the
experimental measurements. Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian formulation is used to
deal with free moving boundaries. Implicit methods including the SIMPLER
algorithm and fully coupled methods based on mesh-free generalized finite
differences with staggered grids, upwind techniques, and a consistent physical
interpolation technique are used to solve the fluid model. A sequence of
experiment-based thin- and thick-wall models are introduced to model the dynamic
nonlinear properties of the stenotic tube wall with large strain, deformation,
compression and collapse. An incremental boundary iteration method and an under-
relaxation technique are used to handle the fluid-wall interactions. Validated
by experimental data, results obtained are physiologically relevant and may
provide information helpful for early detection, diagnosis and prevention of
related cardiovascular diseases. The models and numerical methods developed are
applicable to a wide range of problems with fluid-structure interactions and can
be extended to include mass transfer, structures of arteries and plaques,
endothelial responses, and arterial remodeling. Stenosis, a constriction in
blood vessels, is one of the leading causes of death in the western world. The
investigators and their colleagues couple experiments with computations to model
blood flow in large stenotic arteries and investigate critical flow and artery
wall behaviors that may lead to artery compression, plaque cap rupture, stroke
and heart attack. The problem is difficult because of the high complexity of
artery structure and its nonlinear mechanical properties, strong blood and
artery interactions, and critical flow conditions caused by severe stenosis.
Dynamic properties of the stenotic arteries are determined experimentally using
bovine carotid arteries and hydrogel tubes, whose properties are close to those
of bovine carotid arteries. A series of 3-D nonlinear computational models with
fluid-wall interactions, based on the experimental measurements, are solved by a
novel numerical method to quantify conditions under which artery compression and
plaque cap rupture may occur. Validated by experimental data, these results can
be helpful for early detection, diagnosis and prevention of related
cardiovascular diseases. The models and numerical methods developed are
applicable to a wide range of problems with fluid-structure interactions and
complex geometries. The models can be extended to include mass transfer,
structures of arteries and plaques, grafts and stents, endothelial responses and
arterial remodeling. As applications of biotechnology, the results obtained can
be used to improve the design of medical devices such as grafts and stents.
