
* 0072521
* Dynamics of Lava Domes
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/31/2000
* Neil Balmforth,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Balmforth 0072521 Lava domes are a common geological formation, and their
geometry sets them apart as one of the more simple types of lava flow. Moreover,
domes often have a relatively low aspect ratio and evolve slowly. These
observations can be used as ingredients in building simple mathematical models
of expanding and cooling fluid domes; this proposal surrounds the development of
such models. In particular, lava is considered as a solidifying, non-Newtonian
fluid with strongly temperature-dependent material qualities and an intrinsic
yield stress. The wide array of physical ingredients to the problem make the
mathematical modelling especially challenging. The project exploits the simple
geometry, slow evolution and low aspect ratio of the dome to asymptotically
reduce the governing equations to a simpler form. The reduction furnishes
"shallow-lava equations," in much the same way that the "shallow-ice equations"
are derived and extensively used to model ice sheets and glaciers. Differences
arise because of the viscoplastic nature of silicic lava, and because
solidification creates a solid crust overlying the dome that can contribute
significantly to the balance of forces, especially at the disk's edge. The
mathematical approach are complemented with an experimental one in which
laboratory fluids are used as analogue models of the lava. Both approaches are
used to explore the structure and evolution of the dome, partly with the aim of
learning more about how lava behaves as a fluid. For example, some domes lose
axisymmetry in what might be an intrinsic morphological instability; this
pattern formation process is explored in that light. Lava domes occur in many
geological settings both on Earth and on many other planets and moons of the
solar system. These structures form when crystal-rich silicic magma is pushed up
through vents onto roughly horizontal surfaces, and often occur inside the
craters created by volcanic eruptions. The shape of a lava dome is especially
simple in comparison to most other lava flows. Hence, a first step in
understanding lava flows in general is to explore those domes. Moreover, despite
their slow growth, domes are natural hazards because they can be the setting of
violent and dangerous events: domes can rupture and release confined gas in a
pyroclastic outflow (an extremely hot and fast-moving current of air and ash),
or collapse at their peripheries to create landslides and debris flows. The
proposal outlines a mathematical and experimental approach to the modelling of
lava domes. The purpose is to build models of the dome's structure and
evolution, and compare these models with the real geological structures. By
modelling the domes in this way, more will be learned about how lava flows, and
ultimately this may provide insight into the hazards associated with them.
