
* 0073698
* Research in Robust and Efficient Computational Methods for Partial Differential Equations Arising in Fluid Flows and Electromagnetics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,05/23/2002
* Pavel Bochev,TX,University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 103,089.00

This project is directed towards the development, analysis and numerical
validation of new finite element methods for fluid flows and electromagnetics.
The research in methods for fluid flows will focus on applications of
nonstandard least-squares principles in the construction of the numerical
algorithms. While for incompressible viscous flows conventional least-squares
principles have established themselves as a viable alternative to mixed Galerkin
methods, such principles are not completely satisfactory in the context of high
Re or transonic flows. To circumvent existing computational defects of L2-norm
methods such as sensitivity to singularities, lack of norm equivalence and etc.,
the new algorithms will be based on mesh-dependent and negative-norm least-
squares principles. The emphasis of the second research direction will be on
eddy current computations in three dimensions. To address computational
complexity of 3D simulations algorithms will use equivalent potential
formulations of the governing equations. The issue of proper gauge selection for
the potentials will receive a thorough and systematic examination so as to
ensure well-posed sets of differential equations. Algorithmic development will
pay special attention to the efficient implementation of the relevant boundary
and interface conditions where least-squares terms will be used to enforce these
conditions weakly.



The common thread which links the two principal research directions of this
project is the focus on new computational algorithms for partial differential
equations. Such equations arise in virtually every field of science and
engineering and their efficient numerical solution is critical for our ability
to conduct computer simulations of physical processes ranging from atmospheric
motions to flows of current in superconductors. As a result, development of high
performance computational tools which enable realistic simulations will play an
increasingly important role for the future advances in science and technology.
The impact of such computational algorithms will be felt not only in terms of
tremendous cost and/or time savings made possible by replacing field experiments
by virtual, computer experiments, but also by the fact that in some instances
computer models may be the only feasible design approach. In the focus of this
project is the development of such tools for differential equations arising in
modeling of fluid flows and electromagnetic fields. Two specific applications
that we have in mind are computation of three-dimensional eddy currents and
simulations of transonic and high Reynolds number flows. One motivation for our
research is the practical relevance of these problems. For instance, solution of
the eddy current equations arises in such varied areas as development of
toroidal field magnets for fusion power, modeling of plasma physics phenomena,
and design of tape heads, while transonic and high Re flows are relevant to
design of aircraft and modeling of dispersion of pollutants. At the same time
numerical solution of these problems in realistic three-dimensional settings
continues to be an outstanding and challenging computational task. Thus, our
research is also motivated by the real and existing need to develop efficient
and robust computational tools for electromagnetics and fluid flow applications
which can be used in such realistic settings.


