
* 0073056
* Algorithms for the Inverse Problem of Matrix Construction
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 08/01/2000,07/24/2000
* Moody Chu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 116,000.00

The inverse problem of matrix construction arises in many areas of important
applications. Matrices under construction are supposed to satisfy certain
specific constraints. The constraints could be inherited intrinsically from the
physical feasibility of a certain mechanical structure or could be driven
extrinsically by the desirable property of a certain design parameter. This
proposal intends to extend the investigation that the PI has been conducting in
the past years with emphasis on the the development of numerical algorithms for
application to challenging inverse problems. Four specific inverse problems of
matrix construction will be studied via three possible numerical approaches.
Techniques to be used involves computer experiments, high resolution graphics
and symbolic manipulation, in conjunction with mathematical analysis. This
project is expected to find important applications ranging from new development
of numerical algorithms to theoretic solution of difficult problems. Since
matrix reconstruction with specified properties arises from a remarkably wide
area of disciplines, the resulting technology would have substantial impact on
the progress in scientific and engineering fields.

In the era of information and digital technologies, massive data processing
becomes an imperative task at almost every level of applications. In many
situations the digitized information is gathered and stored as a data matrix.
Nonetheless, because most of the information gathering devices or methods have
only finite bandwidth, one cannot avoid the fact that the data collected often
are not exact. Signals received by antenna arrays often are contaminated by
instrumental noises; astronomical images acquired by telescopes often are
blurred by atmospheric turbulence; and even empirical data obtained in
laboratories often do not satisfy intrinsic physical constraints. Before any
forward analysis technique can be applied, it is important to first reconstruct
the data matrices so that the inexactness is reduced while certain feasibility
conditions are satisfied. The general objective of this proposal is to develop
numerical algorithms to carry out this kind of data reconstruction task. The
work in this proposal concerns the mathematical theory and the numerical
implementation of three algorithms for four specific inverse construction
problems. This investigation could lead to improved techniques for use in
several national strategic areas, including ground-based astro-imaging
processing, medicine, communications, and laser technology.
