
* 0073631
* New High-Resolution Semi-Discrete Central Schemes: Derivation, Applications and Local Error Analysis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2000,08/13/2000
* Alexander Kurganov,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 09/30/2001
* USD 65,000.00

Central schemes may serve as universal finite-difference methods for numerically
solving hyperbolic conservation laws, Hamilton-Jacobi equations and closely
related convection-diffusion equations. Such schemes are not tied to the
specific eigen-structure of the problem, and hence can be implemented in a
straightforward manner as black-box solvers for a wide variety of nonlinear
equations governing the spontaneous evolution of large gradient phenomena. The
first-order Lax-Friedrichs scheme is the forerunner for suchcentral schemes. The
second-order Nessyahu-Tadmor scheme offers high resolution while retaining the
simplicity of Riemann-solver-free approach. In the convective regime the
improved resolution of the Nessyahu-Tadmor scheme and its generalizations is
achieved by using high-order piecewise polynomial reconstructions and high-order
quadrature formulas for computing the flux integrals. At the same time, this
family of staggered central schemes suffers from excessive numerical viscosity
when a sufficiently small time step is enforced, e.g., due to the presence of
(degenerate) diffusive term. Recently Kurganov and Tadmor introduced a new
family of central schemes, which retain the simplicity of staggered central
schemes, yet they enjoy a smaller numerical viscosity. In particular, these
schemes admit a simple semi-discrete formulation. This project aims to develop
new, minimally dissipative fully- and semi-discrete central schemes for
conservation laws. The main ideas behind the construction of these new schemes
is the use of more precise information of the local propagation speed, and
realizing the (non-smooth part of the) approximate solution in terms of its cell
averages integrated over the nonsymmetric Riemann fans of varying size.

Hyperbolic conservation laws, Hamilton-Jacobi equations and convection-
diffusion equations are of great practical importance. They govern a variety of
physical phenomena that appear in fluid mechanics, gas dynamics,
magnetohydrodynamics, astrophysics, groundwater flow, meteorology,
semiconductors, reactive flows, two-phase flow in oil reservoirs, non-Newtonian
flows, front propagation and several other areas. Financial modeling, traffic
flow, differential games, optimal control and image enhancement are among the
most recent applications of the above models.Genuinely multidimensional high-
resolution semi-discrete central schemes provide a rather simple and universal
method for solving these problems. At the same time, the computational
efficiency of central schemes is extremely high. For example, recent numerical
experiments in three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamics demonstrate that using
central schemes allows to achieve the desired resolution about 25 times faster
in comparison with other methods. In general, the advantage of the new semi-
discrete central schemes over alternative upwind methods is particularly
amplified when they are used to solve complicated multidimensional systems
arising in practice. The proposed schemes will be also applied to such important
problems as compressible and incompressible Euler and Navier-Stokes equations,
multi-phase model of geometric optics, multicomponent flow and compressible
bubbles models, moving boundaries problems, shock reflection problem for the
unsteady transonic small disturbance equation and others.
