
* 0074174
* Adaptive Discontinuous Galerkin Methods of Transient Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2000,09/08/2000
* Slimane Adjerid,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The investigators develop very efficient adaptive discontinuous Galerkin (DG)
methods for transient hyperbolic and singularly perturbed convection-diffusion
problems. These methods use discontinuous bases and thus are very effective at
capturing discontinuities. In addition, they simplify adaptive h-, p-, and hp-
refinement, are simple to implement on unstructured meshes with irregular
boundaries, parallelize very well, and satisfy local (element level)
conservation principles. Adaptive enrichment by h-, p-, and r-refinement or
combinations thereof has typically been guided by a posteriori estimates of
discretization errors. The investigators study asymptotically correct error
estimates of discretization errors under h- or p-refinement that provide very
reliable measures of solution accuracy. A posteriori error estimates are
developed for linear and nonlinear hyperbolic and singularly perturbed
convection-diffusion problems. The investigators implement these DG methods for
large-scale problems on modern parallel systems ranging from advanced
supercomputers to clusters of workstations. Parallel procedures must address
heterogeneity at the processor, memory, and communications levels as adaptivity
greatly complicates matters. A balanced parallel computation may cease to remain
so under adaptive h- or p-refinement. Computational loads must dynamically be
redistributed during the solution process to restore and maintain balance.
Procedures to migrate work between the processors so as to minimize the
computational time have hardly been addressed in such a heterogeneous
environment. Complex realistic computer simulations of physical problems like
the flow about a vehicle, weather prediction, and materials processing require
long times on the fastest supercomputers. The investigators develop very
efficient and reliable computational techniques based on the discontinuous
Galerkin method that should have advantages for parallel and network
computation. Accuracy and reliability of the results are guided by estimates of
solution errors that are automatically obtained as part of the computation.
These are used to create adaptive procedures that assign computational resources
to regions where they are needed most. The efficiency provided by adaptivity
leads to more accurate computer simulations, better products, and shorter design
cycles.
