
* 0074240
* Moving Mesh Methods for Numerical Solution of Time Dependent Partial Differential Equations in Two and Three Spatial Dimensions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,07/24/2000
* Weizhang Huang,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,000.00

The investigator continues to develop adaptive moving mesh methods for the
numerical solution of time dependent, multi-dimensional partial differential
equations. The research work will be focused on a new moving mesh method, the
moving mesh partial differential equation approach proposed by the investigator
and his collaborators. The approach has been implemented in one and two
dimensions for generating non-singular structured and unstructured adaptive
meshes and successfully applied to a number of problems. Moreover, the approach
has led to a unifying framework describing previous methods, providing a new
theoretical underpinning, and building reliable new methods. The objectives of
the proposal are to further improve the efficiency and robustness of the two
dimensional method, to apply it to practical problems, and to implement the
three dimensional method.

This project is concerned with the development of new computational methods
which are essential to enhance the ability of scientists and engineers to solve
large scale computational problems that are crucial to our economy, environment,
and security. The research is focused on development of adaptive numerical
techniques or mesh adaptation methods, where the special moving features of the
particular problem being solved are adapted to. Mesh adaptation has recently
played an indispensable role in the numerical simulation of many large-scale
problems arising from science, engineering, and industry, such as those
involving shock waves, boundary layers, ignition propagation fronts, and multi-
material interface. These problems have a distinct common feature, that is,
their solution changes significantly only in a small portion of the physical
domain and the resolution of the solution in this portion dominates the quality
of the whole simulation. Standard (non-adaptive) techniques often fail to solve
these problems because they spend effort evenly on the entire domain and thus
require formidable resources of computer CPU time and memory to obtain a
reasonable degree of resolution. On the other hand, adaptive mesh methods gain
significant economies by paying most attention to the small portion of the
physical domain where the solution changes most. The moving mesh method under
study is a natural type of adaptive mesh methods which are designed to capture
the moving features of the physical solution. The method is suitable for
parallel computing and has proven to be an indispensable tool for use in the
simulation of many industrial manufacturing problems. As an important part of
the proposed research project, two specific applications will be focused on. The
first will be the numerical simulation of chemical transport in groundwater
aquifers. Groundwater supplies much of the water use in the United States. The
wide spread degradation of groundwater quality from chemical contamination has
recently prompted extensive research for simulating and predicting chemical
behaviors in the subsurface. The application of the moving mesh methods will
provide accurate, efficient, and robust numerical algorithms for simulating
chemical transport in groundwater and therefore for effectively protecting and
managing the groundwater resources. The other application will be on the
analysis of dynamic stall of airfoil for better understanding the physical
mechanisms which cause the unsteady flow behavior in the high-angle-of-attack
flight condition found common with modern fighter and civil transport aircrafts.
