
* 0074326
* A Newton-Galerkin Algorithm for Variational Investigations. Focus: Nonlinear Elliptic BVP
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/25/2000
* John Neuberger,AZ,Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 85,000.00

ABSTRACT:

The proposed research primarily concerns finding, describing, and approximating
solutions to semilinear elliptic zero-Dirichlet boundary value problems. While
the Principal Investigator's first priority has been to prove existence and
nodal structure theorems, his current efforts center on computational
investigations. The PI will advance the numerical techniques used in the study
of nonlinear differential equations in general and elliptic boundary value
problems in particular. The PI's experiments support conjectures and reveal
underlying structure as well as provide approximations. Secondary objectives
include involving his students in the implementation of software solutions and
refinement of algorithms. Lastly, the PI will prove convergence results relating
to steepest descent, Newton's method, and Galerkin-type approximations. That
these results may lead to analytical existence and nodal structure theorems is
an additional source of motivation to the PI. The techniques to be used rely on
the variational method, whereby solutions to the PDE are characterized as
critical points of an associated nonlinear functional. The PI is currently in
the process of decomposing function space into Newton flow-invariant manifolds
and basins of attraction. These subsets of function space will be important to
both numerical and analytical investigations.

The proposed research is relevant to important areas of mathematics and science.
Almost any scientific area concerns rates of change, hence differential
equations. Many of these areas rely on the class of differential equations known
as elliptic, and most of the difficult and physically significant problems are
nonlinear. The PI's work is on the boundary of the computational and the
analytical. An exciting new use of computational mathematics is in the
investigation of nonlinear functional analysis. The PI has new techniques in
nonlinear functional analysis for studying the underlying structure of this
class of problem and believes that the techniques may generalize to an even
wider class. Thus, funding this line of inquiry will benefit a large area of
mathematics, soften or solve some long standing open problems in nonlinear
elliptic differential equations, and be of use to many physical scientists.
