
* 0074310
* Modeling Flow in Porous Media with Vugular Meso-scale Heterogeneities
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Hydrologic Sciences
* 09/01/2000,03/15/2004
* Todd Arbogast,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2004
* USD 240,000.00

Arbogast 0074310

Sedimentary rocks sometimes contain void regions called vugs that are much
larger than the usual intergranular pores. Vugular heterogeneities raise both
practical and theoretical problems for understanding fluid flow through such
rocks at the field scale. For example, standard sampling methods are at a scale
too small to resolve these heterogeneities. Moreover it is nontrivial to
identify the correct physical formalism for modeling flow or interpreting flow
measurements, and it is not clear that traditional homogenization approaches are
applicable. In this project, the investigators tie microscopic (CT scan) and
macroscopic measurements of a large sample (about 17,000 cubic cm) of Cretaceous
carbonate rock containing centimeter-scale vugs directly to high-resolution
computation of flow fields. This framework allows the testing of different
physical models for flow in the geometry of the sample. The specific objectives
are to: (1) Map CT scan pixels of the sample to permeability and porosity; (2)
Simulate flow in the micro-scale system; (3) Determine the macro-scale governing
relations for single phase flow; and (4) Determine the macroscopic model
parameters in terms of the microscale characterization. Research in algorithms
and upscaling procedures is conducted to achieve the second and third
objectives. Subsequent numerical experiments determine the influence of
alternative depositional environments and diagenetic histories by changing the
connectivity of the vugs and the permeability distribution of the matrix
material. This results finally in the ability to more confidently predict flow
in vugular media in full-field simulations.

The flow of fluids through porous rock is of economic and environmental
interest. Examples include oil and gas production, obtaining adequate water
supplies (groundwater accounts for about one third of the water used in the US,
with many cities depending exclusively on wells), and remediating subsurface
contamination at Superfund sites and many Department of Energy facilities. The
sedimentary rocks through which these flows occur sometimes contain relatively
large holes or void regions called vugs. The dissolution of fossil fragments is
a common mechanism for creating vugs in carbonate rocks, which contain more than
half the world's oil reserves and comprise many of the biggest aquifers in the
US. Vugs are more conducive to fluid flow than the much smaller pore space
between the rock grains, and this raises both both practical and theoretical
problems for understanding large-scale flows. This project aims to construct
models for this type of rock that predict the effective flow properties over
hundreds of yards to several miles. Because direct experimentation over these
distances is not feasible, an essential component of the research is the
integration of intermediate-scale physical and large-scale computational
experiments. This effort also relies on basic research in numerical algorithms
and modeling techniques. Establishing the correct relations governing the flow
of fluids in such rocks enables more confident predictions from full-field
simulations.
