
* 0074299
* Adaptive Multigrid Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2000,09/06/2000
* Jinchao Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 155,000.00

ABSTRACT

(NSF proposal: DMS-0074299, PI: Jinchao Xu)

The proposed project is on the study of advanced solution methods for partial
differential equations that arise from scientific and engineering applications.
The theme of research is on the development, application and analysis of
multigrid methods. The multigrid method is among the most powerful techniques
for solving large scale linear and nonlinear systems arising from the
discretization of partial differential equations. But the method has not been
used in practice as often as they should be (because it is often not easy to
code and to use), nor as efficiently as they could be (because it is often not
easy to get the method work correctly). Our research is, on one hand, to develop
special type of multigrid methods that are relatively easier to use for general
users for some standard applications and is, on the other hand, to develop
multigrid methods that are carefully tailored for some special class of
practically interesting problems. One major component of the proposed research
is a systematical investigation on various fundamental theoretical issues
related to multigrid methods in general and also theoretical questions related
to the algorithms to be developed for several specific problems of practical
interests.

The multigrid methods we propose to develop and study are expected to be
applicable to a large class of practical problems including numerical
simulations for electrochemical power devices (batteries) and advanced materials
such as lattice block materials and liquid crystalline materials. These
multigrid methods are expected to make a major impact in these and related
applications and in particular to make it possible to simulate these problems in
three dimensions in such a way that other traditional approaches may not be
feasible. For example, the proposed study of advanced numerical methods for
simulating electrochemical batteries has been and will be making a significant
contribution to advanced battery technologies and manufactures that are vitally
important in our everyday life, from the watch and the camera flash to
electromobilies, modern space vehicles and wireless communications in
information technology. Because of the practical backgrounds of these problems,
the proposers and their research associates and graduate students are expected
to actively interact and collaborate with physicists, engineers, computational
scientists and practitioners from industries.
