
* 0074553
* Multiscale Methods for the Rapid Solution of Boundary Integral Equations in Geometrically Complicated Domains
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2000,08/04/2000
* Johannes Tausch,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 73,000.00

The proposed research is concerned with multiscale discretizations of boundary
integral operators on geometrically complicated surfaces. The standard approach,
generating multiscale discretizations in parameter spaces and lifting them on
the surface, is not efficient when a large number of parameter patches is
required. This project is concerned with an alternative approach to multiscale
discretizations. The basis is generated in a hierarchical decomposition of the
three-space and subsequently restricted on the boundary surface. This
construction leads to a sparse representation of the integral operator even for
complicated geometries. It is planned to apply this approach to boundary
integral formulations of general elliptic as well as time dependent parabolic
problems.

The range of important engineering applications which the proposed research
could impact is quite diverse. Examples include the analysis of integrated
circuit interconnect and micromechanical systems. In these areas finding
computationally efficient numerical methods for complex three dimensional
structures is important in order to generate prototypes interactively on a
computer. In the past the major computational tool has been the Fast Multipole
Method (FMM), because of its relative simplicity and its flexibility to geometry
and integral operator. We construct a multiscale basis by using a hierarchical
decomposition of the three-space. The same hierarchy of cubes is also used by
the FMM, and therefore the proposed approach is able to combine the flexibility
of the FMM with the strengths of multiscale methods. Thus the planned research
can lead to faster and more robust algorithms as well as to a better
understanding of theoretical and practical issues of both approaches.
