
* 0074307
* Computational Problems in Multicomponent Materials and Multiphase Fluids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,07/19/2000
* John Lowengrub,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 09/30/2001
* USD 130,000.00

The main objective of this proposal is to investigate processes fundamental to
the behavior of multicomponent fluids and multiphase materials. We will do this
by (1) developing and applying state-of-the-art numerical methods to large scale
computation and (2) analytical, numerical and modelling studies of important
constituent processes. More specifically, our focus will be on developing,
implementing and analyzing successively more realistic models of the diffusional
evolution of microstructure in solid/solid phase transitions. Our investigation
of multiphase fluids includes a study of ternary fluid flow where only two of
the components are immiscible. These projects involve fundamental physical
processes whose phenomenology is basic to understanding the behavior of real
fluids and the material properties of solids. Both are characterized by the
presence of multiple constitutive components, complex pattern formation and/or
singularities (i.e. spatial complexity). Although these processes arise in very
different physical phenomena (fluids versus solids), both involve free boundary
problems where the motion of a bounding interface, separating the different
components, is driven by a competition between surface energy and either an
instability or multi-body interactions. As such, they can be treated using a
common set of analytical and computational tools. The highly nonlinear nature of
these problems makes fast, accurate and robust numerical methods essential to
their study.

In this proposal, we bring together mathematical and numerical analysis,
modelling, and large-scale scientific computation to study certain fundamental
problems in fluid dynamics and materials science. Our focus will be on
developing, implementing and analyzing successively more realistic models of the
diffusional evolution of microstructure in solid/solid phase transitions. These
transformations are an important method of processing multicomponent metallic
alloys such such as steels. The result of this process is the formation of a
multiphase microstructure, which is a key variable in setting the macroscopic
mechanical properties (i.e. stiffness, strength and toughness) of the alloy. The
microstructure is characterized by regions of different metallic components
separated from one another by interfaces. The goal of our research is to
accurately model and simulate the formation of microstructure in alloys in order
to provide metallurgists with a recipe for generating new alloys with desirable
material properties. Our investigation of multiphase fluids involves modelling
liquid/liquid extraction processes that are widely used in chemical production
and waste processing. In these processes, two (or more) fluids are placed in
contact and a contaminant in one of the fluids diffuses preferentially into
another. The first fluid thus is cleaned and is then extracted. In these
processes, two (or more) fluids are placed in contact and a contaminant in one
of the fluids diffuses preferentially into another. The first fluid thus is
cleaned and is then extracted. If the contaminated fluid is broken up into small
droplets, the interfacial area and hence mass transfer is increased. We will use
analysis, modeling and large scale scientific computation to study reaction and
mixing rates within these systems. The ultimate goal of this work is to provide
a theoretical foundation for improving the performance of liquid/liquid
extractors. Although the two problems described above arise from very different
physical processes (fluids versus solids), they are similar in the sense that
the relevant phenomena is strongly influenced by surface tension at the
respective interfaces. Consequently, they can be studied using common analytical
and computational tools. The highly complex nature of these problems makes fast,
accurate and robust numerical methods essential to their study.
