
* 0075731
* Optimization of Parabolic Systems: Iterative Methods, Suboptimal Controls, and Preconditioning
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,07/28/2000
* Matthias Heinkenschloss,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2004
* USD 140,000.00

Optimization of linear or nonlinear parabolic differential equations in the
context of optimal control, optimal design, or parameter estimation plays an
important role in science and engineering. Algorithms for the solution of
parabolic equations often involve marching in time, starting from an initial
condition. In optimization, however, the values of the solution of the parabolic
equation at later times feed into the optimization at early times. This coupling
in time makes the practical solution of these very large-scale optimization
problems challenging. To cope with storage and computer time demands required by
an exact optimization of parabolic systems, so-called suboptimal control
techniques, such as reduced bases techniques and instantaneous control have
recently been proposed. The analysis of these techniques is still incomplete and
the limits of their applicability are not clearly described. This research
integrates selected suboptimal control techniques into an optimization
framework, where they are interpreted as truncated iterative methods or are used
as preconditioners in optimization methods. This improves our theoretical
understanding of these techniques and broadens their applicability. The
resulting methods are applied to specific optimal control problems in or related
to fluid mechanics.

Optimal control attempts to determine system parameters or inputs to increase
the performance of the system. For example, micro electromechanical systems may
be used to alter the flow characteristics on an aircraft wing to reduce drag, or
heaters may be adjusted to achieve a desired temperature profile in a furnace
while minimizing energy consumption. Many systems can be modeled by mathematical
equations. In this case mathematical techniques can be used, at least in
principle, to determine the optimal system inputs. For systems that can be
adequately modeled by moderately complex mathematical equations this is done
routinely and successfully. Detailed mathematical descriptions of other systems,
including flow over an aircraft wing or the temperature distribution in a
furnace, however, are so complex that present mathematical techniques for the
determination of optimal control strategies require such large computer
resources that render them impractical. The goal of this research is to develop
and analyze computational mathematics tools for the determination of optimal
control strategies for a class of complex systems and the demonstration of the
practicability of these tools using selected applications in fluid mechanics.
