
* 0077790
* Theoretical Frameworks for Ecological Dynamics Subject to Stoichiometric Constraints
* DMS,POPULATION DYNAMICS, ECOSYSTEM STUDIES, OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/16/2003
* Yang Kuang,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 314,993.00

Kuang 0077790 All organisms are composed of multiple chemical elements such as
carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus. Recent research in the area known as
ecological stoichiometry has highlighted the ecological importance of the
relative abundance of chemical constituents, known to vary considerably among
species and across trophic levels. However, most theoeretical studies in ecology
have until very recently ignored the sources and consequences of this chemical
heterogeneity. The investigator and his colleagues undertake theoretical
investigations of ecological stoichiometry. They develop a relatively new
theoretical framework for ecological dynamics that explicitly incorporates
stoichiometric constraints. This base model involves a stoichiometric
counterpart of the familiar Rosenzweig-MacArthur equations in which the
effective carrying capacity of the resource species and the transfer efficiency
of the consumer species are constrained by stoichiometric principles.
Introduction of stoichiometric considerations in these equations (here, akin to
"food quality") allows for a rich array of ecologically realistic dynamics,
including deterministic extinction of the consumer species when resources are
abundant but of poor quality. They expand this model in five different
directions, to explore ecological realities (i.e., complications) whose
consideration has proved illuminating in other, non-stoichiometric settings.
Specifically, they analyze the dynamics of 1) a multi-nutrient model; 2)
trophically complex models in which multiple consumer species share a resource;
3) time delays in nutrient recycling that are a realistic component of
terrestrial ecosystems; 4) two patch models featuring habitat heterogeneity and
dispersal of the consumer; and 5) age structured models in which juvenile and
adult consumers differ in their nutrient requirements. The project aims to
provide an analytically rigorous foundation for burgeoning empirical research
into ecological stoichiometry. All living things, including humans, are
constructed of approximately the same set of basic building blocks, chemical
elements such as carbon (C), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and several dozen
more in smaller amounts. However, different organisms contain different
proportions of these key elements in their biomass and thus must extract these
elements from their environment to differing degrees. In many situations, the
environment does not provide these key nutrient elements in the abundance and
proportions that are optimal for organism growth and reproduction. Thus, the
chemical environment of life may set limits on the success of organisms in
various situations. In this project the investigators use mathematical models to
simulate the flow of multiple chemical elements in natural food webs to better
understand how the requirements of living things for multiple chemical elements
establish key feedbacks between the living and non-living world. This work is
important for two reasons. First, it may provide a better fundamental
understanding of how chemical elements move through food webs. Second, improved
fundamental knowledge of how nutrients move in the environment and how to
simulate those movements with mathematical tools may help predict and manage
natural and human-dominated ecosystems, including those affected by nutrient
inputs from human activities (e.g. N and P inputs from fertilizer, sewage) or by
global change (e.g. effects of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide on C and
nutrient flow in the environment).
