
* 0077663
* Homogenization Applied to Integrate Across Spatial and Temporal Scales in Forest/Insect Ecology
* DMS,POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,05/10/2005
* James Powell,UT,Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 340,850.00

Powell 0077663 In one ecological problem of current interest all the elements
exist for application and testing of homogenization to resolve the scale issue
and simulate climate and human impacts on outbreak insect species. The
investigator and his colleagues have developed a deterministic spatial model of
Mountain Pine Beetle (MPB, Dendroctonus ponderosae) dispersal and mass-attack of
pine hosts. The model is validated and descriptive on spatial scales of hectares
and time scales of days. In this project they use techniques of homogenization
on the MPB/host system to construct a forest scale (> 100 hectare/years) model
reflecting the large-scale emergent consequences of current small-scale spatial
and temporal models of insect development, dispersal, and response to climate.
Direct computation on such large scales would be prohibitive; similar
difficulties face most ecological simulations involving spatio-temporal
heterogeneity at realistic scales and life-system/dispersal interactions. The
investigators develop homogenization procedures that make this type of
ecological simulation generally tractable, and implement and test these
procedures in the MPB/host system. The homogenization procedure generates an
integro-difference equation (IDE), operating with year-long clock `ticks' on
landscape scales. In a validation phase, the IDE model is used to classify
landscapes. Statistically analyzing misclassifications in comparison to aerial
imagery makes the simulation methodology self-correcting. Finally, scenario
studies are used to examine consequences of hypothetical climate and management
trajectories on host/insect dynamics. This illustrates the power of
homogenization approaches in an ecological context, and provides needed examples
to make these techniques accessible to biological and environmental researchers.
The method of homogenization is a mathematical technique that allows deduction
of large-scale properties from deterministic small-scale models. To the best of
our knowledge the method of homogenization has never been applied to ecological
problems, where issues of scale are the focus of much debate. One possible angle
of attack is joint use of models and simulation, followed by validation with
spatially explicit data. Direct computational approaches to ecological problems
with full description of spatial heterogeneity and climatic variation are
extremely difficult due to interaction of scales in time and space. The
difficulty is exacerbated on the one hand by the paucity of validated,
deterministic spatial models at any ecological scale, and by the difficulty of
extended spatial observations on the other. In this project the investigators
and his colleagues apply the technique of homogenization to the Mountain Pine
Beetle/Lodgepole Pine ecosystem to resolve the scale issue and simulate climate
and human impacts on population outbreaks of insect species.


