
* 0077971
* Mechanochemical Energy Transduction in Protein Motors
* DMS,CELLULAR ORGANIZATION, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/31/2000
* Hongyun Wang,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 103,000.00

Wang 0077971 ATP (adenosine triphosphate) is the universal chemical energy
molecule in all living cells. ATP driven protein motors play a central role in
many cell functions. For example, kinesin drives intracellular vesicle
transportation and moves chromosomes during mitosis; myosin drives muscle
contraction, and the V-ATPases regulate intracellular acidity. Understanding the
operating principles of the ATP driven motors is crucial to comprehending
intracellular protein transport and cell motility. Structural studies are
providing the atomic details of motor proteins, and are revealing more
information about the conformational changes associated with the chemical
reactions they catalyze. Current experimental technologies permit measuring
forces of a single protein motor with piconewton precision and motions with
nanometer resolution. These advances, along with advances in mathematical
modeling and computer power, make it possible to explore the mechanochemical
energy transduction in molecular motors in unprecedented detail. In this
project, the investigator and colleagues pursue the mathematical and physical
issues that arose in the previous studies of F1 ATPase. These concern the
molecular details of how protein motors should be modeled and what mathematical
formulations are adequate for modeling them. In particular, the study focuses on
the mechanism of force generation at the catalytic site during the ATP
hydrolysis cycle. Resolution of this key process will illuminate the operating
principles of this ATP driven motor, and likely other protein motors as well. To
accommodate more sophisticated modeling, the investigator develops methods for
analyzing protein structures and solving complex model equations. The results of
these studies set the stage for modeling the mechanochemical energy transduction
in myosin and kinesin dimers. The approach is to model the continuous stochastic
motion of the motor using stochastic differential equations and couple these to
the chemical reactions described by discrete Markov processes. The model
equations are constructed from basic physical principles, structural data, and
biochemical and biophysical measurements. These equations are then analyzed
numerically. The hope is that this will lead to a unified view of ATP driven
motors. To facilitate the fast growing field of biotechnology, it is necessary
to deduce concise mechanisms for biological systems from experimental results.
This requires the application of fundamental principles from the mathematical
and physical sciences. The purpose of this interdisciplinary project is to study
the mechanisms by which proteins use chemical energy to generate mechanical
forces. In turn, these forces drive a wide variety of cellular processes
essential to life. In all living cells, the universal chemical energy molecule
is ATP (adenosine triphosphate). ATP is produced using the energy extracted from
food, and the life of every cell depends on processes that are powered by ATP.
For example, muscle contraction is directly driven by the ATP protein motor
myosin. Therefore, understanding the operating principles of the ATP protein
motors is central to comprehending the life of cells.
