
* 0085339
* An NSF Workshop on Mathematics and Robotics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Mechanics of Materials and Str, ROBOTICS
* 07/15/2000,07/26/2000
* Florian Potra,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 36,999.00

The investigator and his colleagues organize a workshop to explore
opportunities in robotics for synergistic collaborations among engineers,
computer scientists, and mathematicians. The workshop brings together engineers,
computer scientists, and mathematicians to discuss examples of research needs in
robotics, to look for common themes, and to explore new ideas, rooted in
mathematics, that could advance this area. A major product of the workshop is a
report that summarizes the present state of the art and that lays out future
opportunities for collaborative research. Robotics is concerned with the design
of mechanical manipulators, the systems needed to control them, and various
applications such as materials handling, assembly, exploration in extreme
environments, prosthetics, and minimally invasive surgery. For their solution,
problems in robotics have drawn heavily on techniques and ideas from engineering
and computer science. It is becoming apparent that progress on significant open
problems requires greater involvement of modern mathematics. This workshop
combines engineers, computer scientists, and mathematicians in a joint
exploration of needs and opportunities in robotics. The workshop report is
expected to stimulate both new interactions among researchers and new insights
and approaches to this important class of problems.
