
* 0094179
* CAREER: Regularization methods for fluid/filament interactions in three dimensions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,09/22/2006
* Ricardo Cortez,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 344,000.00

Cortez 0094179 The investigator develops, analyzes, and applies computational
techniques for the motion of elastic filaments embedded in an incompressible
fluid. This general situation arises in many physical contexts, including the
motion of microorganisms, swimming of aquatic animals, fluid flow around elastic
bodies, bubble motion and more. The project encompasses the development of
numerical methods for flows corresponding to a wide range of length scales. The
methods are based on the use of a force field along filaments made of localized
but smooth terms rather than delta distributions. Regular expressions for the
fluid and filament velocities induced by the forces are then derived as the
basis for the methods. Important properties of this approach are that it
eliminates the singularities that would normally be present if the forces are
assumed to be delta distributions, the volume of fluid within elastic boundaries
is conserved extremely well, and high accuracy can be achieved. The work is
aimed at extending well-known numerical techniques to three-dimensional flows
driven by forces along filaments and to the full range of length scales.
Analysis of the methods is carried out to establish and improve their stability,
convergence and accuracy properties. The applications that are pursued include a
wide variety of flagellar motions, the motion of flexible membranes around
obstacles, and others. The motion of microorganisms in a liquid and the flow of
blood in capillaries are two examples of phenomena that can be studied with
computational methods. Computer techniques that can accurately simulate motions
of this type are very valuable because they can be used to determine how
arteries become obstructed or how flagellated organisms perform specific
functions in the human body and the effects of defects in this mechanism. From a
mathematical point of view, these computer simulations are not ready for
scientists to use; there is a need to improve the accuracy with which the
underlying equations are being solved and increase the reliability of the
methods. This project is aimed at developing computational methods for fluid
flows interacting with elastic structures. The goal is to develop high-accuracy
methods, improve on their mathematical properties, and apply them to problems
from biological sciences.
