
* 0100042
* Combinatorics, Probability and Computation of Finite Groups
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,05/16/2003
* Igor Pak,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2004
* USD 108,499.00

The investigator will study finite groups from Combinatorial, Probabilistic and
Computational point of view. The research will proceed in three major
directions. First, the problem of generating random group elements is studied.
The two major venues: Babai algorithms and the product replacement algorithm -
both will be attacked by the investigator. Second problem involves recognition
of the finite groups based on the random elements. Finally, third problem deals
with property testing of groups is studied, by introducing random subproducts as
pseudo random elements in the finite group.

Finite groups can be viewed as sets of symmetries of finite objects; they are
central in understanding of our universe. Finite groups are often unimaginably
large, which represents both theoretical and computational difficulties for
working with all its elements. Thus the information about the group is often
stored in a small set of elements (generators), so that all other group elements
can be obtained from these. Now the difficult problem is reversing this encoding
and recovering information about the whole group from the generators. The
current proposal aims at developments of the new algorithms and improvement of
the existing procedures.
