
* 0104003
* Local Regularization Methods for Ill-Posed Inverse Problems: Fast Algorithms and Adaptive Parameter Selection
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,07/18/2003
* Patricia Lamm,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2005
* USD 99,000.00

Local regularization methods show great promise for the solution of a number of
different classes of inverse problems, often retaining the special structure of
the original problem as well as leading to very fast algorithms (especially in
the case of Volterra problems). In addition, numerical tests show that local
regularization methods can work well to resolve sharp features of solutions
without having to rely on nondifferentiable or nonquadratic optimization
schemes. To date, the convergence theory for the local regularization of
Volterra problems has been limited to only mildly ill-posed inverse problems. In
the case of more severely ill-posed problems, there is numerical evidence that
certain local methods may suffer from lack of stability and/or convergence.
Because of the cost efficiencies of local regularization methods, an important
question is therefore whether new variations of these methods can be developed
for which stability/convergence can be proven in the general case. The PI
proposes to develop two new variations of local regularization methods which
show promise in numerical tests and for which there is hope of establishing a
general stability/convergence theory. The PI also proposes to develop adaptive
schemes for the selection of variable regularization parameters in local
regularization methods. Variable parameters are of use in applying more
smoothing in some parts of the domain and less in others. In numerical tests
adaptive local regularization techniques have been shown to be effective in
determining the variable regularization parameter at the same time that local
parts of the solution are recovered. Because no convergence theory exists at the
present time for such an approach, the PI proposes to study such adaptive
schemes and develop a theory which will be useful in making recommendations for
adaptive parameter selection methods. The PI also proposes to extend these ideas
to nonlinear Volterra problems and to linear non-Volterra problems.

Inverse problems occur widely in many applications, including problems of
biomedical imaging (CT scans and X-rays), image reconstruction (from satellites
or other sources), and geophysical exploration. The Volterra class of inverse
problems arises in the determination of the surface temperature of a space
vehicle as it re-enters the earth's atmosphere; additionally, Volterra inverse
problems appear as models for remote sensing problems. While classical methods
exist for for solving such problems, classical methods are often very
inefficient and lead to overly expensive solution techniques. A second
disadvantage of classical solution methods is readily seen in imaging
applications where reconstructed images may have blurred edges and inadequately
detailed features. The PI proposes to address both of these difficulties with
the development of new solution methods based on the ideas of local
regularization. The use of these newer methods can lead to a significant
decrease in cost for the solution of a wide class of practical inverse problems,
with improved resolution of detailed features of solutions.
