
* 0104009
* Solving polynomial systems by polyhedral homotopies
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,09/17/2001
* Tien-Yien Li,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 167,239.00

In the last two decades, the homotopy continuation method for solving polynomial
systems has been established and proved to be reliable and efficient. Resulting
from a previous project, supported by NSF Grant DMS-9804846, a source code,
HOM4PS, was produced. Excellent performance of this code on a large collection
of polynomial systems in a wide variety of applications provides practical
evidence that the newly developed methods constitute a powerful general purpose
solver. Nontheless, there are still numerous models of polynomial systems in
applications which do not have a satisfactory line of attack. Those models
provide a rich source of interesting and challenging problems with strong
mathematical content. The essence of the proposed project is the advance
development of the solver based on the conduct of further research to greatly
enlarge the scope of its applications. The ultimate goal is a more complete
high-quality block-box solfware which will incorporate the best state of the art
to provide the general scientific community a reliable source for solving
polynomial systems in practice.

The problem of solving polynomial systems has been, and will continue to be, one
of the most important subjects in both pure and applied mathematics. The need to
solve systems of polynomial equations arises very frequently in various fields
of science and engineering, such as, formula construction, geometric
intersection, inverse kinematics, robotics, vision and the computation of
equilibrium states of chemical reaction equations, etc. In recent years
(1993-1999), a considerable research effort in Europe had been directed to this
problem in two consecutive major projects, PoSSo (Polynomial System Solving) and
FRISCO (FRamework for Integrated Symbolic/numerical COmputation), supported by
European Commission with thirteen university teams in seven European countries
involved. Those research projects focused on the development of the already
well-established Groebner basis methods within the framework of computer
algebra. Their reliance on symbolic manipulation makes those methods seem
somewhat limited to relatively small problems. In contrast, the approch by the
homotopy continuation method in this project is numerical and exhibits much
powerful application results.
