
* 0106511
* Finite-Volume Methods for Hyperbolic Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/17/2001
* Randall LeVeque,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2007
* USD 516,326.00

This proposal concerns the development of multidimensional high-resolution
finite-volume methods for solving hyperbolic partial differential equations, the
development of software implementing these methods, and the application of these
methods to particular problems. These methods are implemented in the CLAWPACK
software package, which is freely available on the web and allows students and
researchers studying a wide range of phenomena to use the technology of high-
resolution methods and adaptive mesh refinement. These algorithms and the
software will be further developed and brought to bear on a wider variety of
problems. Particular problems of interest include: further development of
adaptive refinement base on a new tree-structured code; inclusion of Cartesian-
grid techniques for complex geometries; development of a general methodology for
solving hyperbolic equations on curved manifolds; and wave-propagation problems
(e.g., elastodynamics) in heterogeneous material, including nonlinear problems
with spatially-varying flux functions.

A wide range of practical problems in science and engineering involve the
propagation of waves or the transport of substances in fluid flow. Examples
arise in problems as diverse as the study of ultrasound waves in human tissue,
the transport of contaminants in groundwater or the atmosphere, and the study of
gravitational waves arising from the collision of black holes. Mathematically
all of these problems lead to similar sets of partial differential equations.
Solving these equations numerically requires special techniques that can deal
with discontinuous functions, since often either the coefficients describing the
problem or the solution (or both) are discontinuous. Examples include
discontinuities in material properties at the interface between tissue and bone
in an ultrasound problem, or the shock waves that arise in most nonlinear wave-
propagation problems. Over the past few decades, a powerful class of numerical
methods has been developed for solving such problems that have been much more
heavily used in some applications areas than others. A primary goal of this
project is to facilitate the transfer of this technology to new areas. The
software package CLAWPACK, developed by the P.I. and coworkers, is designed to
make it relatively easy to for students to learn about these methods and for
researchers to apply them. There are still numerous mathematical challenges that
arise in applying these methods to new situations. Research will be conducted to
further improve these methods as a variety of new applications are explored. The
subjects covered in this proposal are fertile ground for graduate education in
computational mathematics. The P.I. is actively involved in training students
and postdocs at the University of Washington as well as at other institutions by
hosting visiting graduate students. The P.I. has also taught several short
courses elsewhere and developed lecture notes, textbooks, software, and other
educational material based on this research.
