
* 0106743
* Development of Numerical Methods for Semiconductor Device Simulation and Electron Microscopy
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/22/2001
* Sigal Gottlieb,MA,University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 50,000.00

This study will focus on two numerical techniques for discontinuous problems and
their physical applications. Particular attention will be paid to the
development of a numerical method and its impact on refining the mathematical
model of the physical system. Sharp gradients and discontinuities are
characteristic of semiconductor device simulations. While numerical methods have
been developed to handle these characteristics, these methods need to be refined
and tailored to capture the features exhibited by carrier flow in semiconductor
device simulations. On the other hand, the mathematical models that are used to
describe carrier transport in semiconductors are constantly evaluated and
changed. Steady-state weighted essentially non oscillatory methods will be
refined and used to determine the validity of macroscopic models of current
transport and deposition in semiconductor devices. Discontinuities are also a
problem in the determination of protein structure by electron microscopy. The
inherently discontinuous nature of physical structures, and the assumption that
repetition of the structure in a gridlike formation is a periodic function leads
to slow decay of the Fourier coefficients. Fourier coefficient extrapolation and
Gegenbauer polynomial methods will be further developed and applied to the field
of electron microscopy to achieve better resolution protein structures. This has
the potential to be added to any electron microscopy software as a
postprocessing step, and provide better resolution structures.

Numerical methods for semiconductor device simulation models allow efficient and
inexpensive simulation of the processes involved in semiconductor device
production. However, these processes have many discontinuities that require
sensitive numerical methods to capture the sharp changes in density and pressure
without smearing them. Such methods, known as Weighted Essentially Non-
Oscillatory methods, have been developed for use in similar problems, but are
not efficient for the long time scales necessary for semiconductor simulations.
The aim of this project is to further develop these numerical methods, and make
them efficient for semiconductor device simulation on computers. Efficient
numerical methods will also serve to compare different models, which attempt to
describe the physical problem, and to evaluate which models best compare to
reality. Another aspect of this project deals with the effects of
discontinuities in protein structures studied by electron microscopy.
Mathematical methods have been recently developed to solve the underlying
problem by adding a smoothing step, which smoothes away numerical artifacts
while keeping the real discontinuities. These methods have never been used on
protein structures, and need to be tailored to it. These methods may improve the
resolution of protein structures determined by electron microscopy.
