
* 0107539
* Mesoscale Numerical Methods for Certain Types of Implicit Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2001,08/20/2001
* Petr Kloucek,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 100,000.00

The investigator develops a comprehensive computational tool for modeling of the
kinetics of microstructural evolution under thermo-mechanical loading in
compound structures. He approximates the microstructural kinetics using first
order implicit partial differential equations with a certain specific type of
Dirichlet boundary conditions, and using a novel subgrid projection method. He
applies this computational technique to provide an active control of vibrations
and noise reduction based on the martensitic phase transformation. Implicit
partial differential equations represent a large class of ordinary and partial
differential equations and systems that are nonlinear in the highest
derivatives, such as the Eikonal or Hamilton-Jacobi equations. They are closely
related to partial differential inclusions that play a crucial role in the study
of phase transitions. Typically, the solutions of imlicit partial differential
equations are not smooth, they are not unique, and often they incorporate
enormous amount of competing scales. These three distinctive features present a
definitive challenge to the design of suitable numerical methods applicable to
finding solutions of implicit partial differential equations. Recent work based
on the Baire category argument shows that there exist solutions of such
equations that cannot be obtained by standard analytical approaches. The
existence theory itself is not constructive, does not yield any hint as to how
to construct selection principles, and it does not provide a notion of a
generalized solution.

In regular use, machinery is subjected to periodic stresses. This results in
acoustic waves travelling through the material. Since these waves are small in
comparison to the potential energy of the overall machine, conversion to heat is
an effective method of noise reduction. Thus highly damping materials may be
used either in part or in full to accomplish this task. Shape memory alloys
exhibit such significant damping properties. These are special alloys that
change their microstructure from that of a stiff, rotationally symmetric phase
to a ductile, less symmetric phase when cooled or put under stress. These
desirable damping properties are a result of movement within the twin boundaries
in the martensite phase, as well as the motion of the incoherent austenite-
martensite interface, and are significantly temperature dependent. The
investigator undertakes computational modeling to understand and actively
control the phase transitions in shape memory alloys, based on implicit partial
differential equations. The applications include such possibilities as
controlled vibration of a cutting edge in non-invasive surgery, ultrasonic wave
detectors, stabilization of platforms on various spacecraft as well as acoustic
suppression in cockpits.
