
* 0107233
* Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/20/2001
* Douglas Arnold,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Mavriplis
* 10/31/2001
* USD 180,000.00

The investigator will devise, improve, and analyze methods for the numerical
simulation of complex physical phenomena modeled by partial differential
equations, emphasizing three main areas: mixed methods for elasticity equations,
discontinuous Galerkin methods, and computational general relativity. For
elasticity, the investigator will build on a recent breakthrough that enabled
the construction of the first stable mixed finite element methods for the
displacement-stress formulations with polynomial trial functions, and also work
towards the development of simpler nonconforming mixed finite element methods
and extensions to three dimensional elasticity problems. Concerning
discontinuous Galerkin methods--finite element methods in which the
approximating piecewise polynomial functions are discontinuous, with
modifications incorporated into the variational formulation to achieve
consistency--the investigator will work with his collaborators to build on
recent work on the unification and classification of such methods to develop a
unified approach to the analysis of and discrimination among a wide class of
discontinuous Galerkin methods for elliptic equations. Application will also be
made to the numerical simulation of elastic plates incorporating shear. The
third and largest effort concerns the numerical solution of Einstein's field
equations relating mass and the curvature of space-time. The emphasis here will
be on understanding the fundamental properties of the Einstein equations most
relevant to their numerical solution and the basic difficulties that have beset
previous attempts at numerical simulations of them. The work will be guided by
the goal of simulating the coalescence of inspiralling pairs of black holes and
the resulting emission of gravitational radiation, which is a problem of
fundamental importance to gravitational physics and also because such
simulations will be essential to realization of a new generation of
observatories based on gravitational wave detectors.

Computer simulation is a key tool for the design and testing of complex
engineering structures. In recent decades computer simulation has also joined
experiment and theory as one of the main paradigms of scientific investigation.
In both areas, many of the most complex systems are first modeled by systems of
partial differential equations--in which the language of calculus is used to
express the variations of the relevant physical quantities in space and time--
and then these systems of differential equations must be approximated by
numerical algorithms, which harness the power of modern computers to perform
billions of arithmetical operations a seconds to extract the solutions to the
equations to the required degree of accuracy. In recent decades the principles
for the design and validation of such algorithms have been developed for many of
the basic systems of differential equations encountered in science in
technology, but many more complex systems have so far resisted effective
computation, and that is the thrust of this research. A particular emphasis will
be on numerical algorithms for accurate determination of the stresses internal
to elastic structures, which is essential to building safe and economic
engineering structures. A second emphasis will be on developing methods to
simulate Einstein's equations of general relativity, especially for predicting
the output of gravitational radiation--minute ripples that propagate on the
curved surface of space-time--from massive cosmological events such as black
hole collisions. Computer codes capable of making such predictions are needed to
realize the effectiveness of a new type of observatory based on gravitational
radiation currently being constructed, which will provide mankind with its first
window on the dark matter that makes up 90% of the universe.
