
* 0107747
* Physical Knots
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2001,09/24/2001
* Gregory Buck,NH,Saint Anselm College
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2004
* USD 124,000.00

Knots are self-entangled filaments. In mathematics, they have been most commonly
studied as purely topological objects. But physical knots are knots made of real
physical stuff, from rope to DNA or other large flexible molecules; or purely
mathematical knots endowed with physical-like properties such as energy or
thickness. The goals of physical knot theory are to mathematically model and
help understand real physical systems, and to use physically inspired measures
of knot complexity to develop novel methods for knot recognition/classification
and gain deeper understanding of configuration spaces of knots. The investigator
also casts a wider net, looking for connections between physical knot theory and
polymer theory, as well as analogies between physical knot theory and other
important optimization and configuration problems such as protein folding.

Modern laboratory technology lets scientists see the tiniest structures of life.
Modern computers let researchers visualize and simulate how the structures
interact. This combined technology has helped make geometry and topology an
essential tool in medicine, polymers, and other areas of chemistry, physics, and
biology. Knotting, or other tangling of filaments, is one of the fundamental
ways that matter behaves, and is a key phenomenon in this scientific
interaction. Knotting and tangling happen at every scale studied by science,
from microscopic DNA loops to everyday rope to tangled magnetic field loops in
the solar corona. The investigator, collaborators, and students study
fundamental problems that arise in all these physical systems: How are knots and
tangles created? What properties of the various systems cause essentially
different kinds of knots and tangles? Can the structure be simplified or
completely untangled? If so, how? How do the mathematical properties of
different kinds of knots or tangles influence physical behavior? The project
contributes to the effort of finding good data structures and good manipulation
and visualization tools for topological and geometric objects -- essential tools
for work in the realm of the very small. These efforts are at the interface of
information technology, nanotechnology, and biotechnology. In materials and
manufacturing, as well as in biotechnology, the work could have considerable
impact by providing effective models of the topological and geometric behavior
of polymers in general, and DNA in the specific.
