
* 0107187
* Particle Simulations in Fluid Dynamics and Molecular Dynamics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/21/2001
* Robert Krasny,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2006
* USD 239,500.00

Krasny 0107187 The investigator develops new computer algorithms for particle
simulations in fluid dynamics and molecular dynamics, and he employs the
algorithms to study important application problems. The main technical tool is a
new adaptive treecode algorithm for solving the N-body problem in the context of
long-range particle interactions. In this algorithm, the particle forces or
velocities are evaluated using Taylor approximation in Cartesian coordinates,
and the necessary Taylor coefficients are computed by a recurrence relation. The
adaptive features include a divide-and-conquer evaluation strategy, nonuniform
rectangular clusters, variable order approximation, and a run-time choice
between Taylor approximation and direct summation. The investigator develops an
optimal strategy for choosing the parameters in the code, in order to maximize
the accuracy and efficiency of the algorithm. The application problems to be
studied in fluid dynamics include the onset of chaotic dynamics in vortex cores,
high precision computation of vortex sheet roll-up and spiral formation in the
Kelvin-Helmholtz problem, and breakdown and transition in vortex rings. An
important component of the work is to compare regularized particle simulations
with experiments and with genuine viscous flows computed by finite difference
schemes. The application problems to be studied in molecular dynamics involve
potential energy and force field evaluation for electrostatic interactions. The
results of this research affect several areas of strategic national interest,
including civil and military aviation and biotechnology. One outstanding problem
in aviation is the simulation of the trailing vortex wake that forms behind an
aircraft on takeoff and landing. The vortex wake is a serious hazard to other
aircraft, especially in crowded airports. It imposes a minimum time and distance
between takeoffs and landings on a given runway, and it is a source of wind
shear, which has been implicated in accidents. The project sheds light on the
structure and dynamics of vortex cores, and this helps aeronautical engineers in
designing vortex wake remediation systems. In the area of biotechnology, one
far-reaching problem is to simulate protein folding in a physically accurate
way. This is in fact the next step required to make use of the data collected in
the human genome project. The project contributes by enhancing the computer
algorithms that are used by biochemists to study protein folding. In the area of
education and human resources, the investigator directs an applied honors
calculus course for freshman science and engineering students, develops a new
graduate course on scientific computing, and mentors the professional
development of undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs.
