
* 0107247
* Adaptive multinumeric finite element methods for shallow water flow
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/28/2001
* Clinton Dawson,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 169,888.00

Recent progress in coastal ocean modeling has emphasized two main themes: 1) the
use of relatively large computational domains which encompass much larger areas
than the region of specific interest, the main concept being to place the open
ocean boundaries far away in deep water non-resonant ocean basins, and 2)
strategically providing computational resolution using unstructured grids in
order to maintain an approximately constant level of localized error throughout
the domain. This large domain/local grid refinement strategy has led to certain
computational difficulties. First, the range of flow regimes varies dramatically
from the deep ocean to the shallow near shore and inland regions which include
inlets, rivers, and flood plains with surrounding levee systems. Not only are
the depths dramatically different, but the force balances in the descriptive
equations vary dramatically as well. Various algorithms perform very differently
within these widely disparate flow regimes in terms of stability, accuracy and
localized mass conservation properties. Second, the high level of grid
resolution provided in localized high flow gradient and/or very shallow water
depth regions actually degrades the stability properties of many algorithms that
worked quite well with coarser discretizations, and work very well in regions
with smoother solutions. The main focus of this project is to overcome these
difficulties through the use of suitably coupled, finite element hp-adaptive
algorithms, which are based on mathematically sound error estimates. The
investigators have an extensive history in developing continuous Galerkin finite
element methods for shallow water problems, and have recently investigated the
use of discontinuous Galerkin methods for these problems. By exploiting the
strengths of these two approaches, they plan to develop simulation tools for
solving shallow water problems which can model large domains with locally
refined, unstructured grids, can accurately resolve high gradient flow regions,
can locally adapt to changes in flow characteristics, and which honor local mass
conservation principles where necessary. Specifically, under this project, the
investigators will (1) further develop and analyze discontinuous Galerkin
methods for shallow water flows in two and three dimensions (2) thoroughly
compare continuous and discontinuous Galerkin methods for some model problems,
and (3) investigate novel multi-algorithmic approaches based on coupling the two
methodologies for shallow water equations and related mathematical models.

Accurate mathematical and computer modeling of coastal ocean circulation and
transport of chemical species in shallow waters has significant implications
from an economic, environmental and public health perspective. Major inter-
related issues include coastal inundation, navigation, sediment movement,
pollutant transport and fisheries. Accurate prediction of hurricane storm surges
can help save lives and property in many low lying regions throughout the United
States and the world. The prediction of coastal currents and water levels is
also of major significance in commercial and military navigation, e.g. in the
design of harbors and navigation channels. Current computer simulation tools are
lacking in their ability to reliably and efficiently model these complex flow
regimes. The investigators on this project, through the use of advanced
mathematical modeling, numerical algorithms and distributed computing
technology, will develop state-of-the-art simulation tools for these
applications.
