
* 0107146
* Temporally Uniform Grid Convergence of Discrete Approximations and Numerical Simulations in the Problems of Wave Propagation over Unbounded Domains
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2001,08/20/2001
* Semyon Tsynkov,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 01/31/2005
* USD 94,989.00

Two major well-recognized difficulties in numerical simulation of waves
propagating over unbounded domains are the accumulation of error during long
time intervals and necessity to truncate the domain and subsequently set the
artificial boundary conditions (ABCs) at the external artificial boundary. These
two issues turn out to be closely related. In the previous work of the PI with
collaborators that has been done in the framework of the scalar wave equation,
we have used the inherently three-dimensional phenomenon of lacunae and
developed a methodology that modifies any appropriate discrete scheme so that
the long-term error buildup is fully eliminated while all of the original
properties of the scheme (e.g., order of accuracy) are preserved. Moreover, the
procedure allows one to replace the original infinite domain by a finite
computational domain, which leads to obtaining highly accurate non-local
unsteady ABCs. These ABCs are built directly for the discrete formulation of the
problem, their temporal non- locality is fixed and limited, and they possess
full geometric universality. The key objective of the proposed project is to
extend the aforementioned methodology to wave-type models of practical interest,
in particular, the Maxwell's equations (electromagnetic waves) and the
linearized Euler's and full-potential equations (acoustic waves). The
attainability of this goal is accounted for by the fact that the solutions to
these equations have sharp aft fronts of the waves (manifestation of lacunae),
which is the exact same behavior as displayed by the solutions to the wave
equation.

Numerical simulation of waves on unbounded domains has numerous applications
that range from scattering of electromagnetic waves from aircraft and ground
vehicles (radar technology) to antenna design to calculation of the acoustic
fields produced by the airframe and airplane's jet engines for the purpose of
reducing the noise levels around airports, as well as inside the passenger
compartments. The results that we expect to obtain are going to benefit the
foregoing applied areas. Indeed, we anticipate the creation of a universal
framework that would allow one to modify a wide class of already existing and
proven methods so that to enable two additional crucial capabilities -- long-
term integration and accurate computation of infinite-domain wave fields on
truncated domains. Besides, as the proposed research unfolds, it will
necessarily include communication and collaboration with physicists and
engineers, as well as preparation of course materials and training young
researchers.
