
* 0107893
* Automated Morphometry of Dendritic Spines
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/10/2001
* W.Brent Lindquist,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 181,000.00

Lindquist 0107893 The investigator creates quantitative computational tools for
the automated analysis of neural images, including software algorithms to
provide automated morphology measurements both of neuron dendrites and of
dendritic spines (the primary synaptic receivers). These tools are developed in
close collaboration with the neural imaging research programs of two groups, led
by Prof. K. Svoboda at Cold Spring Harbor Lab. and by Profs. P. Hof and S.
Wearne at Mt. Sinai School of Medicine. In preliminary work, automated
algorithms have been developed and verified (against manual measurements) to
identify and extract morphological measurements of dendritic spine length and
density from 3D images. This project develops algorithms to i) provide spine
volume measurements, which are currently available only through manually
intensive, scanning electron microscopy measurements; ii) analyze (two-channel)
images containing two dyes that fluoresce at different frequencies. One dye is a
marker for spine morphology, the second is a marker for specific functionality.
This allows for direct correlation studies of form and function. The primary
application of these algorithms is in structural genetics work. iii) determine
higher moment (shape) measures both of spines and dendrite cross sections. The
primary application of these algorithms is in developing models of neural
integration behavior and age-related deficits in short-term memory. Biological
science technologies are now capable of producing data at a rate so fast that
only with computers and sophisticated numerical and statistical algorithms can
biologists analyze these data. In the past decade, laser scanning fluorescence
microscopy, enabling non-invasive, three dimensional imaging of living neurons,
has produced a revolution in neural research. The wealth of information
available from a time sequence of three dimensional neuron images is
outstripping our current information processing capacity, which has been based
upon manual identification and tracing of structures of interest. Although it
uses the superb recognition capability of human sight, manual measurement is
tedious, susceptible to systematic and hard to characterize human biases,
restricted to measurements involving only length and counting, and effective
only for small data sets. The purpose of this project is to develop computer
based tools for the automated analysis of neuron images, eliminating manual
analysis. The resultant computer tools will make practical such studies as i)
the relationship between neuron structure and age-related deficits in memory as
well as some forms of mental retardation; ii) where in neurons certain proteins
concentrate and how their presence and concentration correlates to the signal
processing role of neurons; iii) large scale screening of drug treatments
designed to correct genetic- or trauma-induced deficiencies in neuron structure.
The project is supported by the DMS/Computational Mathematics, DMS/Applied
Mathematics, and IBN/Computational Neuroscience programs and by the MPS/Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities.
