
* 0107428
* High Resolution Finite Difference and Spectral Algorithms for Piecewise Smooth Data
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,06/18/2003
* Eitan Tadmor,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 206,200.00

We plan to develop and implement new high resolution finite difference and
spectral algorithms which reduce the spurious Gibbs effects near the internal
edges of piecewise regular data, and recover with high resolution the underlying
information in between those edges. These are precisely the issues which defy
classical methods and are of great research interest in various applications.
Professors E. Tadmor (UCLA) and A. Gelb (ASU), will continue their ongoing
cooperative research on the following. (i) Accurate realization of piecewise
smooth data in one- and several space dimensions using edge detection and high-
resolution reconstruction techniques. In this context we will develop, analyze
and implement a spectrally accurate recovery procedures by combining
localization based on appropriate concentration kernels which identify finitely
many edges, followed by a novel two-parameter family of spectral mollifiers
which recover the data between the edges with exponential accuracy. These
techniques are at the heart of the modern high-resolution algorithms described
below. (ii) Over the last decade, central schemes proved to be an extremely
robust, all-purpose tool for solving general nonlinear convective-diffusive
problems. We will integrate new recovery procedures and introduce further non-
Cartesian enhancement procedures to the resolution of multidimensional central
schemes. (iii) Further developments and applications of stable and spurious-free
spectral viscosity algorithms. In particular, we plan to apply the new enhanced
SV procedure to problems where piecewise smoothness forms due to mixing and
instability (Richtmyer-Meshkov, Taylor, ...), simulations of the shallow water
equations, and study of the critical threshold phenomena in mixed-type Euler-
Poisson equations.

Look around you: edges are everywhere. Much of the data we encounter -- from
images to signals is piecewise smooth, that is, it consists of smooth pieces
separated by sharp internal edges. This project proposes to continue the
development of novel methods that combat the typical difficulties associated
with problems containing piecewise smooth data. Specifically, we propose to
extend our ongoing study of dealing with the reconstruction of piecewise smooth
data from its spectral information. Here, the large scales represented by the
smooth 'pieces' are resolved by a variety of non-oscillatory reconstructions.
The difficulty arises with the spurious oscillations due to unresolved small
scales which are localized in the neighborhood of the edges. The problem is
often realized in terms of the so called 'ringing phenomena'. To this end, the
location of the edges is detected and information is treated in the 'direction
of smoothness', i.e., away from the detected edges. Application include the high
resolution recovery of piecewise smooth data obtained in such inverse
applications as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography
(PET), climatology data and more. Piecewise smooth data also arise in various
time dependent problems, due to spontaneous breakup in waves patterns. In this
case, the difficulties become even more intricate, as one has to trace moving
edges. We also plan to implement the new recovery procedures for tracing the
evolution of breakdown of waves, and integrate these recovery procedures with
central schemes and spectral viscosity methods -- two modern high resolution
methods developed by us earlier.
