
* 0107210
* Computational Methods for Most-Energetic Traveltimes of Seismic Waves
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/30/2001
* Seongjai Kim,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 38,590.00

The work is concerned with the development of computational methods for the
most-energetic traveltimes (METTs) of seismic waves and their applications to
various physical problems. The METT corresponds to the highest energy level in
data and has been recognized as one of most important components for
image/inversion processes in highly heterogeneous media. However, METTs often
develop discontinuities in wavefronts. Thus, computational principles that have
been utilized for the computation of continuous first-arrival traveltimes can
hardly be adopted. The upwind direction of the METT is determined by the energy
level (amplitudes) of wavefronts and, therefore, the amplitude accuracy is very
crucial for a successful METT simulation. Since the transport equation, which
solves the amplitude, incorporates the traveltime Laplacian, the traveltime
should be solved by a non-oscillatory high-order numerical algorithm which can
provide a mechanism for an accurate traveltime Laplacian near the
discontinuities. The investigator proposes the development of accurate and
efficient algorithms for the METT and the corresponding amplitude in 3D
heterogeneous media, incorporating second- and third-order ENO schemes and their
local extensions for intersecting wavefronts near discontinuities. A full
wavefield solver of negligible numerical dissipation is to be developed and
implemented for a numerical verification of the conjecture: the METT can be
computed in such a way that the corresponding amplitude is continuous over the
whole domain. Applications are planned for the anisotropic METT and realistic
geophysical problems such as tomography in oil exploration, earthquake analysis,
and shallow seismic reflection. The proposed research subjects are vitally
important to energy, economic, and environmental concerns. In particular, the
theoretical understanding and numerical algorithms for the METT and the
corresponding amplitude will open other promising research areas.

For various applications of sound waves traveling through a substance, it is
necessary to compute the traveltime of the sound waves. Since the acquired data
are dominated by the highest energy levels of the waves, the most reliable
results can be obtained by incorporating information from the most-energetic
traveltime (METT). The proposal is concerned with the development of accurate
and efficient computational algorithms for the METT and applications to
important geophysical image processing problems. Image processing methods allow
geoscientists to find interesting underground features. In oil exploration, for
example, geophysicists first compute images of rock/soil structures and then
detect the spots where oil reservoirs are. Thus the oil reservoir detection can
be successful only with accurate and well-focused images, for which the newly
developed algorithms provide the most useful information. The same arguments can
be applied to the shallow sound wave reflection, the image processing techniques
for the subsurface not deeper than 100 meters. These techniques have been
developed for detailed images; examples can be found in waste-disposal site
characterization, archaeological search, and ground security analysis. Many
cracks and break-downs on buildings or roads are due to an ignorance or under-
estimation of the importance of ground security analysis. The proposed work is
also applicable to earthquake analysis. Since a horrible destruction happens
with a close relation to the most-energetic components of the earthquake wave,
the computation of the METT is necessary for a deeper understanding of the
earthquake. The new algorithms are expected to provide an effective mechanism
that helps geoscientists simulate seismic ground motion and helps geologists
predict earthquake destruction areas, with high accuracy and efficiency. The
above mentioned problems are vitally important to energy, economic, and
environmental concerns and can be solved more reliably by the proposed work.
