
* 0109895
* Quantitative Insight into Responses of Cell Populations to Radiation Exposure
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,08/28/2001
* Leonid Hanin,ID,Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2005
* USD 132,000.00

Hanin 0109895 The goal of the project is to gain a new quantitative insight, on
the basis of advanced mathematical methods, into kinetics of biological
processes in irradiated cell populations. The investigator formulates and
analyzes a comprehensive mechanistic mathematical model of these processes,
including formation of radiation-induced lesions and their repair, misrepair and
fixation, cell cycling and cell death. Mathematical modeling techniques include
general age-dependent branching stochastic processes, queueing systems,
stochastic simulation, and modern methods of statistical inference. Parameters
of the model are estimated from experimental data on kinetics and survival of
cells in synchronized cultures of S3 HeLa and V79 cells exposed to continuous
irradiation at various dose rates. Parameter estimation is based on a
comprehensive stochastic simulation model of the underlying biological processes
and on methods of stochastic optimization in the maximum likelihood setting. The
model is applied to stationary and exponential cell cultures that serve as
experimental counterparts of tumor cell populations at different stages of tumor
development. The distribution of the number of surviving clonogenic cells at the
end of radiation exposure, obtained from the comprehensive simulation model of
cell population kinetics, is compared with explicit formulas for this
distribution within simpler birth and death Markov models that resulted from the
preliminary studies. The most important biological outcome of this work consists
of the set of estimates of unobservable model parameters, which are
interpretable in biologically appealing terms of repair processes and cell
kinetics. The project has a significant impact on evaluation, prediction and
optimization of the efficacy of radiation cancer treatment and associated
methods of cure rate estimation. A remarkable progress in cell biology and
radiation biology since the 1920's has resulted in a prodigious amount of
experimental data comprising all aspects of cell responses to ionizing
radiation. These data represent an invaluable source of information for
furthering our knowledge about intracellular processes in normal and irradiated
cells. However, to a large extent, this gold mine of experimental findings
amassed over years remains unclaimed. The investigator and his collaborators
attempt to understand and describe mathematically the most basic processes in
normal and irradiated cells. This is accomplished on the basis of advanced
mathematical, statistical and computational methods applied to the original
experimental data describing responses of several cell lines to radiation
exposure at variable dose rate. The project was triggered by and has far-
reaching implications for cancer radiotherapy.
