
* 0109132
* Support of The Interface Of Three Areas OF Biomedical Science With The Mathematical Sciences
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2001,05/22/2001
* Michelle Schwalbe,DC,National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2002
* USD 25,000.00

Weidman 0109132 There are tremendous opportunities to increase our understanding
of biological and biomedical research challenges through mathematical and
statistical methods. But it is not easy for researchers to collaborate on these
topics because of a historical gulf that separates the disciplines. In order to
overcome that gulf, the Board on Mathematical Sciences of the National Research
Council, in collaboration with the NRC's Board on Life Sciences, holds a
workshop, involving some 70 people across the disciplines, to (1) stimulate some
new collaborations and insights on the spot and (2) provide an introduction for
mathematical scientists (disseminated via print and the Internet) of some
mathematical research directions that contribute to important ongoing research
in the biological and biomedical sciences. At the workshop, leading researchers
in dynamical modeling of cellular functions, in modeling of disease states, and
in neuroscience describe some of the major research challenges in their fields.
They do not limit themselves to "mathematical" challenges; workshop discussions
are focused on identifying the mathematical and statistical research that should
be undertaken in order to advance the biological and biomedical research
agendas. By involving a broad range of mathematical scientists, the workshop
brings a number of different perspectives and ideas to bear on the open
questions raised by the presentations. The aim is to stimulate a wide-ranging
discussion and distill out the best ideas. The workshop's summary will be widely
disseminated in order to give many more mathematical scientists the basic
understanding needed to become engaged in biological and biomedical research.


