
* 0110920
* QEIB: Spatially-distributed Population Models with External Forcing and Spatial Control
* DMS,POPULATION DYNAMICS, OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,01/18/2006
* Louis Gross,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 02/28/2006
* USD 842,492.00

Gross 0110920 The investigators develop methods to carry out spatially explicit
control to link natural and anthropogenic forces that influence the demand for
biological resources with the dynamics of those resources. While there have been
numerous alternative approaches taken to add spatial components to population
models, few of these have attempted to deal with spatial control. The
investigators evaluate extensions of optimal control methods for dynamical
systems to spatial problems, with a focus on general mathematical and
computational issues for spatial control linked with abiotic forcing of
populations. The effort is motivated by two specific examples. The first
concerns black bears in the southern Appalachians, a population with explicit
environmental forcing associated with acorn mast production, which varies
considerably in time and space. This interacts with hunting, which is spatially
restricted. The second example involves an invasive exotic plant species,
Lygodium microphyllum (Old World Climbing Fern), in the Everglades of South
Florida. This species can completely cover the native tree islands of the region
and spatial control of hydrology may be applied to limit its growth. Many of the
current problems in regional management involve issues of spatial control --
what to do, where to do it and for what time periods. Examples include
alternative plans for land use, forest harvesting, location of dams, and water
control. A wide variety of the major environmental public policy issues in the
US require scientific assessments of the impacts of alternative management. The
investigators develop new mathematical and computational approaches that can aid
managers and the public to compare alternative management plans of land and
regional resources. The objective also is to allow for comparisons of
alternative criteria, arising from different stakeholders, to judge the public
utility of different spatial management plans. The project is supported by the
Applied Mathematics, Computational Mathematics, and Population Biology programs
and by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.


