
* 0128285
* An International Conference: Computational Mathematics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2001,09/18/2001
* Mikhael Gromov,nan,Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifques
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2002
* USD 41,911.00

The investigator organizes an international conference at Institut des Hautes
Etudes Scientifiques to study folding and self-assembly of macromolecules. Self-
organization of macromolecules is a fundamental question in molecular biology.
How molecules fold plays a major role in their organization. The meeting fosters
the creation of new tools by bringing together scientists from several domains
to consider the problem from different perspectives. DNA is like a long zipper
whose teeth are pairs of molecules, called base pairs, one molecule on each side
of the zipper. Links between the base pairs close the zipper. The zipper is
about six feet long in human DNA; to fit inside a cell, it coils up. It
partially uncoils to expose sections --- genes --- that are read to produce an
intermediate molecule, called messenger RNA. Ribosomes read the messenger RNA
and produce a corresponding amino acid chain. The chain folds up spontaneously;
this is a protein. Proteins in turn perform their functions by partially
unfolding to interact with other folded macromolecules. Proteins, genes, and DNA
all fold and unfold to do their work. So folding and self-assembly are central
issues in molecular biology. A goal of the conference is to stimulate
synergistic interchanges between different disciplines by bringing together
biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, and computer scientists to
discuss these issues from different perspectives.
