
* 0134408
* CAREER: Topological Methods in Applied Mathematics
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2002,12/03/2001
* Robert Ghrist,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 08/31/2003
* USD 352,690.00

DMS-0134408 Robert W. Ghrist

The efficacy of topological methods in contemporary applied mathematics is
primarily attributable to the fact that topological features of a system are
inherently robust and global. This project focuses on a technology transfer from
contemporary ideas in topology, geometry, and dynamics to bear upon application
domains which include the following: First, Robotics: tools from configuration
space theory, CAT(0)complexes, and computational topology will be directed
toward specific problems in reconfigurable robotics, sensor-based navigation of
mobile agents, and self-assembly systems. Second, Parabolic coupled systems: a
Morse-theoretic homotopy index for braids will be used to solve parabolic
variational problems arising in pattern-formation PDE's, discrete Lagrangian
mechanics, and coupled oscillators. A Floer-theoretic extension of the braid
index will also be developed for infinite dimensional systems. Third,
Hydrodynamics: tools from contact geometry and topology will be directed toward
solving global problems of the dynamics and stability of Eulerian fluid flows in
dimensions higher than two.

In most systems of interest in science and engineering, multiple cooperative
tasks must be globally coordinated. A common thread is that whether the tasks
involve macro-scale robots, micro-scale devices, coupled oscillators, or fluid
particles, there is an abstract space of configurations lurking behind the
physical phenomena. Unearthing and examining those properties of physically-
motivated configuration spaces which capture the global features, the topology,
geometry, and dynamics, holds the promise of providing global tools which
transcend the physical instantiation of the system at hand: ostensibly different
systems possess similar topological underpinnings. The research component of
this project is the development of contemporary topological and global-geometric
techniques for analyzing the dynamics and coordination of systems of interest in
engineering and computer science. The overall goal is an effective technology
transfer from cutting-edge perspectives in topology to bear upon systems in
application domains which include robotics, mechanics, and fluid dynamics. This
is combined with a blend of pedagogical service across graduate, undergraduate,
and high school levels, featuring a focused research group on topological
robotics and a high-school outreach program of expository lectures on the
relevance and joy of mathematical research.


