
* 0201286
* Applications of Semigroups to Algebraic Geometry Codes
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding, 
* 10/01/2002,09/23/2002
* Gretchen Matthews,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2006
* USD 104,872.00

The investigator studies applications of algebraic geometry to coding theory. In
this proposal, the investigator focuses on problems relating semigroups and
algebraic geometry codes. This involves exploring connections between
Weierstrass semigroups of m-tuples of points on a curve and algebraic geometry
codes formed using these m points. The first aim of this project is to better
understand the structure of Weierstrass semigroups of m-tuples of points on
certain curves over finite fields. The second goal is to apply this knowledge to
improve bounds on the minimum distances of codes constructed using these curves
as well as arbitrary curves over finite fields. This builds on the
investigator's previous work showing that Weierstrass semigroups of pairs of
points can be used to construct algebraic geometry codes with parameters
exceeding the usual lower bounds. These codes, constructed using two points on a
curve, have better parameters than any comparable code constructed using a
single point on the same curve. Thus, in the third component of this project,
the investigator compares codes constructed using m points on a curve to those
constructed using fewer than m points. In addition to these topics, this project
includes a focus on semigroups used in decoding algorithms for algebraic
geometry codes.

Error-correcting codes are used to ensure reliable transfer of information
across noisy communication channels by detecting and correcting errors. Such
codes are found in a wide range of devices, from computing equipment to cellular
telephones to compact disc players. For practical applications, codes should be
efficient and correct as many errors as possible. While there are many ways to
construct codes, one of the most promising uses tools from algebraic geometry.
In particular, curves over finite fields are used to define error-correcting
codes, called algebraic geometry codes. One can gain information about these
codes by studying the curves used to define them. In this proposal, the
investigator examines curves commonly used to define algebraic geometry codes by
studying semigroups associated with the curves. This knowledge is then applied
to obtain better estimates of the efficiency and error-correcting capabilities
of the corresponding codes. In addition, the investigator pursues applications
of semigroups to the process of decoding algebraic geometry codes.


