
* 0202815
* Asymptotic Solutions to Problems Arising in Computer Science and Information Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2002,08/24/2004
* Charles Knessl,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 115,000.00

Knessl 0202815 The investigator, together with colleagues and students, studies
a variety of problems in computer science, information theory, and applied
probability. These have the common feature that they can be reduced to solving
recursion or differential equations. Sometimes these equations can be solved
exactly using transform methods. Then one can obtain asymptotic information by
expanding the results using methods such as the Laplace or saddle point methods,
the Euler-Maclaurin and Poisson summation formulas, Watson transformations, etc.
Many applied problems of interest (especially nonlinear ones) cannot be solved
exactly. For these the investigator and colleagues develop appropriate
asymptotic techniques that analyze directly the governing equations. These are
variants of applied mathematics methods, such as WKB expansions and matched
asymptotic expansions. The latter are especially useful for asymptotic problems
that involve several different scales. The focus is on problems in
combinatorics, data compression, analysis of algorithms, digital and binary
trees, queuing, and coding. Computers play a progressively greater role in all
of our lives. Important problems in computer science include sorting and
searching, efficient data storage, and data compression. To decide on what is a
good method to search out a given item in some database, or a good method for
storing music or video with minimal use of memory, it is important to analyze
the method or algorithm. For example, one might ask for the average search time,
or for the likelihood that the search time will be very long, exceeding some
prescribed tolerance. Such questions involve the "analysis of algorithms." They
can frequently be reduced to solving certain classes of equations. The
investigator and colleagues develop mathematical tools for obtaining solutions
of these equations, either exact ones or accurate approximations. Approximations
are often sufficient, because for example the searching problem is most
important if the total number of items stored is very large. This "largeness"
shows up as a parameter in the governing equation that facilitates its solution.
Related mathematical problems arise in other important areas such as molecular
biology and communications, and the investigators' methods and results should
thus find applicability to a wide range of problems.
