
* 0204442
* Numerical Methods for Molecular Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2002,12/15/2003
* Robert Skeel,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 11/30/2004
* USD 232,019.00

Proposal: DMS-0204442 PI: Robert D. Skeel Institution: University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Title: Numerical Methods for Molecular Dynamics

ABSTRACT

The primary goal of the research is to create more efficient propagators for
atomistic computer simulations that reliably achieve acceptable levels of
accuracy and thus to make possible more ambitious scientific calculations. A
second goal is to explore innovative techniques that simulate long-time
molecular motions without sequentially stepping through billions of intermediate
states, as would be necessary with standard approaches. New algorithms for both
dynamics and sampling are to be constructed using such techniques as modified
energy functions that compensate for finite steps, stochastic stabilization, and
optimization of method parameters, together with physical insight. Promising
algorithms are tested and compared using mathematical analyses and computer
experiments. Tools for mathematical analysis include the concept of effective
accuracy, the method of modified equations, linear analysis, and KAM theory.
Computer experiments are performed on model problems chosen to reveal
unambiguously the properties of interest. Faster algorithms are to be
implemented in molecular simulation software developed and distributed for
public use in a project at the University of Illinois Beckman Institute. Many of
the techniques will apply not only to molecular simulations but also to
simulations in astrophysics, structural mechanics, and fluids.

Computer simulations of atomic detail are heavily employed in physics,
chemistry, materials science, and structural biology. These calculations require
the generation of sequences of atomic configurations either for the purpose of
modeling actual motion or for the purpose of calculating averaged values and
structures from a wide range of representative samples. The computing time
ranges from hours to months, so it can benefit tremendously from faster
algorithms. It is the objective of this research project to do this: to create
much more efficient propagators for dynamics and sampling that reliably achieve
acceptable levels of accuracy. The construction of such algorithms employs ideas
from mathematics and computer science together with physical insight. Promising
algorithms are tested and compared using mathematical analyses and computer
experiments. The successful ones are implemented in molecular modeling software
being developed for widespread use in a project at the University of Illinois
Beckman Institute. These advances in methodology are also to be disseminated in
articles targeted to practitioners. Many of the techniques will apply not only
to molecular simulations but also to simulations in astrophysics, structural
mechanics, and fluids. Potentially, the availability of accelerated propagation
algorithms will lead to a variety of scientific results that otherwise would not
be obtained. The performance of the research will be a valuable
interdisciplinary experience for a graduate student.
