
* 0206752
* Computed Tomography and Sampling
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,06/24/2004
* Adel Faridani,OR,Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 208,053.00

This project involves research in computed tomography, advanced Shannon sampling
theory, and applications of sampling theory in tomography. It combines
theoretical investigations, numerical analysis, and computational experiments
with real world data. Computed tomography is a technique which produces images
of the interiors of opaque objects. It is widely used in applications ranging
from diagnostic radiology to research in quantum optics. Mathematically it
requires the reconstruction of a certain density function from its line
integrals. Ordinary tomography is not local: reconstruction at a point requires
integrals over lines far from that point. For a number of applications it is
highly desirable if only integrals over lines intersecting some region of
interest need to be used ("region-of-interest tomography" or "local
tomography"). Shannon sampling theory plays a fundamental role in signal
processing. In tomography sampling theorems are used to identify efficient data
collection schemes allowing for maximum resolution in the reconstructed image,
as well as for error analysis of reconstruction algorithms.

The project's research in tomography involves interdisciplinary collaboration
and is inspired by the question "What features of the density function can be
stably recovered from a given collection of its line integrals?". Specific goals
include the identification and analysis of optimal sampling schemes in three-
dimensional tomography; the analysis of reconstruction algorithms for three-
dimensional local tomography with sources on a curve; further development and
numerical analysis of high-resolution reconstruction algorithms in two
dimensions, and development of a software package for region-of-interest
tomography. The research in sampling theory is stimulated by applications in
tomography and involves the development and application of new sampling theorems
for non-equidistant data; estimates for the aliasing error in various settings;
and further exploration of a generalization of the sampling concept in the
framework of locally compact abelian groups which provides a unified view of a
number of diverse applications.


