
* 0207064
* Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Statistical Theories of Turbulent Geophysical Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,07/30/2002
* Bruce Turkington,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 261,173.00

The research project applies modern methods in analysis, computation and
probability to the modeling turbulent flows arising in geophysical fluid
dynamics. Specifically, the projects investigates statistical theories of
coherent structures in turbulence, which in a model atmosphere or ocean usually
take the form of long-lived, large-scale jets and vortices. The approach builds
on recent developments in the equilibrium statistical theory of such structures,
which has now matured to the point that it can be justified mathematically,
implemented computationally and applied succesfully to geophysical models. A
prime example is the recent model of the zonal jets and vortical spots in the
atmosphere of Jupiter, whose predictions agree remarkably well with
observational data. In light of these developments, the goals of the project are
two-fold. First, the equilibrium statistical theory of coherent structures is
elaborated for increasingly realistic geophysical models, such as multi-layer
quasi-geostrophic models and shallow-water models. The physical implications of
the theory are investigated by computing families of equilibrium structures and
deriving nonlinear stability theorems for them. Second, a novel approach to
statistical closure is developed from the corresponding nonequilibrium theory.
Unlike traditional closure schemes for fluid turbulence, this new methodology
derives macroscopic equations for some specified resolved variables by
conditioning random paths of microstates on the ensemble-averaged dynamics for
those resolved variables. A combined theoretical and computational investigation
of this approximation to nonequilibrium behavior is undertaken for some
prototype problems. In the context of model geophysical systems with damping and
driving, this approach is envisioned as a general procedure for deriving
effective subgrid-scale parametrizations of unresolved eddies.

Turbulent fluid flow remains one of the unsolved puzzles of physical science. A
better theoretical understanding of turbulence is needed as a basis for the
computational simulation of almost all natural fluid motions. This is especially
true of geophysical fluid flows -- the motions of the Earth's oceans and
atmosphere -- which involve complex motions over a wide range of scales, from
meters up to the planetary size. Every modern computer code used in weather
forecasting or climate prediction requires special, but often unreliable,
assumptions about how the small-scale turbulent motions affect the computed
large-scale behavior. The research conducted in this project addresses the
general issue of modeling a complex fluid flow -- a mathematical prototype of an
atmosphere or ocean -- in such a way that its predominant large-scale features
can be captured reliably without resolving the full complexity of its small-
scale motions. In particular, the work seeks to develop the mathematical and
computational tools necessary to predict the behavior of modeled geophysical
fluid systems which exhibit organized features on large scales but disordered
and random motions on a range of small scales. To do so, the project draws on
sophisticated techniques from statistical physics to construct theoretical
models of complex systems of this kind, and thereby to provide efficient and
reliable methods for computing their expected or most probable behavior. A
recent example of this approach is the remarkably successful explanation of the
persistent jetstreams and vortices, such as the Great Red Spot, in the
atmosphere of the giant planet Jupiter, which for the first time shows
quantitative and qualitative agreement between mathematical theory and NASA
spacecraft observations. In the context of Earth's atmosphere and oceans, such
theoretical models and computational methods can used as building blocks in
predictions about the long-term trends in the ocean-atmosphere system.
