
* 0207327
* Non-Conforming HP Finite Element Methods for Computational Modeling of Problems in Science and Engineering
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,08/01/2002
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 90,000.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0207327 PI: Seshaiyer, Padmanabhan Institution:
Texas Tech University Program: Computational Mathematics Program Manager:
Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Non-conforming hp finite element methods for computational modeling of
problems in science and engineering

Most problems in science and engineering routinely require finite element
analysis in the assembly of many incompatible sub-discretizations. Often, these
sub-discretizations are independently modeled, or available from previously
constructed meshes. Therefore, to support a flexible meshing procedure, it is
crucial that an efficient method be employed to join these independently modeled
sub-meshes. Recently, the principal investigator introduced, a non-conforming hp
finite element technique to accomplish such coupling. The proposed research will
systematically develop, improve and combine sophisticated non-conforming hp
finite element methods with high performance computing, through the
accomplishment of the following four objectives. First, the stability and
convergence of these non-conforming techniques will be theoretically established
and computationally validated in higher dimensions. Secondly, the robustness of
such methods to concatenate domains of different dimensions will be
investigated. Third, the performance of these methods will be analyzed for
problems in fluid mechanics. Finally, the stability and convergence of a more
general three-field technique will be investigated. Numerical results will be
presented to validate the exponential convergence of these techniques both
theoretically and computationally.

An ultimate goal of this research is to develop a flexible problem solving
methodology tuned to high performance computing that allows a rigorous coupling
of different physical processes, mathematical models, or discretization methods
in different parts of a simulation domain. The successful integration of the
proposed objectives will contribute to a common infrastructure that provides
efficient computational support and parallel data-management for solving a wide
variety of problems in science and engineering. The solution methodology to be
developed will provide efficient and accurate solutions that will not only
benefit various engineering fields such as aerospace, materials science, and
bioengineering, but also aid in the process of designing better processes and
products from aircraft to prosthetic implants.

Date: June 6, 2002
