
* 0207050
* Theoretical and Numerical Investigation of Dynamical Systems Method for Solving Linear and Nonlinear Ill-Posed Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2002,07/30/2002
* Alexandra Smirnova,GA,Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 72,300.00

Smirnova 0207050 The investigator and her colleague aim to develop theoretically
a novel method, the DSM-dynamical system method, for solving a wide variety of
linear and nonlinear ill-posed problems, to implement algorithms based on this
method, and to demonstrate the advantages of this method in efficiency and
accuracy. The DSM method is used as a general approach to the construction of
regularizing algorithms for solving ill-posed problems, i.e. a stopping rule is
developed: a rule for choosing that moment of time at which the value of the
solution to the basic evolution equation stably approximates the solution to the
original ill-posed equation in the case when the data are given with some error.
Applications of different versions of the DSM are considered to classical ill-
posed problems of computational mathematics, such as stable differentiation of
noisy data, stable inversion of ill-conditioned matrices, and to nonlinear
inverse problems arising in geophysics, quantum physics, medicine, remote
sensing in technology, and other applied areas. The DSM with simultaneous
updates of the inverse derivative operator without actual inverting of this
operator is developed for solving nonlinear ill-posed problems. The DSM is used
as a general method for constructing convergent iterative processes for solving
ill-posed operator equations. Namely, convergent discretization schemes for
solving the basic evolution equation of the DSM provide convergent iterative
methods for solving the original equation. The DSM is developed for unbounded
operators, which do not have continuous inverse operators, and also for a
nonlinear operators whose derivative is a Fredholm operator with nontrivial
null-space. The area of ill-posed (unstable) problems is extremely difficult,
because solutions to ill-posed problems are very sensitive to small variation in
input data. For that reason ill-posed problems cannot be solved by classical
methods: the corresponding numerical procedures for them turn out to be
divergent. However, ill-posed problems are frequently encountered in many
branches of natural sciences and engineering: astrophysics, geophysics,
spectroscopy, plasma diagnostics, computerized tomography, antenna design,
optimal design of technical systems and engineering constructions, optimal
planning, optimal control over various processes, and many other fields.
Mathematical statements of these problems are given in the form of operator
equations of the first kind, problems of functional minimization, problems of
determining values of unbounded operators, variational inequalities, and so on.
The project develops computational methods that provide more accurate solutions
to a wide range of ill-posed problems. The investigator also uses the results in
the graduate courses on ill-posed and inverse problems she teaches at Georgia
State University. Finally, because ill-posed problems are of basic importance in
applications, the results are of wide use in engineering and applied sciences.
