
* 0207081
* Advanced Computational Stochastic Dynamic Programming for Continuous Time Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2002,08/14/2003
* Floyd Hanson,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 302,100.00

Hanson 0207081 The principal investigator and his colleagues develop
computational stochastic dynamic programming methods to find approximations to
optimally control the expected objective value for a wide variety of
applications. These applications include the optimal treatment of cancer by
chemotherapy drugs, the optimal financial investment portfolio and parameter
estimation, optimal control of stochastic manufacturing systems, and the optimal
remediation of ground water pollution. The wide scope of testbed applications
helps to increase the robustness of their advanced numerical methods by having
to treat a variety of models and boundary conditions. Another characteristic of
many of these applications is that the most severe changes happen as jumps of
the system and many models utilize stochastic jump-diffusion processes. The
computation of optimal approximations in jump environments is a unique feature
of the models, where increased realism of the models more than compensates for
the added burden of increased computational complexity over diffusions. The
investigator is writing an applied book with a colleague on stochastic processes
and control emphasizing jump-diffusion models to give broader impact to their
more general results. The mathematical level is intermediate so that it is
accessible and useful to those who actually work with real applications in
science, engineering, and finance. The principal investigator and colleagues
study models of systems in uncertain environments and seek optimal computational
approximations to get the best performance from these systems. Many of the
applications are national challenges. One application is the optimal management
of cancer chemotherapy when cancer cells develop resistance to a cancer drug
combination. The impact of finding optimal cancer treatment schedules would be
significant because cancer is a leading cause of death. Another application is
computational solutions for optimal investor portfolio and consumption problems
in a market with crashes in value; the benefit is a better understanding of our
nation's and the world's financial systems. A third application is the optimal
scheduling of manufacturing systems subject to uncertain failures, repairs, and
other disruptions. Here improved efficiencies are important for the national
economic well-being. A fourth application is the optimal remediation of
pollution in ground water, with important environmental consequences. Students
are involved in these projects, providing them with significant experience in
interdisciplinary research. Finally, the investigators are writing an
intermediate level applied book on the optimal control of systems in uncertain
environments with large changes, integrating their results over a wide variety
of applications. The aim is to bring these ideas in a more accessible form to
scientists and engineers.
