
* 0208568
* Applied Harmonic Analysis and Wireless Communications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 07/15/2002,04/01/2004
* Thomas Strohmer,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 197,825.00

The increasing requirements on data rate and quality of service for wireless
communications systems call for new techniques to improve radio link reliability
and to increase spectral efficiency. The three key technologies to achieve these
goals are equalization, diversity, and channel coding. Mathematics is of
fundamental importance to these technologies, providing the theoretical basis as
well as the means for efficient numerical implementations. The investigator
derives a theoretical and numerical framework for designing equalization
techniques for time-varying channels. Using methods from pseudo-differential
operator theory and time-frequency analysis, he develops a qualitative and
quantitative theory for the approximate diagonalization of operators associated
with time-varying systems. These theoretical results form a keystone in the
construction of fast and reliable numerical equalization methods that are based
on Krylov subspace techniques. The investigator also studies the use of frame
theory in wireless communications. Using concepts from sphere packings and group
theory, he analyzes theoretical properties of special frames such as
Grassmannian frames. Furthermore, he develops theoretical and numerical schemes
in connection with multi-carrier communication systems such as OFDM. This
includes the design of transmission signals with specific properties using a
generalization of the concept of prolate spheroidal wave functions. By taking
recent tools from harmonic analysis into the wireless communications community,
this project enables further advances and breakthroughs in wireless
communications. At the same time it stimulates new research areas in applied
mathematics and paves the road for further interactions between applied
mathematicians and communication engineers. The goal of this project is to
develop mathematical concepts and computational methods for wireless
communications technology. The investigator combines modern tools from
mathematics with methods from information theory and signal processing to
develop new concepts and algorithms for key technologies in wireless
communications, such as coding, transmission, and equalization. Mathematics is
of fundamental importance to these technologies, because it provides the
theoretical basis as well as the means for efficient numerical implementations.
By providing tools to improve radio link reliability and increase data rates,
this project is instrumental in meeting the increasing requirements on future
wireless communications systems. The project produces conceptual deliverables in
the form of new mathematical methods to analyze and construct wireless
transmission systems. The project also produces concrete deliverables in the
form of numerical algorithms for use in the scientific and industrial sector.
