
* 0209931
* Infinite-Dimensional Eigenvalue Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2002,07/30/2003
* Dean Lee,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 65,100.00

Lee 0209931 The investigator and his colleagues develop numerical methods for
eigenvalue problems in infinite-dimensional spaces. At the heart of the effort
is the recently developed hybrid diagonalization/Monte Carlo approach, which
they feel has led to significant advances in the computational treatment of the
general low energy eigenvalue problem. They study the many unresolved
mathematical issues related to approximate methods for low energy eigenvalues
and eigenvectors in infinite-dimensional spaces. Among other things, the
collaborators rigorously analyze the accuracy of the diagonalization/Monte Carlo
approach, study the relation between eigenvalue distribution and eigenvector
structure, generalize the approach to non-Hermitian matrices, and improve the
computational treatment of clustered eigenvalues. In addition to studying the
underlying mathematics, the investigators also begin production on a public
domain library for infinite-dimensional eigenvalue problems. Eigenvalue problems
play a crucial role in many diverse branches of 21st-century science and
engineering. This includes for example the electronic properties of nanoscale
structures and new materials; the interactions of protons and neutrons in heavy
nuclei; and gene similarity database studies in bioinformatics. The eigenvalue
problem consists of finding certain attributes of a given square matrix, M.
Specifically one is seeking column vectors, v, such that M times v is again
proportional to v. The proportionality constant is called an eigenvalue of M and
v is the corresponding eigenvector. In this project computational experts in
computer science, applied mathematics, and physics collaborate to investigate
large-dimensional matrix eigenvalue problems. The collaborators study the
underlying mathematical issues related to this problem and develop a public
domain library that can be applied to matrices of infinite dimension. The
extension to infinite dimensions is crucial for many applications, particularly
those in quantum physics and chemistry, but the existence of this library will
impact many other areas that feature large-dimensional eigenvalue problems and
are currently intractable with existing methods.
