
* 0209617
* Fast Numerical Operations on Implicit Curves and Surfaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2002,08/14/2003
* John Strain,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2006
* USD 398,700.00

Strain 0209617 Robust global implicit representations of curves and surfaces
simplify geometric operations such as evolving, offsetting and intersecting,
while requiring accurate contouring and efficient implicitization techniques.
The investigator focuses on fast new algorithms for the three key issues of
implicit representations: 1. Fast accurate multiresolution methods that extract
piecewise-smooth contours with tightly controlled geometry. These methods
alternate between global topology resolution and local differential-algebraic
boundary value problems, and solve industrial problems ranging from machine
tooling to horizon finding. 2. Efficient implicitization methods that build a
distributed implicit representation from given curves or surfaces. These
methods, which invert contouring, are essential to modeling moving material
interfaces such as the solid-liquid interface in melt growth of silicon
crystals. 3. Fast stable deferred correction methods for the accurate solution
of ordinary and partial differential-algebraic initial and boundary value
problems that control local geometry. Differential-algebraic problems occur
widely in engineering, and challenge existing numerical methods. For example,
automated vehicle piloting requires real-time solution of differential systems
with constraints that keep the tires on the road. Computer models of complex
interlocking physical objects dominate technological processes ranging from
semiconductor etching to surgery planning, from computer animation to computer-
controlled machine tooling. Key steps in these processes involve operations such
as evolving, navigating, intersecting and blending on these objects. The
investigator and his students are developing efficient new computational tools
for simulating these operations in robust user-friendly ways. This highly
interdisciplinary enterprise combines mathematics and computer science to
benefit scientific endeavors ranging from cartography to crystallography. The
research objectives intertwine with an interdisciplinary educational program,
training future scientists and engineers through web-enabled courses,
math/science/engineering seminars, and individual student research mentoring.
