
* 0209066
* Numerical Simulation of Complex Incompressible Viscous Flow in Time Varying Geometries: Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2002,04/01/2004
* Roland Glowinski,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 368,802.00

Recent progress by the investigators in the simulation of incompressible viscous
flow modeled by the Navier-Stokes equations and their visco-elastic and visco-
plastic generalizations in two and three dimensions has led to the proposed work
in challenging three-dimensional problems. Specifically, the authors intend to
study the direct simulation of pressure-driven particulate flow in three
dimensional pipes and horizontal drilling wells, the fluid being either
Newtonian or non-Newtonian with the number of particles ranging in the
thousands. They will also study the direct numerical simulation of blood flow
around three-leaflet prosthetic heart valves. These problems require
methodological advances such as the numerical treatment of collisions, the
motion of non-spherical objects in viscous fluids and the coupling of fictitious
domain and Chimera type methods in order to improve the treatment of boundary
layers.

During the past six years, the investigators of this award have developed a
methodology well suited to numerical simulation of flow in regions with moving
boundaries. The resulting methodology has been successfully applied by the
authors and other scientists and engineers to the solution of difficult problems
from Sciences and Engineering. Among these problems are the direct simulation of
sedimentation, fluidization and particle transport phenomena, which play an
important role in various areas in Sciences and Engineering (Petroleum
Engineering, Food Industry,...). The main goals of this project are to (1)
improve the existing methodology so that it can address fluid/particle
interaction for particles of relatively complicated shape, (2) develop realistic
models and efficient methods for the computational treatment of the collisions
taking place in fluid/particle interactions, (3) apply the resulting methodology
to an important problem in cardio-vascular medicine namely, the simulation of
blood flow/heart valve interaction and (4) simulate slurry transportation in
horizontal pipelines and wells, an important issue in enhanced oil recovery. In
the heart valve project, the goal is to use the simulation tool to design
artificial heart valves generating much less thrombin (a natural blood thickener
causing artery clotting) than the ones currently used, which require the patient
to take blood thinning drugs which have in general health damaging side effects.
The hope is that with an improved design the need for blood thinners will be
substantially reduced if not eliminated. This part of project will be done in
collaboration with cardio-vascular specialists (including heart surgeons) in the
USA and Europe.
