
* 0209297
* Computational Methods for the Solution of Three-Dimensiional Inverse Acoustic and Elastoacoustic Scattering Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,07/25/2002
* Rabia Djellouli,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2004
* USD 221,538.00

The objective of this project is to enable an efficient solution by a
regularized Newton method of three-dimensional inverse acoustic and
elastoacoustic scattering problems. The research will be based upon three
cornerstones. The convergence analysis of the regularized Newton method will be
performed to establish confidence in this approach and shed some light on the
selection of the regularization parameter. In order to ensure the stability,
fast convergence, and computational efficiency of this iterative solution
strategy, the characterization of the Frechet derivatives of the scattered field
with respect to the shape parameters and the Finite Element Tearing and
Interconnecting Helmholtz (FETI-H) domain decomposition method will be extended
to address coupled elastoacoustic problems. Since the far-field pattern is in
general measured only in a limited aperture, two different approaches for
reconstructing the full aperture data will also be investigated.

The determination of the shape of an obstacle from its effects on known acoustic
or electromagnetic waves is an important problem in many technologies such as
sonar, radar, geophysical exploration, medical imaging and nondestructive
testing. This project will develop an efficient computational method for the
inverse acoustic scattering problem. The proposed methodologies also have a
great potential for benefiting the infrastructure of computational sciences.
