
* 0210474
* QEIB: Stochastic Nonlinear Population Dynamics: Mathematical Models, Biological Experiments, and Data Analyses
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2002,09/04/2002
* Jim Cushing,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 225,000.00

Cushing 0210474 The project entails a theoretical and experimental study that
examines nonlinear population dynamics phenomena in the context of stochasticity
and that addresses fundamental concepts of how stochastic and nonlinear forces
combine to produce observed population phenomena. The methodology involves an
interdisciplinary effort that features a thorough integration of biologically
based modeling (deterministic and stochastic), mathematical and numerical
analyses of model dynamics, and the derivation and application of statistical
techniques for connecting models with data (including parameter estimation and
model evaluation). The investigators study the fundamental question about how
(demographic) stochasticity at the individual level propagates to the population
level. A promising class of models that incorporates both demographic and
environmental stochasticity is pursued. A variety of statistical and
mathematical questions that arise from these studies are investigated. The
validity of this modeling methodology and accuracy of a priori model predictions
is directly testable by experiments. The project study includes an experimental
test of this modeling approach to demographic and environmental stochasticity,
using a laboratory model that the investigators have successfully used in a wide
variety of population dynamics and modeling studies during the last decade. The
modeling methodology is also applicable to field populations and the
investigators pursue the development of field studies with several researchers
who have expressed interest in such a collaboration. These collaborators include
colleagues at (1) the Center for Environmental Analysis at California State
University, Los Angeles in a project modeling the spatially structured dynamics
of seashore species, (2) the University of California, Davis in a project to
model a lupine-caterpillar-nematode system, (3) Andrews University on
mathematical/statistical models of the distribution of marine birds and mammals
on Protection Island National Wildlife Refuge in the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and
(4) the Virginia Institute of Marine Science on nonlinear models of the blue
crab in the Exuma Cays. An understanding of the dynamics of biological
populations is fundamental to the understanding of ecological and environmental
problems. Mathematical models can be a valuable tool that provides this
understanding. They can also provide the means to predict the future of
ecosystems and the species that they include. An accurate descriptive and
predictive capability gained through mathematical models provides not only a
basic understanding of ecological problems, but also the ability to design
programs for the assessment, management, and control of ecosystems and for the
solution of environmental problems. A fundamental difficulty in the application
of mathematical models to ecological problems has been the lack of a close
connection of models with biological data. A key problem is the ability of
models to incorporate random effects and disturbances. The investigators extend,
analyze, and apply a modeling methodology they have developed during a decade of
experimental studies, in a controlled laboratory setting, that addresses these
difficulties. The methods are not restricted to laboratory populations, however,
and the project also includes collaborations with new colleagues for the purpose
of applying the methods to field studies of natural populations.
