
* 0211412
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Nonlocal First Order Hyperbolic Problems in Population Models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, BE: NON-ANNOUNCEMENT RESEARCH
* 08/01/2002,07/25/2002
* Keng Deng,LA,University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 86,864.00

The investigators consider a general system of nonlinear nonlocal hyperbolic
equations describing the dynamics of several interacting populations. The goal
of the project is to develop theories on the existence-uniqueness, long-time
behavior, and numerical approximation of solutions to the hyperbolic system. A
combination of analytical and numerical methods is used to understand the
dynamics of the complex proposed model. To study existence and uniqueness of
solutions to this system, two major approaches are adopted. The first approach
to study the well-posedness of solutions is via the finite difference method
used for classical conservation laws. The second approach to investigate the
well-posedness and long-time behavior of solutions is based on the monotone
approximation and comparison results that have been successfully established for
the semilinear case by the investigators. Although similar approaches have been
used in studying other nonlinear partial differential equation models, their
applications to special cases of the general nonlinear and nonlocal model
considered in this project have only been carried out by the investigators. In
addition, a numerical methodology is developed for an inverse problem governed
by the proposed nonlinear nonlocal system of equations. It uses a connection
between real data and the model to estimate unknown parameters. Meanwhile, a
numerical package is developed for simulating the proposed model. Many
populations and their interactions with the environment have been modeled using
the structured population approach, where the structures of interest are induced
by internal characteristics such as age or size. For example, size-structured
population models with distributed rates have been successfully used to describe
the dynamics of mosquitofish in California rice fields. The structured
population approach has also been used to model the dynamics of hierarchically
structured populations in which the differences between individuals have a
direct effect on the availability of resources. Another application is the
predator-prey interaction between zooplankton and phytoplankton within the
context of algal aggregation. Generally speaking, in order to analyze, manage,
and control the dynamics of a population, it is necessary to understand the
interactions between the population evolution and its environment. In this
project, the investigators study a general structured population model. Due to
its complexity, a combination of analytical and numerical methods is developed
to investigate the dynamics of such a population. In particular, a numerical
package to simulate the proposed model is provided. Furthermore, certain
techniques are introduced to estimate the growth and mortality for individuals
within the population from field data. Because of the generality of the proposed
model, the results help to answer questions about nonlinear phenomena in
population dynamics. In addition, the resulting numerical method can be used by
population biologists to investigate the dynamical behavior of general
population models.
