
* 0211991
* International Conference on Mathematics in Biology
* DMS,POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,07/22/2002
* Louis Gross,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 17,040.00

The investigators organize an international conference on mathematics in
biology. The theme of the conference is "Interdisciplinary Connections and
Living Systems." The goals of the meeting are to highlight current top-level
research, to provide a perspective on future research areas, to provide
opportunities for career development to junior researchers, and to foster
interactions between established researchers and junior researchers. The
conference is linked with a short course on the mathematics of biological
complexity designed for biologists, in order to provide opportunities as well
for new collaborations to develop between empirical researchers and
theoreticians. Quantitative approaches are becoming central to all components of
research in the life sciences. With the rapid expansion of bioinformatics,
computational biology, and proteomics, the underlying mathematical approaches
that are essential to these fields are recognized as critical to further
developments. Applications of mathematics to many areas that directly affect
humans allows us to better evaluate the impacts of alternative management of
natural systems, develop new techniques useful in biotechnology, and design more
appropriate responses to health problems. The rapid developments in these areas
require opportunities in particular for young researchers to gain perspective on
the broad range of subjects that now define mathematical biology. The conference
provides a method to carry this out as well as allowing younger researchers to
participate in a formal mentoring program designed to enhance their ability to
pursue a successful scientific career.
