
* 0211458
* Robust Output Sensitive Algorithms for Subanalytic Geometry
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2002,08/16/2003
* J. Maurice Rojas,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2005
* USD 198,560.00

The investigator aims to complete the nascent theory of output-sensitive
algorithms in real algebraic geometry. Output-sensitive in this context means
that the complexity of the underlying algorithm depends mainly on intrinsic
geometric parameters, e.g., the number of connected components of the underlying
solution set, as opposed to extrinsic parameters like the degrees of the input
polynomials. Such algorithms are faster than the traditional methods of
computational algebra by a factor exponential in the dimension, but have so far
been discovered only in various isolated contexts. So a unified algorithmic
approach has a broad impact. Furthermore, the underlying approach takes
numerical conditioning into account from the outset, thus providing algorithms
that are certifiably precise even when applied to approximate data. Another
novelty is that the underlying theory applies in the even broader arena of real
and p-adic analytic functions. The algorithmic aspects of p-adic analytic
functions are almost completely unexplored, so a secondary focus of this project
is to elaborate and apply this new theory to equation-solving over finite fields
and motivic integration. The investigator combines advanced techniques from
numerical analysis and algebraic geometry to provide a new approach to a
fundamental problem occuring in many applications: solving analytic
inequalities. For example, finding the optimal allocation of resources in a
large organization (e.g., an army, an airline, or a large business) has long
been known to reduce to solving linear inequalities. From a different direction,
it is known that the complexity of certain neural net architectures (which are
useful in training automated bomb-sniffers and pattern recognition systems)
depends critically on understanding the solutions of nonlinear polynomial
inequalities. Both these examples are special cases of analytic inequalities,
and this project provides new algorithms for their solution that are magnitudes
faster than current algorithms. Furthermore, these new algorithms provide
certifiably precise solutions --- a feature which is especially important when
facing uncertain physical data. Another novel aspect is the principal
investigator's recent discovery that the underlying techniques apply to an even
broader context, which can provide new solutions to many problems in the design
of cryptosystems.
