
* 0219326
* ITR: Collaborative Research: Solving PDEs Using Low Separation-Rank Representations and Optimal Quadratures for Expontials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ITR SMALL GRANTS
* 08/15/2002,08/09/2002
* Gregory Beylkin,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2004
* USD 350,000.00

This project develops time-domain solvers for wave propagation problems in two
and three dimensions, with fundamentally improved properties, namely,
significantly reduced sampling requirements and, at the same time, significantly
higher accuracy. Such solvers would allow modeling of linear and, eventually,
nonlinear wave propagation in domains that are thousands of characteristic
wavelengths in size, with interfaces and variable coefficients. This approach
would also provide improved bases for solving nonlinear advection-diffusion
problems. The solvers are built upon two new techniques, namely, optimal
quadratures to represent bandlimited functions, and a numerical generalization
of separation of variables to accelerate applying higher-dimensional operators.
Each technique contains the potential to significantly advance computational
science across a wide range of applications. Together they provide a new
paradigm that efficiently organizes the information contained in operators
governing physical phenomena. This project develops these techniques further,
and develops multiresolution representations for operators and functions, based
on the optimal quadratures.

Any computational modeling of natural phenomena requires discretization of the
underlying mathematical equations. This project addresses questions of
optimality and efficiency of such discretizations, and of organization o
information for two important modeling areas, wave propagation and geophysical
fluid dynamics. This research aims to generate a much wider use of efficient
techniques for representing information in scientific modeling, and to increase
the speed and accuracy of simulations by up to two orders of magnitude, with
foreseeable benefits to such areas as seismology, remote sensing, acoustics,
optics, geophysical fluid dynamics, and quantum chemistry. It would reduce the
computational cost of obtaining high accuracy, which is necessary to describe
phenomena that are highly sensitive to changes in physical parameters, and that
often cause technological bottlenecks. This Collaborative Research is led by the
Department of Applied Mathematics at the University of Colorado at Boulder, and
includes the Department of Meteorology at the University of Maryland at College
Park. It will fund one research associate, two visiting scientists from UMD and
Ohio University, and one graduate student in a diverse research group that
includes a research associate, two postdoctoral researchers, a graduate student,
and four undergraduate students.


