
* 0305580
* Multi-Scale Analysis and Simulation of Nanofiber Coatings: Growth and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NANOMANUFACTURING
* 07/15/2003,07/10/2003
* Gerald Young,OH,University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2005
* USD 106,250.00

Proposal: DMS-0305580 PI: Gerald W. Young [gwyoung@uakron.edu] Institution:
University of Akron Title: MULTISCALE ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION OF NANOFIBER
COATINGS: GROWTH AND APPLICATIONS

ABSTRACT

This project proposes to develop multiscale mathematical models and algorithms
for simulating the growth of a coating on a nanofiber. There is potential
application for coated nanofibers, and the nanotubes that result after
dissolution of the nanofiber cores, in the areas of filtration, composites,
biomedicine, and electronics. The ever increasing demand for these high quality
nanomaterials applications drives the need for models that describe the coating
process as well as models that describe the material and electromagnetic
properties of manufactured nanofibers and nanotubes. The coating of nanofibers
by physical vapor deposition (PVD) methods is a process that is only partially
understood. While data on nanodeposition techniques have been collected for over
a decade, a comprehensive quantitative model of the coating process has not yet
been developed. The proposed research addresses this timely need by outlining a
plan to develop truly multiscale models and simulations of coating growth at the
continuum length scale while proceeding hand-in-hand with experimental
validation. The PVD method allows for control over the experimental conditions
so that comparisons between the experimental results and the model predictions
will be straightforward. The plan to link asymptotic analysis, numerical
simulation, quantum mechanics and molecular dynamics constitutes a major step in
the study of nanoscale phenomena. The models and simulations will connect global
continuum models in a PVD plasma reactor, local nanoscale models around a coated
fiber, and quantummechanical and molecular dynamics models at the atomistic
scale. These models will provide inputs to a macroscopic scale model of the
coating growth so that the morphology of the coating can be tracked via a level
set method. The overall goals of the multiscale modeling, simulation, and
experimental efforts are to provide an understanding of how PVD process
parameters affect the coating growth, to identify an optimal range of parameters
for controlling the growth, to explain experimental observations of coating
growth that are not well understood, and to determine the effective
electromagnetic properties of the completed product.

This project proposes to develop multiscale mathematical models and algorithms
for simulating the growth of a coating on a nanofiber. The coating of nanofibers
with specific materials is a relatively new process for producing coated
nanofibers and nanotubes (that result after removing the nanofiber cores). These
nanostructures have many potential applications in filtration, composites,
biomedicine, and electronics. The proposed combination of modeling and
experimental efforts will help to address the fundamental unanswered questions
concerning the physics and chemistry of nanofiber coating and the properties of
the coating. In particular, this project will provide the understanding
necessary to control the coating thickness and uniformity to produce nanotubes
with desired dimensional features. In addition to its impact on scientific
research, this project will enhance the training of graduate students in
nanoscale modeling. This is essential for the development of a strong industrial
base in nanotechnology. This research project will allow The University of Akron
to develop the expertise necessary to augment existing programs to include a
specialization in nanotechnology modeling, at the graduate and the undergraduate
level. Further, it is anticipated that the enhanced understanding of nanoscale
manufacturing processes gained during this research effort will allow
manufacturers to improve existing products and to develop new products.
