
* 0306622
* A Nonconforming Spectral Element Method for Electroosmotically Induced Microfluidic Mixing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2003,08/22/2003
* Ali Beskok,TX,Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 02/28/2007
* USD 157,756.00

In this project, we will develop a comprehensive theoretical and numerical
research program to investigate the micro-scale species mixing. We will
particularly study mixing induced by time-periodic electroosmosis that is driven
by externally applied electric fields, hence eliminating the need for mechanical
pumping components. Rapid switching between several electric field
configurations will be utilized to create different flow fields, resulting in
increased interspecies contact area and/or chaotic mixing. Numerical simulations
of mixing require robust algorithms that minimize the dispersion and diffusion
errors. To address this need, we will develop nonconforming spectral element
algorithms using the Mortar element and constrained approximation methods. Our
approach will allow both h-type and p-type nonconformities for efficient
resolution of all flow features, including the thin electric double layers. In
addition to the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes and species transport equation
solvers, we will develop necessary algorithms to calculate the particle
trajectories, Poincare sections, and other tools required to characterize the
chaotic mixing and mixing efficiency. Implementation of both the Mortar element
and constrained approximation methods will also allow detailed comparisons
between the accuracy and computational efficiency of these two schemes.

In the absence of turbulence, mixing of fluids on micro-scales requires very
long mixing lengths and long times. This creates significant challenges in
design of efficient mixers for micro-fluidic devices, such as micro-total-
analysis-systems, utilized in detection of biological and chemical agents for
medical, pharmaceutical, and national security applications. Utilization of
time-periodic electroosmosis allows design of new mixing strategies that either
enhance diffusive mixing by increasing the interspecies contact area, or induce
chaotic mixing. This project will enable enhanced understanding and
characterization of electroosmotically induced chaotic and diffusive mixing. The
research will facilitate development of new micro-fluidic mixing concepts, which
can be implemented in design of new efficient micro-mixers for micro- and nano-
fluidic applications.
