
* 0308347
* Finite Element Approximation of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2003,06/12/2003
* Richard Falk,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 172,375.00

The first area of study is the approximation properties of several types of
finite element spaces defined on irregular hexahedral elements obtained by
trilinear mappings from a reference cube. Such spaces are used to approximate
three-dimensional vector functions and arise naturally in many applications,
including the approximation of Maxwell's equations and the use of mixed and
least squares finite element methods for second order elliptic equations. The
research is to determine precisely what is needed for optimal order
approximation and construct families of finite element spaces that have this
property. The second area of study is the finite element approximation by
discontinuous Galerkin methods of convection-diffusion problems. The aim is to
derive new local error estimates in order to understand which methods of this
promising class of approximation schemes work well both for diffusion-dominated
and convection-dominated second order partial differential equations. The third
area of research is to use the now well-developed theory for the approximation
of the Reissner-Mindlin plate model (used to study the bending of a thin plate
under external loads) as a basis for developing new approaches to the use of
finite element methods for the approximation of elastic shells. Both the plate
model and to a greater extent the shell model suffer from the problem of
"locking'' when standard finite element approximation schemes are applied,
causing poor approximations for thin plates and shells. The final area of
research involves the design of effective numerical methods for the Einstein
equations, used to numerically simulate the emission of gravitation radiation
from massive astronomical events such as black hole collisions. The approach
taken will be to use simpler model problems with some of the same features to
understand why standard numerical methods for the Einstein equations fail and to
help design methods that overcome these problems.

The mathematical modeling of physical and biological processes using partial
differential equations has become the standard method of studying a host of
important scientific problems. Since it is usually not possible to solve such
equations exactly, the development of reliable and efficient numerical
approximation schemes, which can be implemented on computers, makes this into a
practical approach and is central to progress in many areas of science and
engineering. This project studies "finite element" type approximation schemes
for mathematical models of a variety of applied problems. These include flows of
gases and fluids in which both convection and diffusion are present, Maxwell's
equations for the modeling of the electric and magnetic fields in a body subject
to an applied current, the bending of thin structures (e.g., a roof) under
external loads, and Einstein's equations for the simulation of the emission of
gravitation radiation from massive astronomical events such as black hole
collisions. This work is expected to lead to new and improved numerical methods
for use by scientists and engineers in applied computations.
