
* 0309667
* Temporal and Spatio-Temporal Forcing of Oscillatory and Excitable Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2003,03/23/2007
* Mary Silber,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 300,924.00

Proposal: DMS-0309667 PI: David Mary Silber [m-silber@northwestern.edu]
Institution: Northwestern University Title: Temporal and Spatio-Temporal Forcing
of Oscillatory and Excitable Systems

ABSTRACT

The investigator, together with students and colleagues, studies three problems
in which temporal or spatio-temporal forcing of oscillatory or excitable systems
is important: (1) parametrically excited surface wave patterns, (2) spatio-
temporal local feedback in pattern forming systems, and (3) Hopf bifurcation
based mechanisms for amplification of sound by inner ear hair cells. Faraday
waves, excited on the free surface of a fluid, form in a wide variety of
patterns depending on the fluid properties and the form of the periodic forcing
function. The investigator's research program focuses on a bifurcation analysis
of three- and four-wave interactions when a periodic sequence of delta-function
impulses is applied to the fluid container. This idealized forcing function
admits unprecedented analytic progress to be made in the linear and weakly
nonlinear regimes that apply at or near onset of instability. This project
probes how the periodic forcing function may be designed to favor particular
patterns. In the second research project spatio-temporal feedback is used to
probe the nonlinear pattern formation process, as well as to actively control
it. The control of spatio-temporal patterns by local time-delayed and spatially-
transformed feedback will be investigated through linear stability analysis,
equivariant bifurcation theory, and numerical simulation. In the third project,
models of inner ear hair cells, responsible for translating sound-induced motion
into electrical signals, are analysed. The initial focus is on amphibian hair
cells, for which two separate mechanisms that contribute to the cells' frequency
selectivity have been identified - one due to active mechanical motions of the
hair bundle and the other captured by an electrochemical model of ion channels
in the hair cell body. In each model proximity to a Hopf bifurcation contributes
to the amplification properties of the hair cells. The investigator's research
project uses dynamical systems methods to derive a reliable reduced model, from
existing detailed physiological models of the two Hopf bifurcation mechanisms,
with attention to the effects of this two-stage amplification on gain and
frequency selectivity. This project lays the foundation for further
investigation of the effects of coupling the hair cell bundles.

Many spatially extended nonlinear systems, including hydrodynamic and laser
systems, exhibit spatio-temporal chaotic behavior when subjected to external
forcing. The investigator's research program will lead to a deeper understanding
of how to eliminate irregular behavior in favor of spatio-temporally regular
patterns. This is done through appropriate design of the temporal forcing
function in the case of hydrodynamic waves, or through spatio-temporal feedback
in the case of nonlinear optical and chemical systems. Careful comparison
between theoretical results and results of experimental investigations will be
made, providing valuable feedback to this research effort. The investigator's
analysis of biophysical models of inner ear hair cells contributes to a greater
understanding of how the nonlinearities in two proposed mechanisms of frequency
selectivity and amplification might work together to achieve greater gain. The
training of applied mathematics graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
interdisciplinary research activities is an integral part of the research
effort.




