
* 0309694
* Computational Polyhedral Geometry: Applications in Algebra, Combinatorics, and Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2003,06/12/2003
* Jesus De Loera,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2007
* USD 188,857.00

The investigator uses methods from commutative algebra, convexity, and analysis
to design computer algorithms that allow the practical fast detection or
counting of lattice points inside rational convex polytopes. The main idea is to
represent the lattice points using rational functions. This can be done in at
least three different complementary ways. He implements the methods in the
computer software LattE. The investigator uses this software to help investigate
theoretical questions in combinatorics (properties of Ehrhart functions),
algebra (representation theory and partitions), and optimization (new integer
programming algorithms). The investigator carries out geometric, analytic, and
computational studies of problems in the convexity and combinatorics of
polyhedra, including development of algorithms and software. Informally
speaking, the project can be thought of as an attempt to understand how to count
the possible non-negative integer solutions of a system of linear equations.
With two unknowns, this amounts to counting the number of regularly distributed
points -- lattice points -- in a polygon. With more unknowns, the solutions
correspond geometrically to the higher-dimensional analogs to cubes and
polygons. Examples of regularly distributed points are arrangements of atoms or
crystals. Many of the theoretical questions under study are motivated by
problems in data security and computation (in the context of RSA encryption,
which is used in internet transactions), operations research (via certain
techniques for solving integer programs when levels of uncertainty are
expected), statistics (contingency tables, data analysis), and problems in
abstract algebra (number theory, representation theory). The training of
students is a very important component of the project.
