
* 0309647
* Numerical Schemes for Multiscale Stochastic Bio-chemical Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2003,07/10/2003
* Muruhan Rathinam,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 125,377.00

Rathinam The investigator develops efficient numerical schemes, software, and
theoretical analysis of these schemes for the simulation of continuous-time
discrete-state stochastic dynamic systems that exhibit "multiscale behaviour."
Examples of such systems include chemically reacting molecular systems, traffic
models, and markets. In principle such systems can be simulated exactly one
"event" at a time. But the computational costs are often prohibitive for large
systems. Continuous macroscopic models -- either stochastic or deterministic
differential equaitons -- often prove to be valid approximations to such models
and in that case several numerical methods exist for their efficient simulation.
However, some systems exhibit "multiscale behaviour" in the sense that only
parts of the system may be approximated by such macroscopic models while the
remaining components need to be represented by a discrete and stochastic model.
Motivating examples are found in intra-cellular gene transcription mechanisms,
where the fluctuations of certain key molecular species present in very small
numbers have a critical effect on the final state of the system. The
investigator aims to develop numerical schemes and theory that target such
multiscale systems. These schemes allow simulations to leap over several events
while maintaining required level of accuracy. Computer simulation methods and
their theory are well developed for systems, such as a space craft in motion,
that follow a deterministic and continuous motion. However, in some complex
dynamic systems, such as chemical reactions inside a cell, the behaviour of
traders in a large market, and the internet traffic of data, the entities change
in small jumps that occur randomly in time. The investigator develops important
new tools for the efficient computer simulation of such dynamic phenomena. The
impact of these tools is in the scientific computation of biological, social,
and economic systems. This project also provides opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to develop their skills in modeling and simulation of
such phenomena, which are useful in financial, pharmaceutical, and biotechnology
industries.


