
* 0310609
* Collaborative Research: The Least-Squares Meshfree Particle Finite Element Method
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,06/19/2003
* Bo-Nan Jiang,MI,Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 120,000.00

Although the finite element method has been astonishingly successful in solving
various problems in engineering and science, it has significant drawbacks: mesh
generation and remeshing are very difficult and time-consuming. Meshfree methods
may avoid these difficulties by constructing approximation functions entirely in
terms of a set of nodes. Most meshfree methods are based on the Galerkin
principle and employ moving least-squares approximation for the construction of
shape functions. Although there is no need for an explicit mesh in the
construction of moving least-squares shape functions, a separate background mesh
is required to integrate the weak form, so they are not truly meshfree methods.
Due to the non-interpolative character of the moving least-squares
approximation, the enforcement of essential boundary conditions in the Galerkin
formulation is quite awkward. Moreover, the moving least-squares approximation
is more expensive computationally than the finite element interpolation. In the
proposed research, we will develop a least-squares meshfree particle finite
element method which combines the features of the least-squares finite element
method and the meshfree particle method. The least-squares finite element method
(LSFEM), based on minimization of the L2 norm of the residuals of a first-order
system of differential equations, is a simple, efficient and robust technique,
and can solve almost any kind of partial differential equation with the same
mathematical/computational formulation. Since the least-squares method doesn't
make use of the integration by parts for converting domain integration into
boundary integration, and the meshfree particle method employs the usual finite
element interpolations based on particles, all troubles that plague the
Garlerkin-based meshfree methods disappear. The least-squares meshfree particle
finite element method always leads to a symmetric positive definite system of
linear algebraic equations. The matrix-free particle-by-particle conjugate
gradient method can be used to solve very large problems on parallel computers,
and the implementation is straightforward..

The purpose of this project is to develop a new computer method to simulate
complicated engineering designs and sophisticated multi-physical processes with
much greater accuracy and efficiency. Achievements of this project would enable
numerical simulations beyond current capabilities in many important applications
of national interest, including car crash safety analysis, noise reduction of
cars, energy efficiency in full cells, heat reduction in semiconductor devices,
etc.
