
* 0310656
* Numerical Techniques for Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with Non-Gaussian Noise
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2003,07/21/2003
* David Saunders,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 99,823.00

The goal of this project is to develop and analyze numerical methods for
parabolic stochastic partial differential equations (SPDE's) driven by non-
Gaussian noise. As a first step, work will focus on the stochastic heat equation
in one dimension, with an additive noise term given by a Poisson random measure.
The research will proceed along two paths that will be developed in parallel:
mathematical analysis and numerical experimentation. These techniques will be
used in order to study the application of both finite difference methods
(including the explicit and fully implicit Euler methods and the Crank-Nicholson
method) and finite element methods. Once the analysis of the heat equation is
complete, it will be generalized to quasi-linear second order SPDE's with non-
Gaussian noise. After the analysis of the one-dimensional case is complete,
equations in many spatial dimensions will be considered.

Stochastic partial differential equations (SPDE's) are used to model many
phenomena in the natural and social sciences. SPDE's are applied in a wide
variety of applications in oceanography, neurophysiology, quantum physics,
economics, and the physics of porous media (as applied, for example, in the
geology of oil extraction). The purpose of this research is to develop and
analyze techniques for the simulation of such equations where the randomness
assumes the form of a series of discrete "shocks" (as is often the case in
scientific applications). The development of the mathematics, computer
algorithms and software for the analysis and simulation SPDE's will have a broad
impact on the fields mentioned above, since simulation and numerical solution
are an important part of the application of any stochastic model in science and
engineering. Most current models using SPDE's make use of continuous, "Gaussian"
noise. This is not necessarily due to the suitability of such a specification,
but rather to its ease of application and implementation (and wider familiarity
among scientists and engineers). The study of SPDE's driven by noise terms that
are not Gaussian, and methods for their numerical solution in particular, will
make an important new tool available to researchers in many disciplines.
