
* 0311786
* Implicity Restarted Block Arnoldi (IRBA) Method
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2003,08/07/2003
* James Baglama,RI,University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 64,995.00

The most commonly used approximation techniques for large sparse nonsymmetric
eigenvalue problems are based on the Arnoldi process. In 1992, Sorensen
developed the Implicitly Restarted Arnoldi (IRA) method. This resulted in the
FORTRAN software package called ARPACK (1996). In 1997, we created a block-
version, the Implicitly Restarted Block Lanczos (IRBL) method for solving
symmetric eigenvalue problems. When there are multiple or very close eigenvalues
our method outperforms ARPACK. In 2002, we developed a MATLAB code irbleigs.m
that implements the IRBL method. A block code has many advantages, in
particular, it allows the use of Level 3 BLAS matrix-matrix products to increase
performance and can locate multiple or clustered eigenvalues without the need of
any deflation techniques. Although, Lehoucq and Maschhoff created a block
Arnoldi method in 1997 which is a straightforward generalization of the (IRA)
method there are implementation issues involved that warrant further
investigation before a viable computer code can be created. We propose to
develop the implicitly restarted block Arnoldi (IRBA) method to solve the
nonsymmetric eigenvalue problem and create a public domain computer code. Our
method will use Householder transformations instead of the Gram-Schimdt process
to maintain strong orthogonality and will be based on the equivalent Wu and
Simon's (2001) approach.

Solving eigenvalue problems are a common part of our life whether we realize it
or not. The software package that I will develop will be very helpful in solving
numerous applications, including; noise reduction in airplanes, vibrational
analysis in buildings and bridges, quantum mechanics, image deblurring, and face
recognition.
