
* 0311763
* High-Order Asymptotic and Numerical Techniques for the Simulation of Wave Scattering Processes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,06/10/2003
* Fernando Reitich,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 154,561.00

The PI proposes a development of effective and accurate algorithms for
simulation of electromagnetic and acoustic wave scattering processes. The
project includes the development of efficient, error-controllable schemes based
on asymptotic expansions and on direct discretizations. While the computational
emphasis will be on efficiency, error-controllability will demand careful
mathematical analysis; both requirements will call for a number of intellectual
innovations. Among the methods based on asymptotic expansions, the PI proposes
to: (i) further advance his work on high-order geometric perturbation methods.
Here, effort will concentrate on the design of alternative schemes with improved
stability properties; and (ii) the search for an innovative (rigorous) high-
frequency (integral-equation) solver for scattering by surfaces and bounded
bodies that exhibits the advantages of asymptotic high-frequency treatments
(i.e. a frequency-independent number of degrees of freedom) while allowing for
error control at any fixed, finite frequency. A combination of the developments
in (i) and (ii) will also be sought in the design of a "multi-scale" algorithm.
The program on direct methods, on the other hand, shall be concerned with the
development of algorithms for the treatment of penetrable bodies. For this, it
is proposed to develop (iii) accelerated high-order methods for (volumetric)
integral equations; novelties in the proposed approach include the design of
specialized high-order quadrature rules for volume potentials, and their
incorporation into a general strategy for their fast evaluation, based on
(planar arrays of) "equivalent sources". Finally, the proposal presents a
project on (iv) certain specific aspects of (Runge-Kutta) discontinuous Galerkin
finite element approaches, including the implementation of exact radiation
conditions, the design of optimal inter-element fluxes and time-integration
strategies, and the derivation of a-posteriori error estimates for adaptive
error control.

Electromagnetic and acoustic devices are ubiquitous in present day technology.
Indeed, electromagnetism and acoustics have found and continue to find
applications in a wide array of areas, encompassing both civilian and military
purposes. Among the former, applications of current interest include those
related to communications (e.g. transmission through optical fiber lines), to
biomedical devices and health (e.g. ultrasound, tomography, power-line safety,
etc), to circuit or magnetic storage design (electromagnetic compatibility, hard
disc operation), to geophysical prospecting, and to non-destructive evaluation
(e.g. crack detection), to name but just a few. Applications in defense, on the
other hand, include the design of military hardware with decreased signatures
("virtual prototyping"); automatic target recognition (e.g. bunkers, mines and
buried ordnance, etc); propagation effects on communications and radar systems
(e.g. over complex terrains, through the atmosphere, etc); tactical antenna
design; etc. Although the principles of acoustic and electromagnetic wave
propagation are well understood, their application to practical configurations
of current interest, such as those that arise in connection with the examples
above, is significantly complicated and far beyond manual calculation in all but
the simplest aspects. These complications typically arise from geometrical
and/or compositional complexity in the underlying structures, from the
intricacies of the electromagnetic fields, or from both. The significant
advances in computer modeling of acoustic and electromagnetic wave interactions
that have taken place over the last two decades, on the other hand, have made it
possible to shift the classical "trial and error" design paradigm for devices
that work on such interactions to one that heavily relies on computer
simulation. Still, the sheer complexity of some applications of current interest
and the ever-increasing industrial demand for faster and more reliable software,
present significant challenges to state-of-the-art numerical solvers. This
proposal is focused on the design and testing of improved algorithms that, based
on sophisticated mathematical techniques and developments, will result in
implementations that will substantially expand on the capabilities of presently
available simulators.




