
* 0311902
* A New Approximation Technique for Maxwell's Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,06/09/2003
* James Bramble,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 324,544.00

Bressloff 0209824 The long term goal of this project is to develop a dynamical
theory of how neurons in primary visual cortex (V1) generate a tuned response to
multiple (rather than single) features of a visual stimulus, and how these
responses are spatially integrated across the cortex to generate more global
information about a visual scene. A primary focus of the work is to extend
current network models of orientation tuning to incorporate the fact that V1
cells are also selective for spatial frequency. This is motivated by the
considerable physiological and psychophysical evidence suggesting that cortical
circuits carry out a localized two-dimensional Fourier decomposition of a
stimulus rather than simply performing local edge detection. Optical imaging of
the surface of cortex has revealed an intricate relationship between the
distribution of orientation and spatial frequency preferences across cortex. How
correlations between these two feature preference maps is manifested by the
local and long-range circuitry of V1, and the consequences for the large-scale
dynamics of V1 is also investigated. The primary visual cortex (V1) located at
the back of the brain is the first cortical area to process visual information
received from the eyes. One of the classical results regarding the function of
neurons (brain cells) in V1 is that they analyze very local features of a visual
image, that is, they carry out image decomposition. (For example, V1 cells are
sensitive to the orientation of an edge representing the boundary between a
light and dark region of the image. This discovery by Hubel and Wiesel led to
the Nobel prize in medicine). A very important question that follows from this
is how our coherent perception of the world is reconstructed. Until recently, it
was thought that the local information from cells in V1 was passed through
higher order processing stages in the brain where cognition occurs. However, it
is becoming clear that long-range circuitry within V1 could itself contribute to
the process of reconstruction. The basic aim of the proposal is to investigate
this process by developing a large-scale mathematical model of primary visual
cortex that incorporates the latest anatomical data regarding its internal
circuitry. Understanding how early stages in the visual brain encode images has
important applications to information technology (such as the development of
artificial vision systems) and biotechnology (such as the development of an
artificial prosthesis for the visually impaired). In the latter case it might be
possible one day to artificially stimulate primary visual cortex to induce a
visual sensation, rather like a controlled visual hallucination.


