
* 0311263
* Free Boundary Problems for Systems: Toward a Comprehensive Theory of Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,06/24/2003
* Joseph Jerome,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 60,756.00

This proposal investigates a new class of systems, formulated in terms of time
dependent and stationary partial differential equations. The systems have
inherent switching properties, leading to their interpretation as free boundary
problems. What defines them as new is their characterization as systems rather
than scalar equations, underscoring interlocking, complex dependencies. This
work, part of which is joint with Siegfried Carl, extends the work of many
mathematicians who have worked on free boundary problems for scalar equations
during the last four decades. Systems of free boundary problems are associated
with such diverse models as change of phase, semi-classical band gap theories,
threshold switching, and combustion. Using significant models for illustration,
we employ a multi-tiered analysis, permitting the development of an
infrastructure for analysis and computation. The principal investigator and
Michael Rose introduced the initial comprehensive finite element study of the
two-phase Stefan problem in 1982. In this proposal, iteration and discretization
are studied as companion entities. A particularly significant aspect is the
identification of the system map and its efficient approximation via smoothing
and linearization. The cooperation of Monica Torres has been secured to study
the interface of these systems with homogenization theory and the theory of
fully nonlinear partial differential equations.

Mathematical models of free boundary problems build upon a rich tradition. Free
boundary problems were studied intensively during the 1970s and 1980s. A major
impetus in the U.S. was the construction of the trans-Alaska pipeline, which
required knowledge of the complex process of melting of permafrost. The free
boundary refers to the so-called mushy region between solid and liquid phases. A
mathematical model of temperature, called the two-phase Stefan problem, was
employed for this purpose. One of the principal contributors to this effort was
John Wheeler of the Exxon Corporation. Progress was slow in coming in the
modeling of systems, where several effects may be present. Associated free
boundary problems may arise in many application areas, due to discontinuous
switching induced by sources or sinks within the system. An environmental
example is the discharge of a contaminant species into a river, the regulation
of the discharge, and the ensuing response of control mechanisms to ameliorate
the discharge. Sophisticated systems of partial differential equations,
incorporating physical principles describing the contaminant density and the
river temperature, are utilized, and include the switching phenomena. The
incorporation of quantum principles into models of nanostructures also induces
switching and free boundary problems, as does the study of certain processes of
combustion. Another application of these ideas, which is not pursued in this
proposal, is the pricing of certain financial instruments. An area of broader
impact of the proposal has been identified in relation to the international
community sponsoring the Workshops on Computational Electronics. The principal
investigator has been an advisory panel member since 1990, and details of some
of this work, part of the effort toward making quantum computing possible, will
be disseminated to the community at a regularly scheduled workshop, and in the
journal, Computational Electronics. Publication will also occur in regular
mathematics journals.
