
* 0311807
* Recovery Type A Posteriori Error Estimates
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,06/19/2003
* Zhimin Zhang,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 172,500.00

Zhang The investigator studies a posteriori error estimates for the numerical
solution of partial differential equations. He develops general mathematical
theory for recovery type a posteriori error estimates and explores a new
gradient recovery technique and associated error estimator that has better
properties than the existing ones. Some recent mathematical theory in finite
element superconvergence, asymptotic regularity, as well as improved interior
analysis, is employed in the project. Numerical solutions of differential
equations are essential in all areas of science and engineering. But the
numerical solutions are often less accurate than one desires. It is therefore
important to estimate the error and to use that estimate to improve the
accuracy. Error estimation is essential for effective and reliable computation.
Recovery type a posteriori error estimates are post-processing techniques that
use a numerical solution produced by some base method to produce approximations
that are of higher order of accuracy than the base method solution, and that
combine the two solutions to estimate the error in the approximate solution. The
techniques are common but not theoretically understood or justified, especially
for nonuniform meshes. The investigator studies these methods and develops a new
kind of recovery type error estimator that offers some advantages over present
alternatives. The project fills a gap between engineering practice and
mathematical theoretical development. The project includes training of graduate
students. There are interdisciplinary connections with engineers and other
scientific computing disciplines, and with industry.


