
* 0311996
* Collaborative Research: Symbolic Computations in Algebra and Topology
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,06/03/2003
* Henry Schenck,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 85,427.00

Schenck This is a collaborative project between Henry Schenck and Alexandru
Suciu. The investigators study the interplay between the topology of a manifold
X and certain algebraic structures related to X. From a theoretical standpoint,
such an undertaking involves a mainstream question of algebra, geometry, and
topology: how geometric, topological, or combinatorial aspects of a manifold
manifest in algebraic properties of objects such as the cohomology ring,
fundamental group, and resonance varieties. The focus is on the case where X is
the complement of an arrangement of lines or rational curves in the projective
plane, or a configuration space. The investigators develop a software package of
algorithms to study the aforementioned algebraic invariants of X. The software
is used to generate tables of arrangements (similar to the tables used in knot
theory), providing an extensive list of examples and invariants. The
investigators use these tables to search for counterexamples to open
conjectures, and to spot patterns leading to theorems. The tables and code are a
community resource, available online, and generate considerable synergy between
disparate groups (algebraists, topologists, combinatorialists) involved in
MSRI's special semester on hyperplane arrangements (Fall 2004). There is also a
practical benefit: hyperplane arrangements and configuration spaces are
ubiquitous in pure and applied mathematics, arising in numerous areas including
braid groups, knot theory, robotics, approximation theory, and mathematical
modelling. For example, in approximation theory one can approximate a function
of several variables, say k of them in a k-dimensional region, by dividing the
region into pieces and on each piece approximating the function by polynomials;
the resulting piecewise polynomials are called splines. Technically, the region
is divided into simplices using hyperplanes; the set of splines on the resulting
simplicial complex is an algebraic object that depends strongly on the geometry
of the chosen hyperplanes. In robotics, arrangements arise in motion planning
(finding a collision-free motion between two placements of a given robot among a
set of objects). Configuration spaces show up in multidimensional billiards
(describing the periodic trajectories of a mass-point in a domain in Euclidean
space). Information about the structure of the cohomology ring translates into
bounds on the complexity of the motion planning problem, or bounds on the number
of periodic trajectories. Thus, finding fast algorithms to compute algebraic
invariants associated to arrangements and configuration spaces could have real
world applications. The problems the investigators study are also well suited to
introducing graduate (and undergraduate!) students to research and the use of
computational tools. Students conduct computational experiments, discover
patterns and the structure of the problem, and thus have motivation to learn new
theoretical tools.


