
* 0311378
* Collaborative Research: A Software System for Algebraic Geometry Research
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 07/01/2003,04/03/2007
* Daniel Grayson,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 251,345.00

Grayson This is a collaborative project carreied out by Daniel R. Grayson and
Michael E. Stillman. Macaulay 2 is a free computer algebra system dedicated to
the qualitative investigation of systems of polynomial equations in many
variables. The investigators continue development of Macaulay 2. They upgrade
existing algorithms, install more algorithms, develop and publish new
algorithms, implement new algorithms as they are discovered, add symbolic-
numeric algorithm support, improve the documentation, and make systemic software
changes that help contributors to write, test, and document code. Areas where
new algorithms can make an impact include the study of numerical systems,
fractions with specified types of denominators, ideal factorization, systems
where the multiplication of the variables doesn't satisfy the commutative law,
geometric optimization, the analysis of observations of gene expression levels
over time, and bioinformatics. Macaulay 2 is part of the infrastructure that
supports mathematical research involving systems of polynomial equations in many
variables. A measure of its impact is that at least 70 research papers have
cited Macaulay 2, at least seven mathematicians have contributed code, and books
and course materials are now using it. The experimental results found with
Macaulay 2 are helping in the formulation and development of tractable
conjectures. Now that the software is approaching maturity, the investigators
place more emphasis on recruiting developers from the research community and on
collaborations with other scientists on both mathematical and interdisciplinary
projects that exploit Macaulay 2's capabilities. They introduce graduate
students and postdocs to the use of computers in research mathematics through
visits and a 5 day workshop in Urbana. The study of systems of polynomial
equations has a long and distinguished history in pure and applied mathematics,
with recent impact on such fields as cryptography and robotics. Increasing
computer power, combined with further development of Macaulay 2, enables
scientists to expand dramatically its scope.
