
* 0312040
* Analytical and Computational Studies of High-Speed Flows in Single-and Multi-Phase Reacting Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2003,09/01/2006
* Donald Schwendeman,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2006
* USD 240,000.00

Computational and analytical studies of chemically reacting flows in exploding
and detonating media are proposed. Of primary interest are condensed-phase
energetic materials, typified by a heterogeneous microstructure consisting of
solid grains of the explosive component held together by an inert binder. Such
materials are morphologically, thermomechanically, and chemically complex. There
is a vast disparity between the microscales at which energy is released during
combustion, and the scale of a typical explosive device. Accordingly, existing
mathematical models are approximate, describe averaged behavior, and incorporate
either implicitly or explicitly a certain degree of homogenization. The proposed
work focuses on two available continuum descriptions. The first, called ignition
and growth, treats the explosive as a homogeneous mixture of reacting and
product species. The second employs a multiphase approach and considers the
reactants and products as two distinct phases. At a fundamental level both
mathematical models are systems of hyperbolic PDEs, consisting of the balance
laws of mass, momentum and energy, supplemented by prescriptions for the
reaction rates and the equations of state. Application of appropriate mechanical
and/or thermal stimulus leads to the formation of detonation waves. The
objective of the proposed research is the elucidation, via a mathematical and
computational study, of the mechanisms that underlie the evolutionary behavior
of these waves. We shall focus on their birth, propagation, interaction with
disturbances, and response to changes in the configuration of the confining
boundary. Traditionally, the major emphasis in explosives science has been to
initiate a detonation reliably and predictably. That, in turn, has required a
precise knowledge of the kind and strength of stimulus usually a mechanical
impulse), and the associated time and distance, needed for the initial shock to
transition into a self-sustained detonation. Mathematical models have indeed
been employed with that end in mind. This study, however, proposes that these
models be investigated systematically in a broader context. Such an exercise is
absolutely essential if one is to rationally assess the safety of devices that
employ high-energy explosives. This is because in case of an accident, the
stimulus is unlikely to be in the form of a strong, planar shock applied with
precision. For such a case, one must discover how the explosive will respond
when subjected to a weak compressive pulse or thermal gradient. We intend to do
so by posing and investigating suitable problems for the two classes of
mathematical models. Such a detailed understanding should pave the way for the
rational derivation of further reductions or approximations that are better
suited for engineering computations and design.
