
* 0312292
* Development of Efficient Algorithms for Computational Electromagnetism and Computerized Tomography
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2003,03/04/2005
* Leonid Kunyansky,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 32,098.00

Kunyansky The first part of this project consists in developing fast, high-order
accurate algorithms for solving eigenvalue and boundary value problems for
certain elliptic partial differential equations that describe electromagnetic
wave scattering by surfaces of objects and wave propagation in photonic
crystals. This work grows from a set of highly efficient numerical techniques
recently proposed by the author (in collaboration with O. Bruno, Caltech) for
problems of acoustic scattering. Those methods, which permit computing of
scattering fields from hundred-wavelength-sized objects, with relative
accuracies in the range from 0.0001 to 0.000001, are not directly applicable to
the problems of the current project, due to a different structure of
hypersingular kernels in the scattering equations and a different mathematical
nature of the eigenproblems of photonics. However, further development of this
very promising general approach promises new computational methods of the same
unprecedented accuracy and efficiency. The second part of the project is devoted
to the design of analytic (theoretically exact) algorithms and search for new
analytic inversion formulas for Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography
(SPECT). In particular, explicit inversion formulas recently discovered by the
author are used to develop an efficient algorithm for 3-D SPECT reconstruction
from parallel beam measurements made from non-planar directions. Also, an
analytic solution is sought to a practically important problem of 2-D SPECT
reconstruction from a reduced (collected in the 180 degree angular range) set of
measurements. The need for efficient computational methods arises in several
broad areas of application. For example, non-invasive testing, remote sensing
and, most importantly, radar and radar evasion technologies require very
accurate solution of surface scattering problems. The investigator develops new,
fast, very accurate methods for computing solutions of such problems. The new
computational techniques find applications in the theory and design of photonic
bandgap structures (photonic crystals) -- artificial man-made materials that are
anticipated to become a main building block of devices for the next generation
of optical communication networks, and for optical and quantum computing
technologies of tomorrow. Finally, the novel analytic methods and algorithms of
SPECT that result from this project are important for the theory and practice of
functional medical tomography, studying abnormalities of blood flow in patients.


