
* 0314001
* Computational Methods in Modular Representation Theory
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2003,07/02/2003
* Klaus Lux,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 183,000.00

Lux The investigator studies computational representations of a finite group
over finite fields. Groups can be thought of as the mathematical abstraction of
the common notion of symmetries. As such they arise in mathematics and natural
sciences such as for example physics, chemistry, and biology. The symmetry group
of an object usually also acts on function spaces that are related to the given
object. This is a so-called linear action and in the case where the function
space is finite dimensional the group acts as invertible matrices on the space.
Such a realization is called a (matrix-) representation of the group. In this
context one distinguishes two cases, the one where the matrices are written over
a field of characteristic 0 such as the complex numbers, or the case where the
entries are in a finite field. This case is particularly interesting since here
the representation theory is tightly connected to the structure of the group.
The investigator develops a share package of programs in the computer algebra
system GAP. This system is free of charge, well documented, and widely used. The
theory of representations in the finite characteristic case is far from being
fully understood. For example, up to now not even all the irreducible
representations for all finite simple groups are known. The share package
implements algorithms to help solve several questions concerning the
representations of a finite group. First of all it enables the user to compute
the projective indecomposable representations of a given group or alternatively
access them via a data base that is provided by the package. These
representations are of fundamental importance when one is interested in getting
an overview of all representations of the group. From the projective
indecomposable representations one can derive an algebra called the basic
algebra that has the same representation theory as the group. This algebra is
much smaller than the group algebra itself and hence also has important
applications in computing with representations. The share package therefore also
contains functions to compute the basic algebra. Even though the basic algebra
is a very important invariant, barely anything is known about it even for
specific groups. The share package increases the knowledge about specific groups
tremendously. Moreover, there is an explicit algorithmic connection between
representations of a group and that of its basic algebra. The share package
incorporates functions that allow the user to analyze and construct
representations using this connection. This is of particular importance in
computations of the cohomology ring or the Ext-algebra of a group. A group is a
mathematical object that captures notions of arrangement and symmetry -- for
example, the different orientations of a square when turned ninety degrees at a
time comprise a group. Groups arise in mathematics and natural sciences such as
physics, chemistry, and biology. Exploiting the group structure often leads to
deep insights into problems in these areas. The investigator develops ways to
represent and computationally study finite groups. He implements these methods
in computer software, building on the freely available software system GAP. The
package he develops contains data bases of computed results. These are
accessible to the public via the GAP system and alternatively on the world wide
web. GAP itself is used in the educational environment and as part of GAP one
possible application of the software package is in the class room. It gives
students hands-on experience with representation theory free of charge.


