
* 0314463
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and Properties of Co-continuous Blends - A Numerical and Experimental Investigation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2003,07/22/2003
* Vittorio Cristini,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2006
* USD 132,494.00

A joint theoretical, numerical and experimental study of co-continuous polymer
blends under processing flow conditions is performed. Co-continuous blends
consist of distinct continuous phases that form under appropriate conditions of
flow and mass compositions near the phase-inversion point. This co-continuous
regime leads to synergistic properties of the materials after processing, such
as high electrical conductivity coupled to light weight and optimal mechanical
response. This study is aimed at the development of criteria for detection,
conditions for production, and to a better understanding of the stability of co-
continuous blends. The Newtonian flow regime is investigated and the effect of a
third component, i.e. surfactants, is studied. To perform this study, novel,
state-of-the-art numerical methods are developed and applied to perform large-
scale simulations. In parallel, experiments are targeted to provide insight and
validation of the mathematical models, simulations and theory.

A joint theoretical, computational and experimental study of co-continuous
polymer blends is performed. Co-continuous polymer blends consist of distinct
sponge-like phases where one of the phases plays the role of the sponge and the
other its complement. Such blends offer an important route to materials with
unique combinations of properties not available in single polymers or in blends
with traditional dispersed (non continuous) droplet morphology. These unique
properties impact strongly applications in the areas of materials and
manufacturing, and biotechnology. For example, mechanical properties such as
impact strength and tensile strength can exceed those of either blend component.
Another application of co-continuous polymer blends is products for mass
transfer control. In particular, a water-permeable phase containing a desiccant
can be used to remove moisture from moisture sensitive products such as food or
pharmaceuticals while the other phase provides mechanical strength. The key to
performance in these products is the control of pore size and volume. This
fundamental study brings together state-of-the-art mathematical and numerical
analysis, modeling and large-scale scientific computation with an innovative
experimental program. The experiments are targeted to provide insight and
validation of the mathematical models, simulations and theory. This research is
aimed to provide guidelines for controlling pore size and volume of the blends
and thus to optimize the blend properties. It is expected to lead to significant
improvements in the industrial fabrication processes of co-continuous blends and
in the properties of the final products.
