
* 0317937
* Physical Mechanism of Energy Transduction in Biological Motors
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2003,07/10/2003
* Hongyun Wang,CA,University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 126,421.00

Wang Protein motors convert chemical energy to mechanical work while operating
in an isothermal environment. The molecular mechanism responsible for the energy
transduction is still not clear. The current experimental technologies permit
measuring forces and motions of a single protein motor to the precision of
piconewtons and nanometers. The main focus of this project is to uncover the
energy transduction mechanism of protein motors from single molecule
experimental data. First, the investigator develops robust and effective tools
for extracting the motor force profile from the measured time series of motor
position. The motor force profile shows the motor driving force as a function of
motor position. It contains information about the motor mechanism. The
investigator also explores what else besides the motor force profile can be
extracted from the experimental data. The theoretical and numerical tools
developed are useful for the studies of reaction diffusion processes in general.
Then, the investigator applies the tools developed to study the force generation
mechanism of kinesin and other protein motors. Throughout the model building,
new experiments are suggested to experimental colleagues to resolve the
unsettled issues. Protein motors play a central role in many cell functions. For
example, myosin drives muscle contraction; kinesin drives intracellular vesicle
transportation and moves chromosomes during mitosis. Understanding the operating
principles of protein motors is crucial to comprehending how biological systems
function. It is also important to bioengineering applications: controlling
protein motors artificially, incorporating protein motors into artificial
systems, and manufacturing nano-scale artificial motors. This project seeks to
reveal the operating principles of protein motors from experimental results. In
laboratories, the time course of a single protein motor can be recorded. The
investigator eas develop theoretical tools to recover the motor force profile
from the recorded time courses. Then the force generation mechanism is
investigated.
