
* 0322683
* Computational Techniques from Geometry and Statistical Physics for Optimal Prediction, Control and Wave Propagation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2003,08/12/2003
* James Sethian,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 297,659.00

One part of this proposal is the formulation of statistical and statistical
mechanics tools for solving problems of great complexity, where, in addition,
there may be uncertainties in the formulation of the problems or a lack of data.
The striking fact is that estimating the best solution in an appropriate norm to
such problems is very closely related to the solution of difficult problems in
irreversible statistical mechanics, a connection that can be expressed through a
formalism of statistical projection, sometimes knows as the Mori-Zwanzig
formalism. The use of this formalism brings in connections with renormalization,
Langevin equations, and scaling procedures, which had to be made more rigorous,
and which have now led to new approximation procedures and new formulations of
optimal procedures. The first applications were in modeling problems, which
could validate the new algorithms, and now the focus is evolving to applications
in fluid mechanics, including viscoelastic flows, in plasma physics and in
biology. The other part of the work is the linking of discrete network
algorithms to geometric perspectives to obtain algorithms for efficiently
solving problems in continuous partial differential equations. This has led, so
far, to Ordered Upwind Methods for computing problems in optimal control and
anisotropic front propagation, and static phase space solutions to Eulerian
formulations for multiple arrivals in wave propagation, antenna design, and
seismology. By exploiting an underlying ordering in the construction of the
solution, determined by the flow of information along characteristics, "one
pass" methods can be developed which construct the solution to these problems
without iteration, and with a computational complexity that depends essentially
linearly on the number of mesh points in the computational domain. These
techniques will be extended to min/max problems that arise in non-convex games,
with applications to complex control, to developing adaptive versions which
allows us to compute six-dimensional robotic navigation problems in computer-
aided machining, and, most importantly, in the application of multiple arrival
techniques to inverse problems in tomography.

The goal of this project is to devise new ways to use computers in the solution
of problems which are very complex and that may contain various sources of
uncertainty, because of lack of data, incomplete information about the factors
that affect the solution, excessive requirements of computer time, or because
they involve inherent chaotic behavior. From a practical point of view, the work
so far has led to more accurate imaging techniques for predicting underground
oil reserves and new techniques for cardiac imaging and automatic analysis of
cell irregularities in electron microscopy. The coming methods will make it
possible to interpret medical images more reliably, design computer chips even
more efficiently, gain a better understanding of human physiology, avoid
aircraft collisions even when the skies become very crowded, and predict climate
more reliably.
