
* 0325948
* Mini-symposium on Mathematical and Computational Modeling of Biological Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2003,07/10/2003
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 20,000.00

Seshaiyer The investigator organizes a symposium on mathematical and
computational modeling of biological systems at Texas Tech University from
November 6-8, 2003. The conference consists of a series of lectures given by
outstanding scholars who have contributed extensively to the central theme. The
talks cover a broad range of topics, including the mathematics of cardiac
arrhythmias, past successes and future challenges in continuum mechanics of soft
biological tissues, a 20 year retrospective of the Chay-Keizer model, tumor
mechanics, computational biofluid dynamics, and computational models of
cardiovascular surgery planning. The main objectives of the meeting are to: (a)
disseminate the most recent advances in mathematical and computational
approaches in understanding biological systems, (b) increase the level of
awareness in nurturing mathematical and computational research in biological
systems, (c) to train senior undergraduate, graduate, post-doctoral students and
early career scientists in interdisciplinary aspects of problem solving, and (d)
initiate and promote new collaborations between mathematics and all areas of
science, engineering and science education. The theme of the meeting is the
opportunity to use mathematical and computational tools to understand biological
systems. The meeting includes experts giving lectures on diverse topics in the
underlying theme, with the expectation to provide members of the mathematical
and engineering community an opportunity to learn about new research venues.
Participants include undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. The meeting provides a forum for the exposure and exchange of
ideas, methods, and results in the underlying theme of the conference. The
conference provides an excellent opportunity to assess the current developments
and future directions in this area. Special efforts are made to encourage women
and underrepresented minorities to pursue careers in science, especially in
interdisciplinary areas that bridge the biological, mathematical, and
computational sciences.


