
* 0327088
* NATO Advanced Study Institute on Computational Noncommutative Algebra and Applications; July 6-19, 2003; Tuscany, Italy
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 07/01/2003,06/30/2003
* James Byrnes,RI,Byrnes                  James          S
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2004
* USD 13,800.00

Principal Investigator: James S Byrnes Proposal Number: DMS- 0327088
Institution: private, Newport RI

Title: NATO Advanced Study Institute on Computational Noncommutative Algebra and
Applications Abstract

One of the most important applications of geometric algebras to geometry is its
use for the representation of groups of Euclidean and Minkowski rotations. This
aspect and its direct relation to robotics and vision will be discussed by
several of the Principal Lecturers at the Advanced Study Institute conference.
Group theory, beginning with the work of Burnside, Frobenius and Schur, has been
influenced by even more general problems. As a result, general group actions
have provided the setting for powerful methods within group theory and for the
use of groups in applications to physics, chemistry, molecular biology, and
signal processing. These aspects, too, will be covered in detail by many of the
Principal Lecturers.

The fusion of algebra, analysis and geometry, and their application to real
world problems, have been dominant themes underlying mathematics for over a
century. Geometric algebras, introduced and classified by Clifford in the late
19th century, have played a prominent role in this effort, as seen in the
mathematical work of Cartan, Brauer, Weyl, Chevelley, Atiyah, and Bott, and in
applications to physics in the work of Pauli, Dirac and others. The topics of
the Advanced Study Institute conference, geometric algebras and computational
group harmonic analysis, have emerged as key tools for resolving the ever
expanding conceptual and computational demands on signal and image processing as
it rapidly grows in importance. Signal and image processing is used in remote
sensing, micro and unmanned vehicles, biological processing and neural and
quantum computing. The ASI will bring together world leaders from both academia
and industry with extensive multidisciplinary backgrounds for an interactive
forum; they will initiate new efforts and intensify existing efforts towards a
unified computational framework for the advancement of a broad range of
applications. The forum will provide opportunities for young scientists and
engineers to learn more about problem areas and about the crucial role played by
new mathematical insights from recognized experts in this vital and growing area
of both pure and applied science. The team-authored proceedings, to be written
by the lecturers, will offer these insights to those unable to attend. A key
feature of both the ASI and the proceedings will be the presentation of problems
and applications that will shape the twenty-first century computational
technology base.
