
* 0337500
* UBM-Undergraduate collaborative group in mathematical biology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES
* 04/15/2004,08/29/2003
* Anthony Ives,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 03/31/2007
* USD 95,200.00

Ives, Milewski The two investigators train a long-term (2-year) collaborative
group of 4 undergraduates working on a suite of problems in mathematical
biology. One of the investigators is a biologist, and the other is an applied
mathematician, yet both have collaborated with researchers from the other
discipline. The investigators work collaboratively with 4 undergraduates and
address aspects of at least three problems at the interface of biology and
mathematics: (1) Why do periodical cicadas have long, prime-numbered periods?
(2) Why do pineapples, pinecones (and many other plants) display patterns with
Fibonnaci sequences? and (3) How does the functioning of ecosystems change as
they collapse via species extinctions? These three questions are an exciting
starting point for the collaborative group, and they are selected to both keep
the interest of the students and take life through the collaborative process.
Although some areas of biology (ecology in particular) have luminous histories
of partnership with mathematics, the current explosion of theoretical and
technological advances in both fields has upped the ante for interdisciplinary
work. To work at the interface between biology and mathematics, more scientists
need to be trained in both fields, and trained in how to connect the fields.
Recognizing that a single person cannot span the gap between fields effectively,
future scientists must also be trained to work collaboratively. Using
collaborative learning groups for undergraduates fosters interdisciplinary
thinking for the participating undergraduates and the investigators. It also
serves as a model for training undergraduates to do research at the interface
between disciplines.


