
* 0341899
* Collaborative Research: Meshless Methods: Mathematical Foundations and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2003,07/29/2003
* Uday Banerjee,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 82,843.00

Recently Meshless Methods, and the closely related Generalized Finite Element
Methods, for the numerical solution of partial differential equations came into
the forefront of interest, especially in the engineering community. For example,
in the last two years several engineering books on the subject appeared, an
international conference was organized, and many engineering papers were
published. These methods generalize the classical Finite Element Method in that
they are neither based on a mesh nor on classical polynomial approximation. The
theoretical underpinning and general state of the art for these methods is
similar to that of the Finite Element Method in the 1960s, when already
engineering computations based on heuristic principles were done, but the theory
had not been developed. This research will address the theoretical and
implementational basis of these methods in conjunction with applications. The
most important feature of Meshless Methods is their flexibility and potential.
It is a challenge to employ this flexibility to achieve their potential: the
solution of today's complex problems, with the consideration of the rapidly
decreasing ratio of cost of computer arithmetical operations to the human
effort. These issues will be investigated in this research project.

The broader impact of the proposal lies in the mathematical and computational
science aspects of Meshless Methods. The broader mathematical impact includes
the understanding of these methods and their potential, which will be directly
reflected in the performance of the methods on complex problems of solid and
fluid mechanics, for example, multiscale problems. It is likely that the
development of the mathematical foundation of Meshless Methods will have similar
or larger impact than the mathematical development of the 1970s and 1980s had on
the Finite Element Method. The broader impact of this proposal is in its
simultaneous consideration of mathematical theory, modeling of engineering and
scientific problems, computational issues, and engineering computational
experience.
