
* 0354543
* FRG: Algebraic topology as a tool in feature location, feature classification, shape recognition, and shape description
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Special Projects - CCF, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2004,11/12/2009
* Gunnar Carlsson,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 792,473.00

DMS-0354543 Gunnar E. Carlsson, Persi Diaconis, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Susan
Holmes

This is a DMS Focused Reseach Group award under solicitation
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2002/nsf02129/nsf02129.htm. The principal investigators
are Gunnar E. Carlsson, Persi Diaconis, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Susan Holmes at
Stanford University. This project will develop topological tools for
understanding qualitative properties of data sets. We will use homology as
applied to data sets directly and to derived complexes to define invariants or
signatures that distinguish between the underlying geometric objects. Important
goals will include the identification, location, and classification of
qualitative features of the data set, such as the presence of corners, edges,
cone points, etc. and the use of homology applied to canonically defined blowups
and tangent complexes to distinguish between two dimensional shapes in three
dimensional Euclidean space. We will use the recently developed techniques of
persistence and landmarking to make homology a stable and readily computable
invariant. We will also develop the theory of multidimensional persistence, in
which one studies spaces that are equipped with several parameters, in order to
better understand data sets in which there are several different parameters
describing different geometric properties of the space. The overall goal is to
continue to develop and improve the available tools for studying qualitative
information about geometric objects.

The goal of this project is to develop tools for understanding data sets that
are not easy to understand using standard methods of statistics and analysis.
This kind of data might include singular points, or might be strongly curved.
The data is also high dimensional, in the sense that each data point has many
coordinates. For instance, we might have a data set whose points each of which
is an image, which has one coordinate for each pixel. Many standard tools rely
on linear approximations, which do not work well in strongly curved or singular
problems. The kind of tools we have in mind are in part topological, in the
sense that they measure more qualitative properties of the spaces involved, such
as connectedness, or the number of holes in a space, and so on. For example, the
project takes the point of view that it is better to understand qualitative
properties before attempting to do more precise quantitative analysis and better
to distinguish shapes by understanding them qualitatively rather than doing data
base comparisons. Thus, methods will be developed to compute, in a timely,
robust, and trustworthy manner, the fundamental geometric properties that any
realistic mathematical model associated to a given data set must contain. Then
statistical and analytic techniques may be applied to the geometrically correct
models in order to extract the detailed information desired by practitioners.
