
* 0404537
* Iterative Methods for Nonlinear Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2004,05/12/2005
* Carl Kelley,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2008
* USD 215,499.00

The main topics of the proposed research are (1) the development and analysis of
mesh-independent methods for computation of steady state solutions of time-
dependent partial differential equations, especially those with nonsmooth
nonlinearities, and (2) fast algorithms for continuation of the solutions of
compact fixed point problems with respect to a parameter. The investigate will
apply his results to chemical engineering, chemistry, environmental science,
electrical engineering, nuclear engineering, and aeronautical engineering. Both
phases of the project address a weakness of a conventional implementation of a
globalized inexact Newton method, namely the inability to select among multiple
solutions. Continuation methods use additional information, such as a physical
parameter in the equation or the fact that the nonlinear equation is the steady
state equation for a time-dependent problem, to guide the solver, and both
improve the solver's robustness and increase the likelihood that the important
solution or solutions will be found. The proposed research will analyze the
robustness of these methods as computational grids are refined, how they perform
if the nonlinearity is not differentiable, and how one can design fast
algorithms for the corrector iteration which best exploit the functional
analytic properties of the combination of the problem and the continuation
method.

Nonlinearity is common across all of science and engineering. Therefore,
algorithms for solving nonlinear equations are fundamental components of many
simulators and engineering design tools. The investigator will study solution
methods for equations that depend on physical parameters, such as the voltage
across a semiconductor device, the load on a mechanical structure, or the
temperature of a chemical reaction. As such parameters change, the nature of the
solution can vary significantly, and the performance of the simulator can be
affected as well. The PI's research is directed at improving the performance of
the algorithms and making the solvers more robust. His success will have an
impact on the performance of simulator and design tools, and thereby accelerate
the design cycle. The PI's and his students, through collaborations with several
national laboratories and companies, will apply these results to problems in
nano-scale electronics, chemical engineering, and aerospace.
