
* 0410545
* Adaptive Anisotropic Mesh Generation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2004,08/26/2004
* Weizhang Huang,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 222,719.00

This project is concerned with the adaptive generation of anisotropic meshes for
use in the numerical solution of partial differential equations. The goal is to
study anisotropic meshes and their quality measures based upon rigorous
mathematical analysis of the interpolation error and ultimately to develop
efficient and reliable algorithms and computer software for their generation in
two and three dimensions. At the core of mathematical modeling in science and
engineering is a system of partial differential equations. Numerical simulation
has become an indispensable tool for solving partial differential equations and
therefore simulating physical processes. Meshes and their adaptive generation
play a vital role in improving the accuracy and efficiency of numerical
simulations. The key to mesh adaptation is the ability to simultaneously control
the shape and the size of mesh elements. Research has so far concentrated on
traditional or isotropic mesh adaptation where the element size is adapted to
some error estimate while the shape is kept close to being equilateral. It is
known that isotropic meshes tend to concentrate too many nodes in the regions of
large solution error. This drawback can be overcome and the efficiency and
accuracy of numerical simulations can be dramatically enhanced by properly
choosing an anisotropic mesh where the elements are allowed to have a large
aspect ratio but aligned with the solution. The research of this project will
focus on the development of general anisotropic estimates for interpolation
error and the study of their use in construction of new algorithms and computer
codes for generating adaptive anisotropic meshes in two and three dimensions.
Mesh assessment strategies and quality measures in geometry, alignment, and
adaptation will be developed. The methods will be applied to the numerical
simulation of groundwater flow systems where chemical contamination and other
substances can cause the flow density to vary considerably. The successful
completion of this project will greatly improve our understanding of the
mathematics within mesh adaptation, and the outcome will serve as building
blocks for further studies and development of mesh adaptation algorithms and
software. The developed meshing strategy can be combined with many existing
numerical methods and computer codes in other areas of science and engineering
to greatly enhance their efficiency and accuracy. Education will be important
part of this project. Students will be actively involved and receive their
professional and interdisciplinary training during the term of the project.


