
* 0410561
* Computational Methods for Bulk Solid Handling Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,06/13/2008
* Pierre Gremaud,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2008
* USD 212,538.00

The mechanical behavior of granular materials is still only partially undertsood
even though many continuum models have been proposed. The goal of this project
is to build, study, implement and test efficient and reliable numerical methods
allowing for a quantitative study and comparison of those models. Specific
problems to be studied include wave propagation in bulk materials, static
granular piles, multiphase models for fine powders and multidimensional granular
flows. In all those problems, dry friction plays a central role. Depending on
the problem and its formulation, the presence of frictional effects manifests
itself mathematically in various ways: presence of a graph, stiff source term in
systems of balance laws, algebraic constraints. Each of those difficulties leads
to new numerical challenges. The wide variety of mathematical problems resulting
from the modelization of the above phenomena (differential inclusion, systems of
conservation laws, balance laws, Hamilton-Jacobi equations, elliptic and
parabolic problems, non-local free boundary problems) is a testimony to the
incredible richness of this field.

In countless industries, materials have to be processed, stored and retrieved in
granular form. Surprisingly many problems occur during those various phases.
Difficulties range from the complete structural collapse of silos during
discharge to poor performance and unpredictability of the manufacturing process.
This comes at a very high financial cost to solid processing plants. It is
proposed to design and implement, in consultation with engineers from both
Academia and Industry, numerical methods that allow for the calculations of
granular flows and related problems in general geometries. The current methods
in use date back to the 1950's and have limited predicitive capabilities.


