
* 0410406
* Object-Oriented Image Analysis and Synthesis via Computational Harmonic Analysis and Boundary Value Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2004,08/05/2004
* Naoki Saito,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2008
* USD 282,492.00

The objective of this project is to develop a set of tools capable of performing
truly localized Fourier analysis and synthesis of objects of interest in a given
image that have smooth boundaries but of general shape. To do so, we will bring
in tools in the traditionally different fields such as boundary detection and
delineation algorithms (computer vision), image compression and denoising
schemes (image processing), elliptic boundary value problem solvers and
potential function computations (scientific computing), and Fourier analysis and
fast algorithms (computational harmonic analysis). Our primary concern is
analysis (e.g., extraction and characterization of spatial frequency features)
and synthesis (e.g., reconstruction from the compressed representation of
objects after their boundaries are detected and they are segmented either
manually by a human interpreter using a pointing device or automatically by the
algorithms proposed by other researchers. On the one hand, the boundary of an
object provides important information: geometry and shape of the object. On the
other hand, it becomes a nuisance for other tasks such as the Fourier analysis
of the internal information (e.g., textures) of the object because it creates
spurious interference patterns due to the Gibbs phenomenon that masks the
important internal information of the object. We will decouple the geometry and
internal information of the object by solving the elliptic boundary value
problem on the domain where the object is supported. More precisely, for the
analysis of the object, we embed the detected and segmented object in an
otherwise empty rectangular domain, and smoothly extend the object to the
outside of the object boundary by solving the Poisson equation with the
homogeneous Dirichlet boundary condition at the edges of the covering rectangle.
Since the values on the edges of the covering rectangle vanish, this smoothly
extended component can be expanded into the Fourier sine series with quickly
decaying coefficients, which enable us to effectively characterize and compress
the internal information of the object. Finally, we subtract this component from
the original object on the supported domain to obtain the component responsible
for geometric information of the object, which turns out to be a solution of the
Laplace equation on that domain. For the synthesis or reconstruction of the
object, we need to store the Fourier sine coefficients of the extended component
and the boundary coordinates and the original values of the object at those
points in the analysis stage. Then, the original object is recovered by adding
the geometric component (which is recovered by evaluating the single and double
layer potentials on the domain) and the smoothly extended component (which is
easily recovered from the Fourier sine coefficients). In order to solve the
Laplace/Poisson equations, we will fully utilize the advanced Laplace/Poisson
solvers based on Fast Multipole Methods. We will also extend our analysis and
synthesis paradigm to an object with holes (i.e., multiply-connected domains),
investigate the effect of noise on the boundary shapes and values, and
investigate the effect of compression of the boundary information to the quality
of the reconstructed images. Furthermore, we will develop a gradient and
directional derivative estimation algorithm equipped with regularization (high-
frequency attenuation) capabilities, which will provide good boundary conditions
and consequently improve the performance of the boundary detection and
delineation algorithms as well as the accuracy of the solutions of the
Laplace/Poisson equations.

Potential applications of our methodology include biometrics and image-based
diagnostics in medicine and other fields such as geology and material sciences.
Biometrics has recently become a tremendously important subject for homeland
security reasons. Since our paradigm provides both geometric/shape information
and internal texture information of an object of interest in an separate manner
for images obtained by various sensors and imaging modalities, it may allow data
examiners to characterize the features of the objects of interest much more
reliably compared to the methods which solely use either shape or texture
information. For example, characterizing and diagnosing cancerous cells in
various image modalities including Pap smear test images in gynecology may
benefit from using the tools we will develop in our project (e.g., object-based
storage, cataloging, compression, and analysis). Similarly, extracting
quantitative information from optical images of sections of rock core samples
(e.g., the size and internal texture/spatial frequency information of some
fossils), which is important in earth science including oil and gas exploration
industry, may also benefit from our research. We envision that scientists in
completely different disciplines such as medicine, biology, and geology, will
start noticing the importance of computational harmonic analysis and certain
partial differential equations (PDEs) if they use our tools to be developed in
this project and feel that these are useful for their own tasks. This is a great
thing we, as applied and computational mathematicians, can hope for. In terms of
the educational impact, this project will create a common meeting ground among
students in the different fields: applied mathematics, computer science,
electrical engineering, statistics, and neuroscience. We expect lively
interchanges of ideas among such students who will participate in this research
project or attend the associated courses and seminars we are developing.
Students participating in our project will also learn computational harmonic
analysis, the basic theory and fast computational algorithms of certain PDEs,
and image analysis, which will become indispensable for the future applied
mathematicians and scientists working in the area of imaging science, and which
will be surely helpful for their future career, either in academia or in
industry.
