
* 0411413
* Numerical Modeling of Coupled Ground & Surface Water Flow & Transport
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2004,08/24/2004
* Clinton Dawson,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop advanced numerical methods for
modeling flow and transport processes in coupled surface water/ground water
systems. As the relevant processes, and spatial and temporal scales, can
strongly differ in the various subdomains of a coupled hydrosystem, different
modeling concepts must be chosen for these subdomains. The PIs will investigate
appropriate mechanisms for coupling mass, momentum and species transport in
ground water and surface water regions. This will include mathematical
formulation and algorithmic and software tool development between different
domains and models. Efficient discretization techniques, based on finite element
technology developed by the PIs and adapted to the dominant processes in each
region, will be developed. The stability of these methods will be analyzed, and
a priori and a posteriori error estimates will be derived. Time-stepping
strategies for accurately handling the different temporal scales within these
flow and transport domains will be studied, and fast and robust solution methods
for the resulting linear and nonlinear systems of equations will be developed.
Representative benchmark problems based on laboratory and field experiments will
be formulated and will be used to validate the numerical methods. The resulting
methodology will be implemented within a parallel computing framework for
distributed and grid computing platforms.

Sustainable management and protection of water resources is one of the key
problems of the 21st century. Comprehensive, long-range water resource
management requires a careful study of the interaction of ground water and
surface water. Historically, ground water aquifers and surface water bodies,
such as streams, lakes and wetlands, have been studied in isolation, without
properly accounting for the interactions between them. Recent data, however,
collected in the United States and abroad, give startling evidence of the effect
surface water and ground water systems have on each other. These studies
indicate, for example, that water contamination can easily be transmitted from
ground to surface water and vice versa. In many cases, the precise location of
initial contamination is irrelevant, because the close proximity of ground and
surface water can result in both being contaminated. Advanced computer
simulators are needed to study and predict the movement of potentially harmful
chemical species within these complex environments. In this project, the PIs
will develop mathematical models and state-of-the-art computational algorithms
and technologies for simulating large-scale ground and surface water systems.
The project will involve the collaboration of the PIs with researchers at
government laboratories and state agencies, and will include the training of
graduate and undergraduate students. The technology to be developed has
potential application to other areas, including thermal and chemical processing,
biomedicine, and sequestration of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
