
* 0411402
* Study of Dispersive Waves and Development of Accurate Nonreflecting Boundary Conditions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2004,08/20/2004
* Fang Hu,VA,Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2008
* USD 120,846.00

In numerical simulations that involve an open physical boundary, the infinite
domain is necessarily truncated due to the limitation of finite computational
resources, creating virtual boundaries that need to be reflectionless to out-
going waves. It remains a significant challenge to formulate correctly the
nonreflecting boundary condition with high accuracy and efficiency for many
important applications in computational sciences where the governing equations
are nonlinear or have non-constant coefficients. The proposed research is aimed
at developing accurate nonreflecting boundary conditions based on the Perfectly
Matched Layer (PML) methodology that can be used to produce potentially
reflectionless absorbing boundaries. In the past few years, considerable
progresses have been made in constructing PML for the linearized Euler equations
with constant coefficients. The proposed work will resolve a key issue in
extending PML from constant to non-constant mean flows and lead to the
development of PML for nonlinear Euler and Navier-Stokes equations. An essential
element in this research is the understanding of phase and group velocities of
waves supported by a bounded flow. The proposed approach is genuinely multi-
dimensional and extendible to nonlinear problems. Issues about mathematical
formulation, stability and well-posedness of the partial differential equations,
numerical accuracy and computational advantages of the proposed method, in
particular the role of dispersive waves, will be studied. Theoretical as well as
computational results will be compared with existing methods. This project will
also provide training of graduate students in which a more traditional applied
math topic, dispersive wave analysis, is closely coupled with a core scientific
computing issue. Due to ubiquitousness of nonreflecting boundaries in
computational sciences, the findings of this research are expected to have a
broad and significant impact on a wide range of interdisciplinary scientific and
engineering applications, such as those in the study of turbulence and
transition, turbulent mixing, boundary layer control, aeroacoustics, underwater
acoustics and atmospheric wave modeling. The use of the proposed new method,
when successful, will also improve the quality of existing computational fluid
dynamics codes both in the academia and industry.
