
* 0411388
* Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,06/17/2004
* Douglas Arnold,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2007
* USD 124,111.00

Many complex physical phenomena can be modeled mathematically by systems of
partial differential equations (PDEs). For example, the response of a solid
material to forces imposed on it can be modeled by the equations of elasticity.
Solutions of these equations can then be used for many purposes, such as to
predict the behavior of a solid structure or improve its design. The equations
of elasticity are far too complex to solve exactly in realistic situations.
However, high performance computers with advanced algorithms may obtain accurate
solutions. A major goal of this work is to develop efficient and certifiably
reliable solution algorithms for elasticity. Following on recent breakthroughs
which enabled the development and certification of such methods for problems
involving two-dimensional deformations, the investigator and his collaborators
will develop analogous methods for the much more difficult situation of full
three-dimensional deformations.

The second area of investigation concerns the development of computer algorithms
for solving Einstein's field equations of general relativity, which are the
basis for the modern understanding of gravity. Computation has recently joined
theory and experiment as a third mode of inquiry into gravity, setting the stage
for major new advances in understanding, but also bringing tremendous
challenges. The geometric and physical content of general relativity can be
expressed in the language of PDEs, and thus, in principle, made amenable to
numerical simulation. But this is achieved only at the expense of extremely
complex systems of PDEs, which have proven very difficult to solve numerically.
The emphasis here will be on understanding the fundamental issues relevant to
the numerical solution of the Einstein equations in cases of physical interest.

This work has many broader impacts. Robust and reliable methods for solving the
equations of elasticity are needed in many challenging industrial and
engineering applications, for example for aircraft, advanced buildings and
bridges, and offshore oil platforms. Recent design failures, some of them
catastrophic, have been traced to inadequate numerical algorithms for
elasticity. Thus this project has the potential to contribute to public safety
and prosperity. Computational algorithms for general relativity are recognized
as crucial to the success of the emerging fundamental science of gravitational
astronomy, another large potential impact of this project. The techniques
developed in this work are expected to apply to other important systems of PDEs
as well. Moreover, the project will contribute to the infrastructure of science.
It will advance the development of an interdisciplinary community involving
mathematicians in gravitational astrophysics, both through collaborations and
through a workshop that the investigator will organize during the project
period. The investigator will disseminate the results of the research broadly
through publication, conference and seminar presentations, and the world wide
web. Finally, the project will directly support the training and scientific
breadth of young scientists by involving students and postdocs in important,
cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research.
