
* 0411955
* Efficient Algorithms for Large Scale Convex Programming
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2004,08/16/2004
* Osman Guler,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 240,000.00

The goal of this project is to analyze and develop algorithms for large scale
convex programming problems. The principal investigator will extend the scope of
interior point methods by developing invariant, primal and dual interior point
methods over homogeneous cones, which form a large class of problems including
linear programming, semidefinite programming, and second order cone programming.
Homogeneous cones have rich symmetry properties and a classification theory,
which make them an ideal candidate for extending the theory of structured
interior point methods beyond semidefinite programming. The investigation of the
modeling power of homogeneous cone programming will be an important part of the
project, and several related topics in semidefinite programming and hyperbolic
cone programming will also be investigated. A second, but related component of
this project will be the development of provably efficient first order methods
for large scale convex programming. These methods have low memory requirements
and global convergence rates which are (nearly) independent of the dimension of
the underlying optimization problem. Hence, they are attractive for solving very
large scale problems for which interior point methods may be ineffective because
of their extensive memory requirements. The principal investigator and his
graduate students will seek answers to these and related problems in convex
programming. The resulting algorithms will be numerically tested in order to
confirm their effectiveness.

Numerous problems from industry, engineering, and science (designs of VLSI,
antenna arrays, truss structures, and control systems in engineering, portfolio
analysis in finance, structure of molecules in quantum chemistry, combinatorial
optimization, and many others) depend on efficient optimization algorithms for
their resolution. Semidefinite programming (SDP) has proved to be an excellent
framework in which to model most of these large scale problems, and interior
point methods for SDP have been very successful in solving them numerically.
Very large scale problems arising from medical imaging and quantum chemistry
provide good incentives for developing first order methods for convex
programming. The theoretical insights gained from this research will lead to a
deeper understanding of interior point methods for semidefinite programming and
beyond. These insights will enable the principal investigator, his students, and
other researchers to develop faster, more reliable algorithms which will make it
possible to model and solve larger problems. These advances will directly
benefit researchers in diverse scientific fields, who rely on modern
optimization techniques to solve their problems, by providing them with a set of
state of the art algorithms. The research of this project will help advance the
frontiers of scientific research in convex programming, and will be incorporated
into undergraduate and graduate teaching whenever possible.
