
* 0412267
* Numerical Methods for Fully Nonlinear Elliptic Equations of the Monge-Ampere Type
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2004,08/09/2007
* Roland Glowinski,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2008
* USD 233,059.00

The Monge-Ampere equation and related models have been for several decades
topics of very active investigations by differential geometers and nonlinear
partial differential equation specialists. However, if the Mathematics of Monge-
Ampere equations and related models have motivated many investigators, and is at
the origin of an abundant literature, the same can not be said of their
Numerics; it is likely that the "full nonlinearity" of these equations is the
dissuasive factor when considering their numerical solution. Taking these facts
into account, the objectives of this project are: (i) Investigate computational
methods for the solution of real Monge-Ampere equations, relying in particular
on mixed finite element approximations. (ii) Investigate efficient iterative
methods for the solution of the discrete problems derived from (i); on the basis
of preliminary investigations one can expect fast Poisson solvers and properly
preconditioned conjugate gradient algorithms to play an important role in the
solution process. (iii) Use the resulting numerical methods to investigate the
mathematical properties of Monge-Ampere type equations from the theory of fully
nonlinear partial differential equations and from Differential Geometry, such as
the Gaussian curvature equation. (iv)Apply the above methods to the numerical
solution of problems from natural and engineering sciences involving Monge-
Ampere related models (such problems take place in, e.g., Fluid Mechanics and
Nonlinear Elasticity).

The Monge-Ampere equation and related models play an important role in various
areas of Mathematics, such as Differential Geometry, Partial Differential
Equations and Calculus of Variations. Actually, this type of equations occur
also in more applied areas such as Fluid Mechanics, Nonlinear Elasticity,
Material Sciences, Mathematical Finance, and from that point of view their
numerical solution is an issue of practical importance. Surprisingly, and
despite the above mentioned importance of these equations, they have motivated
very little numerical work, compared to less fundamental models; the complexity
of these equations may be the cause of this paradoxical situation. The main
objective of this computationally oriented project is the construction of user
friendly efficient numerical methods for the solution of the Monge-Ampere
equation and related mathematical problems. There will be a systematic effort to
derive a modular methodology, relying as much as possible on "on the shelf"
existing methods. These investigations should be beneficial to both the
theoretical and applied sciences; indeed, they should: (i) Create bridges and
foster cooperation between the computational/applied mathematics and the "more
theoretical" mathematics communities. (ii) Involve students (and faculties) in
highly interdisciplinary investigations. (iii) Motivate numerical analysts and
computational scientists to look at an important interdisciplinary field, which
has been clearly under-investigated. (iv)Lead to the teaching of courses
broadening the knowledge basis of students and introducing them to a highly
multidisciplinary field. (v) Foster international cooperation, since
collaborations on these topics, with European scientists in particular, are
taking place already. The results of these investigations will be made available
via publications, conferences, and dedicated web sites.
