
* 0414011
* Mathematical Modeling of the Chemotherapy, Immunotherapy and Vaccine Therapy of Cancer
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2004,08/26/2004
* Lisette de Pillis,CA,Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 328,283.00

The investigators bring together expertise in the areas of differential
equations and numerics, differential geometry, and optimal control with the goal
of developing mathematical modeling and analysis tools applied to the creation
and testing of new combinations of chemo-immunotherapies for treating cancer.
The investigators, together with their students, carry out work along three
complementary paths. First, dynamical systems population models are created and
analyzed to determine fundamental system behavior that helps guide the
development of combination therapies. Second, differential geometry approaches
allow for the analysis of idealized geometric forms approximating physical
structures of spherical, cylindrical, elliptic, and harmonic spherical tumors,
which can closely approximate certain in vivo tumor geometries. Third, optimal
control theory is used to reveal paths to new optimal combination therapies with
implementation of a variety of constraints to minimize tumor burden while
keeping the patient's immune and normal cell populations above a healthy
threshold. The results of these investigations have the potential to provide
guidance in the structuring of improved patient-specific treatment protocols.

The mathematical modeling of cancer growth and combination treatment strategies
adds to our basic understanding of cancer response mechanisms in fundamental
ways. The simulations, geometric visualization, and optimization the
investigators undertake allow for an array of virtual experiments to be run that
can be performed quickly with no risk to living persons, but that provide data
that can significantly benefit medical decision making. The modeling of cancer
growth and treatment requires skills from multiple disciplines. A major outcome
of this project is the development of software for simulating and visualizing
cancer growth and treatment pathways, involving chemotherapy and immunotherapy,
which can result in the creation of new mathematically guided patient-specific
combination treatment strategies. This work lies at the intersection of
information technology and biotechnology, with mathematics at the core. The
investigators have the ability to funnel discoveries for new treatment
strategies suggested by the mathematics directly to collaborating clinical
oncologists through the ongoing meetings of a California-based Mathematics of
Medicine Study group. In turn, the physicians in this group can enhance the
development of the mathematical models by sharing outcomes of ongoing clinical
trials. The investigators directly involve undergraduates in the multiple facets
of this cutting-edge endeavor through research assistantships, courses, and
independent study. A unique aspect of this project is the collaboration of three
women investigators who are attracting more women students to this area of
research. The investigators as a team can serve as role models on the forefront
of the fight against cancer, and in particular are in a good position to affect
breast cancer studies, which are of special importance to women's health. The
results from solving the challenging mathematical, computational and biological
problems of this project are made publicly accessible through publications and
web-based postings. This collaborative effort has the potential to help
clinicians save lives and reduce the suffering of cancer patients.
