
* 0414039
* Mathematical models for bacterial propulsion and pattern formation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/15/2004,09/02/2010
* George Oster,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 476,158.00

The investigator constructs mathematical models for bacterial propulsion and
pattern formation. Attention is restricted mostly to two classes of bacteria:
myxobacteria and mollicutes. This work is performed in collaboration or
correspondence with experimental laboratories engaged in studies of these
organisms. The models are primarily directed towards understanding and
explaining their experimental observations. The specific goals of this project
are to model (i) the gliding mechanisms of Myxobacteria and Mollicutes, (ii) the
swimming mechanisms of E. coli and Synechococcus, and (iii) aggregation and
fruiting body formation in Myxobacteria.

The investigator develops mathematical and computational models of different
mechanisms by which bacteria move. Bacteria use many different mechanisms to
move about on surfaces and through fluids. The term "gliding" is used to
describe the motion of bacteria on surfaces when there is no visible means of
propulsion. The investigator studies the molecular and cellular mechanisms that
underlie this mysterious form of locomotion. Many bacteria swim, driven by
rotating "propellors" called flagella. However, the motor mechanism that turns
this propellor has not been worked out, and is a focus of this project. The
photosynthetic bacterium, Synechococcus, lives in the oceans, and constitutes
the most abundant organism on the planet. How it swims is a longstanding
mystery, for it has no visible propulsive organelle on its surface. The
investigator and his colleagues suggest and model a mechanism for how this
bacterium swims. The broader impact of these studies grows from the insights
they provide into the propulsion, development, and mechanochemistry of bacteria,
many of which are important pathogens of great medical interest.
