
* 0432634
* 16th Householder Symposium on Numerical Linear Algebra; Champion, PA; May 23-27, 2005
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 09/01/2004,08/09/2004
* Jesse Barlow,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 20,000.00

The Householder Symposium gathers the world's most active researchers in
numerical linear algebra once every three years to review advances in the field,
present recent theoretical and practical results, assess where the field is
headed in the near future, and to provide an intimate atmosphere to foster close
personal interaction and exchange of ideas. Key subjects that will be emphasized
at the symposium include the solution of large systems of linear equations,
eigenvalue problems, preconditioning, perturbation theory, least squares,
integral equations, and applications in many different aspects of scientific and
engineering computation, including control, systems and signal processing, data-
mining, data compression, and bio-engineering. Many reseachers in numerical
linear algebra consider the Householder Symposium to be the most important and
influential meeting in the field.

This project supports the travel of junior U.S. researchers to the 16th
Householder Symposium on Numerical Linear Algebra to be held May 23--27, 2005 in
Champion, Pennsylvania. The funds are for travel expenses for U.S. graduate
students and recent Ph.D.s who would otherwise be unable to attend. The NSF
funds will permit full participation by the most promising junior members of the
U.S. numerical linear algebra community. As the Householder Symposium is
traditionally a gateway conference into the field, participation of junior
scientists is essential. U.S. participation in the Symposium will have a
positive impact on the continued strong competitiveness of the U.S. in the
crucial discipline of numerical linear algebra. Advances in numerical linear
algebra have had an enormous impact on a number of scientific fields that are
important in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in science and technology. Some
recent examples include the development of web search engines such as those for
Google and Yahoo, algorithms used in the development of the global positioning
system, eigenvalue based algorithms for face recognition that can be used in
airport security, and the development of algorithms for high speed
supercomputers.
