
* 0435593
* International Conference on Multiscale Methods and Partial Differential Equations; August 26-27, 2005; Los Angeles, CA
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 01/01/2005,08/18/2004
* Thomas Hou,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2005
* USD 9,999.00

The International Conference on Multiscale Methods and Partial Differential
Equations will be held at UCLA on August 26-27, 2005. The objective of this
conference is to bring together researchers, students and practitioners with
interest in the theoretical, computational and practical aspects of multiscale
problems and related partial differential equations. The conference will provide
a forum to exchange and stimulate new ideas from different disciplines, and to
formulate new challenging multiscale problems that will have impact in
applications. Despite considerable progress in a wide range of the sciences, and
a growing awareness of the importance of multiscale approaches, currently there
is fragmentation in multiscale methodology, its rigorous analysis and its
applications. There is an urgent need to develop systematic multiscale analysis
and computational methods that can be applied to a wide range of practical
problems. This effort poses new challenge to the theory of partial differential
equations. By bringing together analysts, experts in multiscale modeling, and
computational scientists, we can identify the key issues in multiscale
mathematics and common themes of various multiscale problems arising from
different disciplines. This provides a unique opportunity to make significant
advances in this area.

Advances of computational sciences in the past few decades have resulted in an
increase of several orders of magnitude in computing power. Modeling and
simulations of physical problems in a narrow range of scales have been quite
successful. However, to solve complex physical problems which involves a wide
range of spatial or temporal scales remains to be a major challenge in many
scientific disciplines. These problems are of vital importance to our national
interests, affecting our policy and technology advances in areas such as
environmental science, energy, biology, materials science, and information
science. Multiscale analysis, modeling, and simulation is an emerging new
research area which has already made significant impact in many scientific
disciplines. There have been many exciting recent, but problem specific,
advances in multiscale analysis, modeling and simulation. Up to now, most work
on multiscale modeling and computation has been developed within an individual
discipline. Breakthroughs in specific domains could be applicable in a broader
context, but remain isolated. As a result, multiscale descriptions are nowhere
near their potential level of impact, including in education and industry. One
of the main purposes of our multiscale conference is to integrate these isolated
efforts and diverse developments. The conference will also provide a special
opportunity to connect applied mathematicians with domain experts in multiscale
modeling and computation. This will help bridge the gap in research and
knowledge transfer between mathematics and other application disciplines.
