
* 0435964
* The 2005 International Conference on Preconditioning Techniques for Large Sparse Matrix Problems in Industrial Applications; May 19-21, 2005; Atlanta, GA
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2004,08/09/2004
* Michele Benzi,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 11,300.00

The innermost computational kernel of many large-scale scientific applications
and industrial numerical simulations is often a large sparse matrix problem,
which typically consumes a significant portion of the overall computational time
required by the simulation. Many of the matrix problems are in the form of
systems of linear equations, although other types of problems, such as
eigenvalue calculations, can occur too. A tremendous impact will be made if the
performance of these sparse matrix solvers can be improved. A traditional
approach to solving large sparse matrix equations is to use direct methods. This
approach is often preferred in industry because direct solvers are robust and
effective for moderate size problems. However, the unprecedented pace of the
advance in technology has led to a dramatic growth in the size of the matrices
to be handled. For example, the storage requirement for three-dimensional
simulations makes direct methods prohibitively expensive. Iterative techniques
are the only viable alternative. Unfortunately, iterative methods lack the
robustness of direct methods. They often fail when the matrix is very ill-
conditioned. This is the reason for the tremendous current interest in
preconditioning techniques for large sparse matrix problems: preconditioners
dramatically improve the robusteness and performance of iterative algorithms.

In spite of much progress on preconditioning techniques over the last few years,
iterative solvers are still not always completely reliable and efficient. The
proposed conference, the fourth in a series of biannual meetings on
preconditioning, intends to address the complex issues related to the solution
of general sparse matrix problems in large-scale real applications and in
industrial settings. The issues related to sparse matrix software that are of
interest to application scientists and industrial users are often fairly
different from those on which the academic community is focused. For example,
for an application scientist or an industrial user, improving robustness may be
far more important than finding a method that would gain speed. Memory usage is
also an important consideration, but is seldom accounted for in academic
research on sparse matrix solvers. As a last example, linear systems solved in
applications are almost always part of some nonlinear iteration (e.g., Newton)
or optimization loop. It is important to consider the coupling between the
linear and nonlinear parts, instead of focusing on the linear systems alone. The
speakers of this conference will discuss some of the latest developments in the
field of preconditioning techniques for sparse matrix problems. The conference
will allow participants from academia, industry and government labs to exchange
findings in this area and to explore possible new directions in light of
emerging paradigms, such as parallel processing and object-oriented programming.


