
* 0440299
* SGER: Proposal forModeling the Dynamics of Shape Change in Liquid Crystal Elastomer Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2004,09/06/2006
* Michael Shelley,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 02/28/2007
* USD 200,000.00

Liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs) are rubbers whose constituent molecules are
orientationally ordered, with their salient feature being a strong coupling
between the orientational order and mechanical strain. A characteristic feature
of LCEs is that relatively small external effects, such as changes in
temperature or onset of illumination, can produce huge and rapid deformations.
LCEs will likely assume real technological importance due of their softness and
their ready responsiveness to applied fields, yielding applications in
microfluidic pumping and switching, and helping to answer basic questions in
locomotion. By extending the theory of rubber networks, the investigators
develop and explore continuum descriptions of these materials, and study how
LCEs behave in the bulk and in interaction with an external fluid, and begin to
develop simulational methods for these systems. Parallel to the theoretical
study is an experimental program that involves the applications of LCEs, such as
to locomotion, but also to new materials synthesis.

Liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs) are active flexible materials whose
constituent molecules can be reoriented or disordered by applying electric or
temperature fields. A consequence of this is that relatively small external
effects, say in temperature changes or an onset of illumination, can produce
huge and rapid deformations of the material. The investigators have already
demonstrated that LCEs can have fascinating dynamics when interacting with a
fluidic environment, such as the observed "swimming" of floating LCE samples
away from an illuminated region. These materials may be of technological
importance due of their softness and responsiveness, suggesting applications in
microfluidic pumping and switching, and helping to answer basic questions in
locomotion. To fully exploit these materials the development of soundly based
mathematical models is crucial. The investigators develop mathematical
descriptions of these materials, and seek to understand the ways in which LCEs
interact with applied fields and with their environment. Parallel to the
theoretical studies is an experimental program that involves the applications of
LCEs, such as to locomotion, but also to new materials synthesis.
