
* 0442154
* Surveillance, Analysis and Modeling of Chatroom Communities
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, APPROACHES TO COMBAT TERRORISM, 
* 01/01/2005,07/25/2005
* Bulent Yener,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Hans G. Kaper
* 12/31/2006
* USD 171,758.00

The aim of this proposal is to develop new techniques for information gathering,
analysis and modeling of chatroom communications. First, the investigator and
his colleague consider graph-less models to capture the structure of chatroom
communications. In particular, the investigators study how to develop a
multidimensional singular value decomposition approach for component analysis of
chatroom communication data. Second, the investigators develop new visualisation
techniques to display the structural information found in the first step.

Internet chatrooms provide an interactive and public forum of communication for
participants with diverse objectives. Two properties of chatrooms make them
particularly vulnerable for exploitation by malicious parties. First, the real
identities of the participants are decoupled from their chatroom nicknames.
Second, multiple threads of communication can co-exist concurrently. Although
human-monitoring of each chatroom to determine "who-is-chatting-with-whom" is
possible, it is very time consuming, hence not scalable. Thus, it is very easy
to conceal malicious behavior in Internet chatrooms and use them for covert
communications (e.g., adversary using a teenager chatroom to plan a terrorist
act). This project aims at a fully automated surveillance system for data
collection and analysis in Internet chatrooms to discover hidden groups. The
surveillance is done in the form of statistical profiling for a particular
chatter, a group of chatters, or for the entire chatroom. The statistical
profiles are used to devise algorithms to determine chatters and their partners
and answer to queries including (i) "in which chatrooms topic A is discussed",
(ii) "who is chatting about topic A in chatroom X", (iii) "is topic A is a hot
one in chatroom X" etc. Thus, the proposed system could aid the intelligence
community to discover hidden communities and communication patterns in chatrooms
without human intervention.

This award is supported jointly by the NSF and the Intelligence Community. The
Approaches to Terrorism program in the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
Sciences supports new concepts in basic research and workforce development with
the potential to contribute to national security.
