
* 0449973
* CAREER: Design and Analysis of Restarted Iterative Methods for Linear Systems, Eigenvalue Problems, and Model Reduction
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2005,09/06/2005
* Mark Embree,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 439,680.00

Applications throughout computational science require the solution of large-
scale linear systems and eigenvalue problems, tasks that are often accomplished
using Krylov subspace projection methods. Nonsymmetric matrices pose a
particular challenge, with accurate solutions often requiring a combination of
restarted iterations and effective preconditioning. This project seeks to
develop an improved understanding of the convergence of restarted Krylov
subspace algorithms for linear systems and eigenvalue problems. The behavior of
such methods depends not only upon the eigenvalues of the matrices involved, but
also on nonnormality and properties of starting vectors. These latter issues
complicate analysis and can lead to algorithm failure; new insight into the
mechanisms that spawn such failure will inform the design of improved restarted
methods. The project will also consider the important role of preconditioners.
Projection methods for dimension reduction of large-scale problems raise related
concerns. Reduced-order models may capture salient eigenvalues of the original
system, yet miss important transient features of the solution that are of
physical significance, especially if the model derives from a nonlinear system.
Throughout this project test cases will be drawn from applications such as fluid
dynamics.

Large-scale linear algebra problems play a central role in many areas of
computational science and engineering, with applications ranging from fluid
dynamics and circuit simulation to neuroscience and data mining. Though the
efficient solution of such problems is essential to high-fidelity mathematical
modeling and the nation's fastest computers devote many cycles to this
challenge, several of the most important algorithms are unreliable and not yet
understood. This project seeks answers to fundamental questions concerning the
behavior of such methods, with the goal of gaining insights that will lead to
more rapid and reliable algorithms. Given the many fields that rely on these
techniques, such improvements will have broad application throughout the
scientific computing community. To complement the research program, this project
includes an important educational component comprising the mentorship of
graduate and undergraduate students, the development of a graduate course, and
the broad public dissemination of educational material for numerical analysis, a
core discipline for students preparing for careers in computational science and
engineering.
