
* 0505880
* Collaborative Proposal: Quadratic Inverse Eigenvalue Problems for Model Updating in Science and Engineering: Theory and Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2005,04/17/2008
* Moody Chu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2010
* USD 205,938.00

This project is devoted to the study of three inverse quadratic eigenproblems
with their pertinence to physical and engineering applications. The aim is to
develop theoretic understanding and derive numerical algorithms for the
quadratic model reconstruction so that the inexactness and uncertainty inherent
in the model due to the limitation of current technologies are reduced while
certain specific mathematical conditions are satisfied. The most difficult task
in the quadratic model reconstruction is to satisfy the associated constraints
which could be inherited intrinsically from the physical feasibility of a
certain mechanical structure or could be driven extrinsically by the desirable
property of a certain design parameter. The greatest challenge, which is also an
imperative requirement in practice, is that the reconstruction must be carried
out using only partial eigeninformation which are available by the state-of-the-
art computational techniques. The inverse problem of constrained model
reconstruction is essential for the understanding and management of complex
systems, yet many questions on the solvability, sensitivity, and computation
remain unanswered. The investigators have made significant contributions to the
quadratic model construction problems individually and now intend to extend
their investigation and join expertise to these challenging inverse problems.
This proposed work therefore should be of compelling independent interest within
both the engineering and mathematical sciences communities.

In mathematical modelling, techniques of inverse problems that validate,
determine, or estimate the parameters of the system according to its observed or
expected behavior are critically important. This research concentrates on the
inverse model reconstruction problems with their pertinence to physical and
engineering applications. These problems have been strongly motivitated by
scietific and industrial applications, including structural mechanics such as
vibration control and stability analysis of bridges, buildings and highways,
vibro-acoustics such as predictive coding of sound, biomedical signal and image
processing, time series forecasting, information technology, and others. Thus
this project will impact a wide variety of industries utilizing these
applications, including aerospace, automobile, manufacturing and biomedical
engineering. The greatest challenge facing these industries is to manufacture
increasingly improved products with limited engineering and computing resources.
A great deal of money and efforts have been spent in these industries to
satisactorily perform the model updating task. However, the lack of proper
theory and computational tools often force these industries to solve their
problems in an ad hoc fashion. An improved analytical model that can be used
with confidence for future designs is an essential tool in achieving this
obejective. The propsed research has not only strong mathematical foundation but
also significant matematical modelling and experimental aspects using idustrial
data which should be instantly welcome by the industries. Furthermore, the
students working on this project for four years will receive a valuable
interdisciplnary training blending mathematics and scietific computing with
various areas of engineering and applied sciences. Such expertise is rare to
find, but there is an increasing demand both inacademia and industries.


