
* 0508986
* Analysis and Control of Complementary Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2005,08/31/2005
* Jong-Shi Pang,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 11/30/2007
* USD 225,000.00

A complementarity system is a dynamical system defined by an ordinary
differential equation (ODE) involving the solutions of a finite-dimensional
complementarity problem parameterized by the state of the differential equation.
Complementarity systems constitute a new mathematical paradigm that finds a wide
range of applications in nonsmooth mechanics, robotics, multi-body dynamics,
switched circuit systems, economic and traffic systems, and even biological
systems. As such, the rigorous study of these systems is warranted. Due to their
intrinsically nonsmooth characteristics, such a study defies classical dynamical
systems theory and requires novel mathematical analysis, computational and
design tools. This proposed project is devoted to the investigation of
challenging issues in the analysis and control of complementarity systems. We
propose to apply state-of-art techniques from mathematical programming, convex
analysis, systems theory, and control theory to tackle these problems. On the
analytical side, we will address several fundamental and critical issues of
system behavior, e.g., existence and uniqueness of solutions and Zeno property,
which are directly related to numerical computation and system analysis.
Moreover, we aim at studying controllability and observability and developing
control algorithms that will be applied to robot motion planning, multi-body
systems subject to unilateral constraints, and constrained dynamic optimization
problems.

Dynamical systems modeled by ODEs provide a powerful mathematical and
computational framework for the study and understanding of a wide range of time-
dependent physical phenomena that naturally occur in many engineering
applications. As the application areas expand, researchers and designers are
encountering increasingly complex systems subject to various constraints, which
arise as a result of the global behavior of the systems and the interactions
between them and their complex environment and/or other systems at different
levels. A trivial example of such constraints is a falling object before and
after hitting the ground. At the instant where the object touches the ground, an
impact occurs followed by a rebounce of the object that results in a change of
direction of the object's motion. This is a mode transition. The proposed
research aims at treating dynamical systems where mode transition is an unknown
but important component of the overall system configuration. If successful, the
results of the research will let us gain a better understanding of many complex
engineering systems with mode changes and will provide a solid foundation for
the improved design of such systems that in turn will have a significant impact
on many practical fields. The proposed work will also contribute to the
advancement of basic sciences and to the education and training of the human
workforce.
