
* 0508260
* Mathematical Development of Large Eddy Simulation of Turbulence
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2005,04/08/2008
* William Layton,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 266,481.00

The investigator studies the accuracy and reliability of large eddy simulation
(LES) of turbulent flows. The research on LES includes modeling, analysis,
algorithm development, numerical analysis, and computational testing. The recent
mathematical development of approximate de-convolution models for turbulence
shows this approach to be an excellent path for developing accurate, stable and
predictive LES models. The research on finding better LES models is thus based
on the approximate de-convolution framework. The research on matching algorithms
to models uses an improved understanding of models and their numerical analysis
to develop better algorithms. The investigators research studies reliability of
simulations by developing analytical foundations of models and algorithms
directly from the Navier Stokes equations and by computational estimation of
model sensitivity. Training Ph.D. students properly to contribute to this area
is a large part of the proposed effort.

The accurate and efficient simulation of and extraction of reliable information
from turbulent flows is a central computational challenge in many important
applications including global change estimation, biomedical device design,
energy efficiency improvement, optimization of industrial processes, safety
estimation of the new generation of nuclear reactors, pollution dispersal and
abatement and security issues involving dispersal of biological and chemical
agents. All the above applications require accurate and reliable numerical
simulations of complex flows and thus progress in these applications needs
efficient and accurate models of turbulence and fast and reliable numerical
methods. This project involves the development and testing of models for
turbulent flow which can address essential difficulties in the modeling and
simulation of complex flows. This research studies the physical and mathematical
foundation of the models as well as efficient computational methods for
performing numerical simulations of the models. The aim of the research is to
advance the efficiency, reliability and accuracy of the simulations of
turbulence which form a core difficulty in these, and many other, applications.
