
* 0508175
* Computational Methods in Applications of Nonlinear Dynamics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 06/01/2005,05/26/2005
* Timothy Sauer,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 219,802.00

In recent years, modeling of dynamic phenomena in engineering and science, from
high-energy lasers to weather prediction, has dramatically increased in accuracy
due to more sophisticated treatment of nonlinear effects. The field of nonlinear
dynamics, which is focused on exactly how to carry out the improvements, has
experienced a parallel increase in importance. However, more accurate modeling
leads to more delicate computational simulations. One focus of this project is
to investigate issues of validity of computer simulations. We plan to study the
interaction between nonlinear dynamics and computer arithmetic, that
surprisingly often proves to have a major impact on simulation outcomes.

The second focus of the project is research on fundamental questions in the
interpretation of experimental multivariate time series and spike train data,
including data from physical experiments, epileptic seizures, and signal
processing. Complex deterministic time series are being identified in physical,
chemical, engineering and biological/medical settings. Techniques will be
developed to reconstruct the dynamical behavior of the process, with potential
to predict or control the process.

The broader impact of the project derives from integration of the research
topics in the PI's undergraduate and graduate teaching, the support of graduate
student research, and the enhancement of research infrastructure through
collaboration with non-mathematician collaborators. There are close connections
between the fundamental questions posed in the proposal and introductory
numerical analysis and dynamical systems at the undergraduate and graduate
levels; the PI has co-authored a text on the latter topic and is finishing an
undergraduate text on the former (publication expected Dec. 2005), demonstrating
an ongoing commitment to transferring benefits of research into teaching.
