
* 0509124
* Efficient Computation of Epitaxial Growth
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/15/2005
* Peter Smereka,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 236,100.00

Epitaxial growth is a physical process where atoms are slowly deposited onto a
substrate so that a crystal is grown, loosely speaking, one atomistic layer at a
time. This is a fundamental scientific problem in which both nanoscale and
macroscale effects are important. The resulting film morphology is determined by
a complex interaction between thermodynamic and kinetic effects. In addition,
epitaxial growth techniques have been used to create novel materials which
contain quantum dots (nanometer sized collections of atoms embedded in a matrix
of different species of atoms). The resulting material has unique electronic
properties. For example, solid-state lasers have been made out of such
materials. In addition, there is hope that such materials may be useful in
quantum computing applications. Modeling the growth of such a material is still
in its infancy.

The purpose of this proposal is to develop efficient algorithms for the
simulation of epitaxial growth using a computer. The proposal will focus on
atomistic models rather than continuous ones since they naturally include
nanoscale physical effects such as nucleation and fluctuations. In particular,
kinetic Monte Carlo models will be used, in which simple rules for atom motion
are evolved in stochastic fashion. The proposal aims at devising efficient
computational methods to simulate such models. Our computational strategy is
based on coarse-graining both in time and space, taking special care to preserve
physical fidelity. Preliminary results indicate that our algorithms are 5 to 10
times faster than the current state-of-the-art. It is felt that the numerical
methods proposed here will allow model development to proceed at a much faster
pace, thereby facilitating the design of new materials. The proposer plans to
work closely with two experimental research groups in the Material Science and
Engineering Departments at the University of Michigan.
