
* 0509695
* High-Order Numerical Simulation of Focusing Nonlinear Waves in the Non-Paraxial Regime
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,07/08/2005
* Semyon Tsynkov,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 104,931.00

The key objective of the project is to build a quantitative predictive
capability for the focusing nonlinear electromagnetic waves. A standard
mathematical model for describing this type of problems is the nonlinear
Schroedinger equation (NLS). By now, this equation is relatively well studied.
There are, however, indications that the NLS model may be oversimplified. An
alternative is provided by a more comprehensive nonlinear Helmholtz equation
(NLH), from which the NLS is, in fact, derived by employing the so-called
paraxial approximation and neglecting the important phenomenon of
backscattering. In contradistinction to the NLS, relatively little is known
about the solvability of the NLH and uniqueness of its solutions. Moreover, this
equation presents a considerable challenge for the numerical approach as well.
Nonlinearity is a major hurdle, as it implies that the impinging and
(back)scattered waves cannot be separated. Another key difficulty is the small
magnitude of backscattering compared to that of the forward propagating wave. In
the course of the project, the PI and his colleagues will develop, implement,
and test an efficient numerical procedure for integrating the NLH. It will
involve major modifications and improvements to the previously proposed
methodology that has already proven successful and, in fact, unparalled in the
literature. The methodology employs a high-order finite-difference
approximation. Its central element is a special two-way nonlocal artificial
boundary condition that makes the outer boundary transparent for all the
outgoing waves and at the same time is capable of accurately prescribing the
given impinging signal. It is expected that with the help of this methodology, a
valuable new insight will be gained into a number of key outstanding questions
in nonlinear optics, in particular, whether the nonparaxiality and
backscattering may arrest the collapse (blow-up) of focusing nonlinear waves,
and whether the NLH is capable of sustaining the so-called narrow spatial
solitons, with the width on the order of only several wavelengths.

In the course of the project, a numerical methodology will be built to simulate
the propagation of intense laser light through a variety of media and materials.
This methodology has a solid mathematical foundation, and is expected to help
address a number of challenging issues in the theoretical nonlinear optics. In
addition to its potential theoretical merits, the methodology will be useful
from the standpoint of applications as well. Indeed, the propagation of laser
beams in materials is typically accompanied by the phenomena of nonlinear self-
focusing and backscattering. The capability to quantitatively analyze and
predict these key phenomena is extremely important for many of applications in
modern science and engineering. The latter range from remote atmosphere sensing
(when an earth-based powerful laser sends pulses to the sky, and backscattered
radiation accounts for a substantial part of the detected signal), to laser
surgery (propagation of laser beams in tissues), to transmitting information
along optical fibers. There are other possible applications that involve, e.g.,
interactions between the co-propagating or counter- propagating laser beams.
They may provide a vehicle for designing the so-called all- optical switches for
the next generation of opto-electronic circuits. The proposed numerical
methodology will yield a powerful tool for the accurate and robust analysis of
the foregoing applications, along with many others.
