
* 0509873
* Workshop on Geometry and Symmetry in Numerical Computation
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/27/2005
* Simon Tavener,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 16,650.00

Some of the most exciting developments in modern computational science have
resulted from exploiting ideas in areas of mathematics not traditionally
associated with numerical computation. Conversely, numerical techniques have
been applied to solve computational problems arising in "non-traditional"
fields. A good example is the fruitful interaction between computational
mathematics and algebraic geometry. Singularity theory, which builds on ideas of
algebraic geometry, has been embraced by computational scientists to compute
paths of critical points in multi-parameter systems of differential and partial
differential equations. Symmetries and group actions are used to create
numerical methods for specific types of problems with significantly improved
accuracy and stability properties. Techniques in algebraic geometry are also
very useful for finding solutions of differential equations on manifolds, and
are currently being applied to develop algorithms to compute decompositions of
higher order tensors. On the other hand, numerical techniques for continuation,
homotopy and symmetry provide the basis for methods in numerical algebraic
geometry that are used to compute solution components of systems of polynomial
equations. The ability to carry out the numerical decomposition of polynomial
systems has yielded applications in mechanical engineering including the
understanding and design of mechanisms that transmit, control, or constrain
relative motion, robotics, control theory (pole placement), integer programming,
and statistics. The development of hybrid exact/approximate methods for finding
solutions of polynomial equations gives rise to issues of errors and stability
that confront numerical analysts in many other contexts.

The Workshop on geometry and symmetry in numerical computation will bring
together experts from computational mathematics and algebraic geometry in order
to explore and develop the potential in this rich interdisciplinary area. The
program has been planned specifically to introduce and attract students and
young investigators to this area. Each session will begin with an introductory
lecture followed by four talks by leading experts. The introductory speakers
will prepare a short "guide" describing some basic language and results that the
audience can use during the invited talks. The one hour lectures themselves will
be aimed towards an audience of advanced graduate students and researchers from
different areas of mathematics. We expect the Workshop to break down
disciplinary barriers and encourage cross-fertilization between researchers from
algebraic geometry and numerical analysis. The lectures and discussion sections
will encourage students and young researchers to become involved in the
intersection of algebraic geometry and numerical analysis, and will provide
stimulation and support for those already engaged in this activity. Potential
outcomes range from improved methods to compute large complex physical systems
governed by systems of partial differential equations, to advances in
computational methods for general relativity, to new geometric methods for the
analysis of large data sets, and to more efficient numerical methods for
robotics and control.
