
* 0510324
* Multistage Stochastic Convex Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2005,08/22/2005
* Alexander Shapiro,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 199,999.00

Optimization problems with uncertainty are encountered in many applications.
Some examples that have received a fair amount of attention include inventory
control with uncertain demand, investment portfolio selection with uncertain
returns and liabilities, and electricity generation with uncertain demand. There
are various approaches to modeling and solving such problems. The investigators
consider Multistage Stochastic Programming and Dynamic Programming problems in
which a sequence of decisions is made and some of the problem parameters are
random, and information that can be used in later decisions become available
over time.

Considerable progress has been made in the last few years in our ability to
handle optimization problems with uncertainty. It was shown theoretically and
confirmed in numerical experiments that sampling methods allow solving some of
these problems with proven accuracy and in some cases even exactly. It seems
that we now have a sound theoretical background and some numerical experience
indicating that come types of problems can be solved effectively by sampling
techniques. The proposed research is aimed at developing basic theory and
numerical procedures for solving multistage optimization problems with
uncertainty. In order to make them work, effective deterministic optimization
algorithms should be combined with simulation methods in an efficient way. If
successful, it may open the possibility to solve a considerably larger class of
real world problems. In that respect theoretical results and preliminary
numerical experiments with the suggested approach are quite encouraging.
