
* 0510162
* Particle Simulations of Vortex Sheet Motion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2005,07/14/2005
* Robert Krasny,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 64,299.00

The investigator will develop particle simulation techniques for vortex sheet
motion in two- and three-dimensional fluid flows. Vortex sheets are weak
solutions of the ideal fluid equations in which the vorticity is concentrated on
a surface and they are widely used in fluid dynamics to represent thin shear
layers in slightly viscous flow. Vortex sheet simulations encounter severe
difficulties due to Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, singularity formation, and
chaotic dynamics, but the investigator has shown that these difficulties can be
overcome by regularizing the Biot-Savart kernel in the equation governing the
motion of material points on the sheet surface. The present project extends the
capability of these regularized particle simulations by developing an improved
treecode algorithm for evaluating the Biot-Savart integral, and adaptive
quadrature and particle insertion schemes to maintain resolution as the sheet
rolls up. In contrast to other approaches using spherical harmonics, the present
treecode algorithm uses Taylor approximations in Cartesian coordinates which
provides more flexibility and enables the method to be applied to nonharmonic
functions such as the regularized Biot-Savart kernel. The quadrature and
insertion schemes to be developed will make essential use of the Lagrangian
sheet parameterization. The investigator will perform particle simulations of
vortex ring dynamics and will compare the results to laboratory experiments and
direct numerical solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations. Other topics to be
studied include high precision computation of spiral formation in the Kelvin-
Helmholtz problem, and extension of the present techniques to density-stratified
flow.



Computer simulation is a well established tool in basic and applied research in
all areas of science and engineering. For example, automobile manufacturers, as
well as pharmaceutical companies, routinely use computer simulations in the
design of new products. A successful computer simulation relies on several
components: a mathematical model of the physical problem, numerical algorithms
for implementing the model on a computer, and computer hardware to perform the
simulation. The present project focuses on the first two components by
developing better models and algorithms for the computer simulation of fluid
flows which are dominated by vortices. Vortices in air or water are usually
invisible, but they can exert strong forces on nearby solid structures. One
example is the trailing vortex wake behind an airplane which is responsible for
the lift of the airplane, but also poses a hazard for nearby aircraft. In
crowded urban airports with few runways, it is often necessary for an airplane
to wait several minutes before taking off, to ensure that the wake of the
preceding aircraft has dissipated to a safe level. The present investigation
will contribute better algorithms for simulating the trailing wake which can be
used by aeronautical engineers in designing methods to enhance wake dissipation
and reduce takeoff delays. The algorithms developed in this project are also
applicable to evaluating electrostatic forces at the molecular level, a generic
computational problem with many potential applications in areas such as
chemistry and plasma physics.


