
* 0510799
* AMC-SS: A Multi-Element Generalized Polynomial Chaos Method for Modeling Uncertainty in Flow Simulations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2005,06/29/2005
* George Karniadakis,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/28/2010
* USD 311,795.00

In numerical simulations of fluid flows, just as in experiments, we often
question the accuracy of the results, and we construct error bars that reflect
the numerical accuracy of the solution. In many cases, however, there exists a
much larger error associated with the fact that the physical parameters, the
geometry, and the operating conditions of the simulated flow are not precisely
known. With the computational fluid dynamics field reaching now some degree of
maturity, we naturally pose the more general question of how to model
uncertainty and stochastic input mathematically, and how to develop new
algorithms that will yield simulation results that reflect accurately the
propagation of uncertainty. To this end, the Monte Carlo approach can be
employed but it is computationally expensive and it is only used as the last
resort.

In this grant we develop a new approach similar to high-order finite element
methods but instead decomposing the random domain. Specifically, we extend the
pioneering ideas of Norbert Wiener in generalized Fourier series -- the so-
called polynomial chaos expansion -- and apply it locally to each random
element. The resulting system of governing equations forms a set of coupled
modified flow equations, which are deterministic and thus can be solved with
standard numerical methods. Comparisons with the Monte Carlo method show that
the new method is faster by a factor of 100 to 1000 on the average. We propose
to document systematically this method and use it to study in detail important
problems in high-speed flows and in modeling blood flow in the human arterial
tree. The proposed approach will affect fundamentally the way we design new
experiments and the type of questions that we can address, while the interaction
between simulation and experiment will become more meaningful and more dynamic.
This, in turn, will find its way into the design of flow systems equipment and
will provide a rigorous reliability framework.

We plan to involve graduate and undergraduate students in the current research
and we will develop a specific initiative to attract pre-college female students
to mathematics and computational science.
