
* 0511430
* Least-Squares Finite Element Methods for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2005,09/08/2005
* Zhiqiang Cai,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 110,000.00

The goal of this project is the development and analysis of least-squares
methods for partial differential equations (PDEs) arising from applications in
fluid and solid mechanics. These systems are naturally nonlinear and numerical
simulation is typically difficult and expensive. The least-squares finite
element method is a powerful tool for many PDE-based applications in science and
engineering. One of the main characteristics of a least-squares formulation is
that it transforms a given set of equations into a loosely coupled system of
scalar equations that can be treated easily by multilevel finite element
methods. The finite element spaces for the individual unknowns may be chosen
independently, based on simplicity and availability or from the physics of the
underlying problem. The linear systems of equations resulting from well-posed
least-squares discretizations are always self-adjoint and positive definite, and
variational multigrid methods generally provide a robust, scalable solver. In
addition, the associated functional itself provides a natural sharp local error
estimator, which can be used for effective adaptive mesh refinement. Coupling
nested iteration and Newton linearization with a least-squares discretization
and multigrid iterative solver constitutes a robust, comprehensive solution
strategy for difficult nonlinear problems.

This project represents a focused study of least-squares methods for several
linear and nonlinear elasticity and fluid flow problems, extending to
applications in viscoelasticity. Some research in these areas has been
successful and preliminary results are encouraging, but much remains to be done.
This project includes both general solution methodologies for problems with
strong nonlinearities and specific least-squares formulations for models that
have not been analyzed in a least-squares framework. The applications considered
in this project include complex and specialized systems important in areas
including engineering, physics, aerodynamics, atmospheric sciences, geology, and
biomechanics. One target application, for example, is a specific incompressible,
non-Newtonain flow which arises in the modeling of blood flow. Here, a
viscoelastic model that takes into account the elastic nature of the suspended
red blood cells is to be considered. In these and many other areas of interest,
computer simulation of complex phenomena are currently limited by efficiency of
numerical methods. The basic techniques developed here will enhance the broader
area of scientific computation by adding to the collective understanding of how
to analyze and solve complex problems.
