
* 0511800
* Algebraic Multigrid Methods and Their Application to Generalized Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2005,09/06/2005
* Ludmil Zikatanov,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 120,000.00

The research in this proposal is on the study and applications of efficient
algebraic multigrid methods for the solution of linear algebraic systems arising
from the discretization of second order partial differential equations by the
generalized finite element method. The proposed research will focus on the
development and analysis of adaptive techniques in the construction of hierarchy
of nested spaces and the choice of approximate subspace solvers that lead to the
efficient and robust multigrid methods applicable to wide range of generalized
finite element discretizations.

The rapid increase in the power of today's supercomputers has made it feasible
for the scientific community to use numerical simulations to model physical
phenomena to produce meaningful results. One of the modern techniques that can
deliver quantitative results via such simulations is the generalized finite
element method. This method has proved to be a very robust discretization tool,
applicable in various branches of engineering and sciences, for example, in
simulating and determining the elastic, electromagnetic and other important
physical properties of heterogeneous materials. Like most other discretization
techniques, most often the majority of computation in such simulations is
devoted to the solution of the resulting linear systems of equations. Hence, it
is very important to develop efficient solvers for these systems. The results
from the proposed research are thus expected to have a broad and noticeable
impact by providing the much needed iterative multilevel solution techniques for
the discrete linear systems arising from numerical models in many applications.
The proposed research is also expected to have an educational impact as it will
provide a solid base for training of graduate students in the modern theoretical
and practical aspects of numerical methods for problems in science and
engineering.
