
* 0511441
* Mathematical Algorithms for Computer Simulation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2005,09/06/2005
* Reinhard Laubenbacher,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 150,000.00

The project focuses on the development of a mathematical foundation for
interaction-based computer simulations that can be represented as deterministic,
discrete-time dynamical systems on finite state sets. Here, an interaction-based
simulation is considered to be a collection of variables, each equipped with an
update function or a set of rules which is used to compute the state of that
variable at the next time step, based on the states of all the other variables.
Thus, the description of the system is given via local interactions, and global
dynamics is generated through the simultaneous iteration of all local update
functions. Cellular automata and Boolean networks are examples such simulations.
An important question, that has been studied extensively in the framework of
cellular automata is how one can predict global dynamical features of such
systems from the structure of the local update functions. By assuming that the
state set for each variable is a finite field, such as the field with two
elements used typically for cellular automata,this problem can be addressed
within the framework of computational algebra. The algorithms developed in this
project will become part of a symbolic computation software package for finite
dynamical systems, implemented in the computer algebra system Macaulay2.

Interaction-based simulation is becoming increasingly important in the analysis
of large biological, epidemiological, and socio-technical networks, such as the
immune system, the spread of infectious diseases in urban areas, or road traffic
and wireless communications networks. Typically, such networks are understood at
the level of individual interactions, but global information tends to be sparse.
The software design of such systems is very challenging, and so is the analysis
of simulation output, due to the size and complexity of the simulated systems. A
mathematical foundation for such simulations will provide tools for the design
of large-scale simulations. It will also help to systematically answer questions
about biological and other systems, such as optimal ways to treat infectious
diseases,or how to contain their spread in large populations.
