
* 0511411
* Collaborative Research: Morphological Evolution in Materials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CONDENSED MATTER & MAT THEORY
* 07/01/2005,07/13/2005
* Xiaofan Li,IL,Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 121,910.00

The shapes of interfaces between phases at the microscopic level are of critical
importance in predicting macroscopic material characteristics such as strength
and electronic properties. Thus, understanding the evolution of microstructures
in solids is a fundamental problem in materials science. Simulations in the
presence of numerous evolving interfaces pose mathematical and computational
challenges, especially in three dimensions. This interdisciplinary research and
training program focuses on developing mathematical models and computational
techniques to overcome the challenges of computationally studying surface
defects in solids and coarsening in solid-solid and solid-liquid systems. The
mathematical impacts of the study will include accurate and fast numerical
methods for microstructural evolution in three dimensions and for evolution of
defects on solid surfaces, using boundary integral methods and incorporating
both diffusional and elastic effects. These techniques will be applied to (1)
investigate coarsening in solid-solid and solid-liquid systems by performing
two- and three-dimensional simulations, and (2) examine step flows (motion of
atomic-height steps) on solid surfaces in three dimensions. These investigations
will provide insights into materials issues encountered in high-temperature
alloys and semiconductor thin film growth. Close collaborations with
experimentalists will allow comparisons of the simulation and experimental
results. The equations governing the proposed material systems are closely
related to a host of mathematical descriptions for pattern formation in moving
boundary problems. Therefore, the proposed modeling and computational techniques
will have broad applications and will provide new tools for other research
areas. Importantly, the proposed program will provide excellent training
opportunities for graduate students interested in research at the interface of
mathematics, computation, and engineering.
