
* 0511533
* A study of how indicators for 2-D turbulence depend on the driving force in the Navier-Stokes equation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2005,06/09/2005
* Michael Jolly,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2010
* USD 283,633.00

This project is focused on the discovery of driving forces that support the
Kraichnan theory of 2-D fully developed turbulence. In recent work the
investigators and their collaborators have identified critical wave numbers
expressed as averages of different norms of the solution to the Navier-Stokes
equations (NSE). These wave numbers provide necessary, and nearly sufficient
conditions for the Kraichnan theory to hold. This team has also localized to
some extent the global attractor of the NSE in a plane spanned by two of these
norms (one being the energy), to help understand which driving forces produce
these conditions. The proposed work will combine this analysis with
computational optimization to zero in on such forces, and then study in detail
the turbulent features they produce. The mathematical treatment of turbulence is
largely driven by the heuristic theories of Kolmogorov, Batchelor and Kraichnan.
The approach taken in projecting the attractor however, seems to be entirely
new. The information provided by this analysis will guide the computational
component which otherwise would be confronted with a vast landscape of possible
driving forces to consider.

Turbulence is readily observed in three-dimensional physical space domains. Most
people think of a bumpy plane rides (in this case the domain is the volume
around the airplane). Like the swirls generated by rocks in a stream, rapidly
changing patterns form in the air around the plane. Turbulence theories do not
attempt to predict the precise development of these patterns, but rather find
(a) consistent laws which describe how, on average, energy is transferred to
smaller length scales, and (b) critical length scales at which this this
phenomenon changes. True 2-D flows in nature are less prevalent. The most
prominent example, the earth's atmosphere, is actually a thin 3-D domain, whose
behavior approaches that of a 2-D flow. The fate of energy over different length
scales is more complicated for 2-D flow, though that of 3-D flow is in some
sense embedded into it. Though 2-D experiments are difficult to carry out in the
laboratory, they allow for much finer study on a computer. Of all 2-D flows, the
one studied in this project is arguably the most amenable to analysis and
efficient simulation. Yet it is fundamental, not only to 2-D and nearly 2-D
flows such as the atmosphere, but also to 3-D turbulence due to universality.
