
* 0511454
* Images Degraded by Nonlinear Motion Blurs: Mathematical Models, Algorithms and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,07/08/2005
* James Nagy,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 266,448.00

This project is concerned with the development of algorithms and software for
the restoration of images degraded by nonlinear and nonuniform motion blurs. The
problems to be addressed by the investigator and his colleagues include the
development of an appropriate mathematical model for nonlinear motion blurs,
analysis of the ill-conditioning of the blurring process, development of
efficient algorithms for removing motion blur, and development of software for
specific applications. Algorithm and software development is needed for the
solution of large scale, severely ill-conditioned linear systems that arise in
the discrete formulation of these problems. For nonlinear and nonuniform motion,
these systems generally have no exploitable structure; that is, standard
deconvolution techniques that use fast Fourier transforms are not applicable.

Images used for surveillance, medical diagnostic, and other scientific purposes
are rarely perfect. Imperfections in the imaging system and environmental
effects may result in serious degradations, such as blurring, in the recorded
image. Postprocessing techniques (i.e., computational methods) are often
necessary to obtain better quality pictures. Designing appropriate algorithms
requires accurate mathematical modeling of the image formation process, and
development of robust, efficient computational tools. One of the most common
causes of blurring in images is motion of either the recording device or the
objects being imaged. Although linear motion, with constant speed and direction,
is well understood, very little work has been done to develop mathematical
models and efficient algorithms for the restoration of images degraded by
nonlinear and nonuniform motion blurs. The investigator and his colleagues
consider this difficult, important problem. The software developed through this
project can be applied to many important applications, including medical imaging
(e.g., movement of the heart during cardiac imaging processes), aerial and video
surveillance, forensic investigations, and astronomical imaging.
