
* 0511336
* Scalable Iterative Solution of Large Linear Systems with Applications in Fluid Dynamics, Radiation Transport and Markov Chains
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2005,01/22/2009
* Michele Benzi,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2009
* USD 237,008.00

The solution of large systems of linear equations remains one of the main
bottlenecks in many numerical simulations throughout computational science and
engineering. Despite much recent progress, there is still a great need for
improved iterative solvers in such areas as fluid dynamics, radiation transport,
magnetohydrodynamics, image processing, computational mechanics, acoustics, and
so forth. The increasingly important area of data mining and information
retrieval also makes heavy use of sparse matrix techniques and necessitates
reliable and scalable algorithms for linear equations and eigenvalue problems.
The PI will investigate efficient iterative solvers with a focus on
preconditioning techniques for nonsymmetric and indefinite problems. The PI
proposes to use a blend of algebraic and problem-specific techniques to
construct robust and scalable solvers for linear systems arising from
discretizations of problems from fluid dynamics and radiation transport, as well
as for solving large sparse complex symmetric systems and for computing the
stationary vector of Markov chains.

The ultimate goal of research in computational mathematics is to provide
scientists and engineers the algorithmic and software tools needed for the
solution of challenging scientific and technical problems of increasing size and
complexity. The competitiveness of American science and technology greatly
benefits from (and to a large extent depends on) the creation of innovative
computational methods and software and by the continuous improvement of existing
techniques. Progress in the solution of the problems targeted by the PI will
have a positive impact on science and engineering by enabling faster and more
detailed computer simulations. In addition, several graduate students (and
possibly a few undergraduates) will be impacted by this research either through
direct involvement, or through the positive effects this research will have on
the PI's teaching of computational and applied mathematics courses at Emory
University.
