
* 0511461
* Computational Noncommutative Harmonic Analysis with Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2005,08/18/2006
* Thomas Strohmer,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 276,358.00

The increasing requirements on data rate and quality of service for wireless
communications systems call for new techniques to improve radio link reliability
and to increase spectral efficiency. The three key technologies to achieve these
goals are equalization, diversity, and channel coding. Mathematics is of
fundamental importance to these technologies providing the theoretical basis as
well as the means for efficient numerical implementations. The investigator will
derive a theoretical and numerical framework for designing equalization
techniques for time-varying channels. Using methods from pseudo-differential
operator theory and time-frequency analysis he will develop a qualitative and
quantitative theory for the approximate diagonalization of operators associated
with time-varying systems. These theoretical results will form a key stone in
the construction of fast and reliable numerical equalization methods which will
be based Krylov subspace techniques. The investigator will also study the use of
frame theory in wireless communications. Using concepts from sphere packings and
group theory he will analyze theoretical properties of special frames such as
Grassmannian frames. Furthermore he will develop theoretical and numerical
schemes in connection with multi-carrier communication systems such as OFDM.
This includes the design of transmission signals with specific properties using
a generalization of the concept of prolate spheroidal wave functions. By taking
recent tools from harmonic analysis into the wireless communications community
this research activity will enable further advances and breakthroughs in
wireless communications. At the same time it will stimulate new research areas
in applied mathematics and pave the road for further interactions between
applied mathematicians and communication engineers.

The goal of this project is to develop mathematical concepts and computational
methods for wireless communications technology. The investigator will combine
modern tools from mathematics with methods from information theory and signal
processing to develop new concepts and algorithms for key technologies in
wireless communications such as coding, transmission, and equalization.
Mathematics is of fundamental importance to these technologies, since it
provides the theoretical basis as well as the means for efficient numerical
implementations. By improving radio link reliability and increasing data rates
this research activity will be instrumental in fulfilling the increasing
requirements on future wireless communications systems. The project will produce
conceptual deliverables in the form of new mathematical methods to analyze and
construct wireless transmission systems. The project will also produce concrete
deliverables in the form of numerical algorithms for use in the scientific and
industrial sector.
