
* 0512969
* Integral Equation Methods for Scattering by Inhomogeneous Media: Preconditioning, Efficiency, and High-Order Accuracy
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2005,08/18/2006
* E. McKay Hyde,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 0.00

The PI proposes to develop and rigorously analyze new efficient and high-order
accurate integral equation methods for acoustic scattering in two and three
dimensions, with the longer-range goal of developing methods for full
electromagnetic scattering (by inhomogeneous and even anisotropic media) in
three dimensions. These methods combine an existing FFT-based method for
integrating over smooth regions of the inhomogeneity, with an accelerated, high-
order accurate integration scheme, for small regions near scatterer
discontinuities. The PI also proposes to develop preconditioning strategies
through two distinct lines of investigation: (1) preconditioning by means of a
perturbation expansion about a simple, piecewise-constant, radially layered
inhomogeneity and (2) preconditioning by means of the infinite frequency limit
of the problem, i.e., geometrical optics. To pursue a preconditioner based on
geometrical optics, an effective method for computing the multi-valued solution
to the eikonal equation in inhomogeneous media (capturing the reflection and
refraction at discontinuous interfaces) will be developed by building on a
recently developed phase-space-based level set method, which combines a spectral
representation in the phase variables with a discontinuous Galerkin finite-
element discretization in the spatial variables.

The use of numerical methods to evaluate the scattering of waves by complex
material structures plays an important role in an enormous range of scientific
and engineering technologies. Examples include radar and remote sensing, medical
and biological imaging (e.g., CT-scans, ultrasound), laser-plasma interactions
(e.g., in laser-driven fusion), photonic crystal design, nondestructive testing,
neutron and electron diffraction, and exploration seismology. At the same time,
the ever increasing size and complexity of material structures of practical
interest place many problems beyond the capabilities of state-of-the-art
computational methods, thus requiring new and innovative mathematical
approaches. The PI proposes to develop new efficient and highly accurate
computational methods for such problems to enable the treatment of larger and
more complex scattering structures.
