
* 0512231
* AMC-SS: Computational Algorithms and Reduced Models for Stochastic PDEs
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2005,06/29/2005
* Roger Ghanem,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2008
* USD 250,000.00

Recent advances in the ability to manipulate matter across many scales,
including the nanoscale, have contributed significantly towards developing
computers and sensors whose capabilities could not be imagined only a decade
ago. This has, in turn, brought closer the promise of computational experiments
as true surrogates for physical experiments. The benefits of this development
are very clear: products can be designed to their smallest detail before
expensive production begins; complex systems such as airplanes and chemical
plants can be faithfully designed and certified while bypassing the very
expensive "physical testing" phase; what-if scenarios involving hypothetical
disasters such as terrorist attacks or meteor encounters can be preempted or at
least be readied for.

An essential component towards fulfilling this promise of "computational
reality" is the realization that reality is variable: every time a wave is
observed on the shore, every time an earthquake is measured, a soil specimen dug
out from the earth, different and unique features are observed of the wave, the
quake, or the soil, respectively. Then, a challenge to "computational reality"
is the ability to reproduce this real-world scatter.

The proposed research addresses this very issue by modeling the unknown root
cause of this variability using the mathematical theory of probabilities. Thus,
uncertainties that contribute to the observed variability in nature become an
intrinsic part of the predictive model, endowing it with the ability to more
realistically reproduce reality. As significant contributions to this
overarching problem, two issues are specifically addressed in the present
research. First, it is vital that the particular form of uncertainty with which
the model is endowed does indeed correspond to that observed in reality. Thus,
in the first component of the present research, theory and algorithms for
constructing models of stochastic processes that are consistent with
experimental observations will be developed. These models will be developed such
that they can be efficiently embedded into computational algorithms currently in
use by state-of-the-art predictive tools. Stochastic representations pioneered
by the PI will be used to that end. Secondly, it must be noted that any effort
at capturing the variability in nature is fraught with complexity, not the least
of which is the burden of enumerating, in some sense, all possible states of
nature. The second component of the present research addresses this complexity
through innovative computational algorithms that can efficiently and faithfully
reproduce natural variability. This will be done by capitalizing on a certain
structure both in the underlying physics as well as in the mathematical form
assumed to govern the physical behavior of interest. Both new models and new
algorithms will be developed to tackle this problem.

This research provides a significant contribution towards enabling rational risk
management and resource allocation for complex systems whose accurate behavior
requires the large-scale computational solution of complex mathematical
equations.
