
* 0512673
* Compatible and Nearly Compatible Finite Element Discretizations: Algorithms, Analysis and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/14/2005
* Timothy Warburton,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 186,195.00

The investigator is studying connections between conventional finite element
methods and the cutting edge discontinuous Galerkin method. Only recently has it
been discovered that the differential operators discretized via these
philosophically distinct methods have closely related eigenspectra. The
investigator is synthesizing analytical and numerical tools from both fields to
examine and improve the robustness of the latter method when used with highly
non-conforming discretization resolution. In addition, the investigator and a
graduate student are creating an object oriented library which allows non-
experts to use combinations of these methods through a simple and intuitive
interface.

As new techniques for computational simulation of physical phenomena are
developed, it is extremely important to determine under what circumstances they
perform at their best and in a predictable way. There has been significant
interest in the recently developed discontinuous Galerkin simulation method,
because it can solve large scale problems not readily attainable with existing
methods. For example, these methods can potentially increase the accuracy,
efficiency, and scope of modeling radar scattering from large complex aircraft.
The investigator is studying how to predict when this new method will give
physically reasonable solutions, for example in computing the noise generated by
next generation aircraft. The end product of this investigation will be a set of
guidelines on how and when to best use the methods. Furthermore, the
investigator is developing a software library which will ease transfer of these
high resolution methods by simplifying the process of rapid prototyping and
testing of new critical core components for physics simulation tools.
