
* 0513394
* Variational Approaches to Optimizations and Adaptivity in Problems Involving Visibility
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2005,09/19/2006
* Yen-Hsi Tsai,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 102,580.00

The problem of visibility involves the determination of regions in space visible
to a given observer when obstruction of the observer's line-of-sight is present.
When the observer is replaced by a light source, and the obstruction to sight
(the occluders) constitute non-reflecting obstacles, the problem translates to
that of finding the illuminated regions. The PI proposes to study computational
and mathematical aspects of problems involving visibility optimization. Novel
optimal control and game formulations with visibility objectives will be
introduced and investigated. Shock-capturing techniques as well as numerical
algorithms for Hamilton-Jacobi equations will be introduced and a new type of
Hamilton-Jacobi equation with discontinuous coefficients will be rigorously
derived, and whose viscosity solution theory will correspondingly be developed.
Variational calculus and higher order PDEs will be investigated and incoporated.

This proposal concerns developing practical mathematical and computational
strategies for optimizing surveillance in many different contexts. The potential
impacts for the proposed project include surveillance and robotic path planning,
which are of immediate national interest, and applications that involve
computations of high frequency wave propagation such as radar cross section
computations in stealth fighter jet design. As an example of a potential
application, consider a robot placed on a terrain such as the surface of Mars.
The mission is the explore the terrain using various devices, including a video
recording device. How does one compute the visibility of this robot? How should
an optimal search path be designed? If more than one robot is placed in the
domain, how should the robots coordinate for a jointly optimal search result? In
the context of wireless communication, a similar question can be raised as to
finding an optimal placement of n wireless base stations for maximal averaged
coverage in an urban region, or determining a path with maximal averaged signal
coverage given the locations of base stations. In designing UAV's (Unmanned
Aviation Vehicles), how should one track a target to keep it in sight for as
long time as possible? In general pursuit-evasion problems: What is the best way
to make a certain hidden object become visible? Or the reverse: What is the best
way to hide from a moving threat? The computational approaches in the proposed
project will be guided by the practicality considerations guided by the listed
examples as well as by certain level of rigorous mathematical theory.
