
* 0513438
* Lattice Differential Equations and the Computation of Stability Spectra
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2005,08/18/2006
* Erik Van Vleck,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 211,775.00

The investigator and his colleagues consider issues in the approximation of
solutions of differential equations. Differential equations are commonly used to
model physical and biological phenomena in many areas of science and
engineering. A differential equation is a rule, a relationship between the
solution and its derivatives, that determines how an initial configuration
evolves into future configurations. The focus of this project is on the
approximation of Lyapunov exponents and related quantities that provide
information on stability, the tendency for nearby configurations to evolve
nearby, and instability, the tendency for nearby configurations to move apart,
and on the analysis and computation of lattice differential equations, i.e.,
differential equations that are discrete in space and continuous in time. Much
of this work emphasizes the blending of rigorous analysis with practical
implementation of algorithms. This research has as a central theme: the
combination of dynamical systems and numerical analysis ideas together with the
modeling and analysis of differential equations. Discrete models play a
prominent role in the modeling of physical and biological systems. Of particular
interest are traveling wave solutions of lattice differential equations. Sacker-
Sell and Lyapunov spectral intervals are natural analogues of the real parts of
the eigenvalues that provide stability information for time-varying differential
equations. The investigator develops, analyzes, and justifies the use of
numerical techniques for the approximation of these spectral intervals. A suite
of computational modules for the computation of stability information and for
functional traveling waves is being developed. It is backed by analysis of the
numerical techniques in a form that should prove useful to working scientists
and engineers.
