
* 0513251
* Domain Decomposition Methods: Algorithms and Theory
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2005,08/25/2005
* Olof Widlund,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 100,000.00

Large scale continuum mechanics simulations routinely require the efficient
solution of very large linear or nonlinear systems of algebraic equations as
well as powerful computer systems. Such problems are increasingly solved on
parallel or distributed computing systems which provide access to a large amount
of memory as well as a substantial number of fast processors. The goal of this
project is to further develop solvers of domain decomposition type, algorithms
which respect the memory hierarchy of modern computing systems and allow for a
performance which approaches peak floating point performance. There already
exists a well developed mathematical theory and a good understanding of how to
adjust these algorithms to problems arising in different applications but there
is also a real need to further extend our understanding and to improve and
numerically test new algorithms especially in view of emergence of parallel
computing systems with very many powerful processors. A main goal of this
project is the further understanding of the FETI-DP and BDDC families of domain
decomposition methods.

The direction of the work in this field is strongly influenced by the
interaction between academic computational scientists and scientists at the US
national laboratories and in the engineering software industry. The connection
to the SANDIA- Albuquerque laboratories is particularly strong. Domain
decomposition methods are used extensively in very large and important
applications at these laboratories and the domain decomposition methods are also
making significant inroads in software systems that are used by a large
community of engineers for the design and checking of machine parts and larger
engineering structures. Particularly important application areas are elasticity
and electromagnetics. The latter field helps create a foundation for
improvements of cellular phone systems, other wire-less communication systems,
as well as micro electronics.
