
* 0513509
* The D-bar Method in Electrical Impedance Tomography
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2005,08/08/2007
* Jennifer Mueller,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 111,996.00

Reconstruction algorithms for two and three-dimensional electrical impedance
tomography (EIT) are developed. EIT is a relatively new medical imaging
technique in which electrodes are placed on the surface of the body, current is
applied on the electrodes, and the resulting voltage is measured on the
electrodes. Since the various organs and tissues in the body frequently have
different conductive properties, an image is formed from the reconstructed
conductivity distribution. In this research the D- bar reconstruction algorithm
for 2-D EIT based on the paper by Nachman [Ann. Of Math. 143 (1996)] will be
further developed through a study of the algorithm applied to discontinuous
conductivities, a study of electrode effects on the algorithm, incorporating
boundary reconstruction in the numerical algorithm, more accurate computations
of the scattering transform, and adapting the algorithm to non-circular
geometries. This work is expected to improve the accuracy of the method and
bring it to a clinically useful stage. In addition, a 3-D D-bar algorithm will
be developed for EIT data collected on planar electrode arrays. The particular
clinical application for the 3-D algorithm is breast cancer detection.

This work will provide further insight into the D-bar method in two and three
dimensions. The terminology "D-bar method" comes from the techniques in inverse
scattering which result in a D-bar equation, which is a certain type of partial
differential equation in complex variables, to be solved in the reconstruction
process. The 2-D D-bar algorithm is the only direct (non-iterative) method for
EIT solving the full nonlinear conductivity problem to have been successfully
implemented on experimental EIT data. At present, no direct numerically
implemented method exists for EIT in three dimensions. The 2-D EIT problem has
an important application as a method for monitoring patients with acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). ARDS is a life-threatening condition in
which inflammation of the lungs and fluid in the air sacs leads to low blood
oxygen levels. The treatment is mechanical ventilation, which has potential
side-effects to the lungs. By placing electrodes around the patient's thorax,
EIT can be used to continually monitor ARDS patients, providing information
about their condition and aiding in determining the proper ventilator settings
to minimize side-effects. A 3-D D-bar reconstruction algorithm with the main
application of breast cancer detection has the potential to reconstruct the
conductivity values with more accuracy than existing algorithms and thus may
improve the specificity of EIT as a method of breast cancer detection. EIT as a
tool for breast cancer detection is in the early stages, and the development and
study of a 3-D D-bar algorithm will provide a deeper understanding of the
effectiveness of EIT for this application.
