
* 0513214
* Algorithms for Total Least Squares: Development, Evaluation and Novel Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/23/2006
* Rosemary Renaut,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 101,385.00

The investigator and her postdoctoral fellow together with one graduate student
are focusing their research for this grant on the development, analysis and
implementation of novel algorithms for solution of linear ill-posed inverse
problems in which both the measured data and the model are error-contaminated.
The analysis will provide improved insight for the performance of new and
existing algorithms. One direction is analysis of the linear support vector
machine which has already been validated as an effective tool in statistical
pattern recognition. Reformulation of the support vector machine to account for
errors that may occur in the features of the patterns to be classified, an
example of which might be error contaminated microarray data, utilizing the
tools of regularized total least squares, will better account for these errors
in data measurements. Another direction is the use of a total variation
regularized structured total least squares algorithm to provide a completely new
mechanism for combining edge preserving regularization with an errors in the
variables model of signal inversion. For multiple, but similarly corrupted,
signals, a concurrent solution technique will enhance signal inversion and
restoration. While several approaches for Tikhonov regularized total least
squares have been presented in literature, an effective comparison of their
competitiveness for both synthetic and real data has not been performed. These
investigators will determine which of algorithms are most suitable for
extensions to realistic problems. All software developed for this project will
be disseminated to collaborators for their applications and published on the
world wide web.

The investigators have a track record of studying and developing computational
tools which can be utilized for many different applications. The successful
outcome of this particular research will have major impact on solution of so-
called inverse problems for biomedical applications, genetic data analysis and
seismic tomography. These are areas in which the PI is actively collaborating
with other practioners, including those at the Translational Genomics Research
Center in Phoenix, AZ. Inverse problems arise in many biomedical situations: for
example medical imaging can be used to obtain non-invasive information about the
function of an internal organ, potentially also impacted by presence of
malignant or benign tumor. Another direction is for the design of new and
improved analysis of seismic data with the intent to lead to increased
understanding of the dynamic nature of the Earth's interior, and in particular
the relationship between plate tectonic processes observed at the surface and
the thermo-chemical structure of the interior.
