
* 0513380
* Collaborative Research: An adaptive hp-Finite Element Method for Two Fluid Flows with Topological Change
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2005,07/13/2005
* Brian Helenbrook,NY,Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 38,832.00

The investigators propose a methodology for performing highly resolved
simulations of multi-fluid flow problems with topological change. The
methodology combines a mesh deformation and adaptation algorithm and an hp-
finite element method to obtain high spatial accuracy. Multi-scale resolution is
provided by using a mesh refinement criterion that detects oncoming topological
change and automatically refines the mesh. To allow topology change
(reconnection of fluid interfaces), a level-set formulation is used in a small
spatial and temporal window around the topology change event. Once the topology
change is complete, the window is removed and the high-accuracy deforming mesh
simulation is continued. This approach will provide better accuracy and
efficiency than previously possible for multi-fluid problems with topological
change. The techniques developed can also be used with formulations such as
molecular dynamics for the topological change window and thus they are the step
towards a first-principles prediction of practical problems with topological
change.

Examples of flows having topological change include wave crashing, cavitation,
bubbly flows, boiling, atomization, mold-filling, liquid jets in a gas, coating
flows, etc. The design of many practical devices hinges on an accurate
prediction of these flows. One such example is liquid fuel injection into either
jet engines or internal combustion engines. The performance of these devices is
strongly dependent on the performance of the fuel injectors. (Most people are
familiar with the idea of getting their automobile fuel injectors cleaned to
increase efficiency and reduce pollutant production). Injectors are currently
designed almost entirely using a trial and error approach because current
analytical and numerical tools cannot predict the process. This investigation
aims to develop a simulation technique that will provide accurate and reliable
predictions of practical flows having topological change.
