
* 0514414
* Development of a super-grid-scale model for artificial boundaries in fluid dynamics and other wave pheonmena
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2005,07/05/2005
* Tim Colonius,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 209,387.00

A new framework for modeling artificial boundary conditions in a variety of
applications, including fluid dynamics, acoustics, and electromagnetic wave
propagation, will be developed. Previous approaches have relied either on simple
descriptions of those processes occurring near boundaries, such as linearized
disturbances to uniform states, or on a range of ad hoc techniques that attempt
to mitigate spurious artifacts of domain truncation. The present work is based
on the concept of a super-grid-scale model that is in many ways analogous to
sub-grid-scale models that are used in Large Eddy Simulations of turbulent
flows. The formulation explicitly recognizes that in general systems (especially
inhomogeneous and nonlinear PDE), domain truncation, like filtering, is a
modeling problem--the result is ``missing information'' that cannot be recovered
from first principles. Many existing techniques (especially damping layers)
implicitly supply such a model, but our hypothesis, backed by preliminary
calculations in compressible flow and acoustic applications, is that better
models can be developed by exploiting a strong analogy with sub-grid-scale
modeling techniques. The analogy is based on the dual roles that filtering and
windowing play in real and Fourier space. The proposal details a rationally
sequenced research program that includes examination of several different super-
grid models (based on analogies to existing sub-grid models), detailed
computations and comparison with previous methods in the areas of incompressible
and compressible flow, acoustics, and electromagnetic, and detailed analysis of
stability and convergence of the models and discretized systems.

It is often said that simulation is becoming the 'third leg' of science, taking
an important place beside theory and experiment. In engineering, simulation is
an essential tool that enables design and optimization based on first-principles
rather than empirical correlations. However, computation is only useful when the
underlying system is correctly modeled. Indeed, many relevant systems in fluid
dynamics, acoustics, and electromagnetic waves cannot be reliably simulated with
existing techniques. Techniques for artificial domain truncation, in particular,
are a pacing item in many applications in these and related fields. Artificial
domain truncation (or artificial boundary conditions) refers to situations where
one wishes to simulate only a portion of a larger system in order to reduce
computational effort. The present research will provide a new generation of such
techniques that are based on a rigorous and well-validated modeling framework
called the super-grid-scale model. Successful outcome of the proposed research
has potential for far-ranging impact scientific and engineering design-oriented
simulations.
