
* 0532668
* Special Meeting: Workshop on Algorithms for Modern, Massive Datasets
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 08/15/2005,08/03/2005
* Gene Golub,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2006
* USD 15,000.00

This special meeting will bring together people from the Computational
Statistics and Numerical Linear Algebra communities with people from the
Theoretical Computer Science community to promote cross-fertilization of ideas.
This will hopefully lead to a better understanding of modern massive data sets
as well as invention of new techniques and algorithms for their modeling and
analysis. Most conferences and workshops on information retrieval and data
mining are dominated by studies of traditional data sets and traditional
algorithmic techniques. Nevertheless, modern data sets have become extremely
complex and have rendered traditional approaches for processing them ineffective
in many instances. The difficulties occur primarily in two ways: modern data
sets are often high-dimensional and massive, and thus novel dimensionality
reduction or sampling-based techniques have to be employed in processing them,
and modern data sets often have complicated nonlinear structures, and must be
modeled with appropriate mathematical objects such as tensors, symmetric spaces,
Lie groups, etc. This special meeting will study data sets with such complex
structures and explore novel techniques for analyzing such data.

The techniques that will be discussed at the meeting have applicability in
numerous fields of practical and important interest. For example: (1)
Applications in Bioinfomatics and the Medical Sciences include improved methods
to analyze large microarray and high-throughput chemical data sets for
developing new medications, identifying novel gene products, elucidating protein
folding pathways, and the improved detection and classification of cancer. (2)
Applications in the Social Sciences include improved methods to model the
combinatorial structure of large social networks; this has been used and will
continue to be used to, e.g., identify potential terrorist cells hidden in a
communications network. (3) Applications in the Geosciences include remote
sensors in air-and spacecraft that produce more data than can currently be
stored, but which must be analyzed for environmental planning, weather
forecasting, and public health contamination issues. (4) Applications in
Computer Vision include novel ways to identify noisy images of targets and faces
for improved target identification and individual identification in more
realistic settings.
