
* 0533726
* An International Workshop on Computational Science and Its Education
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/02/2006
* Xiaoping Shen,OH,Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 10/31/2007
* USD 29,150.00

Among the recent advances in mathematics and science, computational science
stands out as a new and third basis for discovery in addition to theory and
experiment in research and education. In numerous applications of engineering,
biomedicine, economics, sociology, and other disciplines, computational methods
are the key to advancement of technology. To address the current trend and to
identify important issues in future research and education in computational
science, the investigators propose to co-organize an international workshop in
Computational Science and Its Education with a group of researchers and
educators in United State and China. The workshop will focus on the following
areas: (1) Computation and analysis for problems with stochastic nature; (2)
Computational fluid dynamics with multi-physics and multi-scale structures; (3)
Computational methods for problems in nano scale; (4) Inverse problems with
applications; (5) Topics on integration of computer science, electrical
engineering and mathematics; (6) Interaction between teaching and research in
computational science with emphasis on curriculum reform/design in computational
science leading to the enhancement of the mathematical sciences workforce
training in the 21st century.

The proposed workshop shall be hosted by the Capital Normal University in
Beijing, China from August 29 to August 31, 2005. The proposal is requesting
support for the travel support for some USA-based researchers and educators for
attending the workshop. The participation of USA-based researchers and educators
is highly valuable for the nation's advancement in computational science and
education. USA has attracted a large number of first class mathematicians and
computational scientists in the history, the workshop will push the trend to
continue in the future. The workshop will promote inter/multidisciplinary
research in its focusing areas: stochastic problems, multiscale and nano
problems, and computational fluid dynamics in multi-physics. It will also
encourage interaction among researchers and practitioners to advance
applications of its focusing areas related to national security and global
environment study. In addition, the workshop will facilitate panel discussions
to stimulate curriculum reform in computational science education and to broaden
the educational spectrum to benefit underrepresented groups in the area made
possible by new highly developed computational and educational devices/software.
The workshop will make a broader impact on paving the way for worldwide
collaborations in computational science research and teaching benefited from the
experience between the US and Asia arising from this workshop. Participants will
gain insight from the integration of the high technology of US with the rapidly
developing labor market in Asia.
