
* 0542174
* New Numerical Methods for Hamilton-Jacobi and Liouville Equations; Their Applications to Geometrical Optics, Wave Propagation and Travel-time Tomography
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2005,08/23/2005
* Jianliang Qian,KS,Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 11/30/2007
* USD 90,972.00

The investigator develops novel and efficient numerical methods for Hamilton-
Jacobi and Liouville equations. These equations arise from seismic wave
propagation, geometrical optics, optimal control, travel-time tomography,
medical imaging, computer vision, and material sciences. His previous works on
computing viscosity solutions and multivalued solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi
equations lead him to develop more powerful and efficient numerical methods for
solving these equations and incorporate these new methods into seismic modeling
and inversion, as well as other possible applications. Problems under
consideration include continued development of adaptive eikonal solvers for
three-dimensional isotropic and anisotropic media; fast sweeping methods for
stationary Hamilton-Jacobi equations on unstructured meshes; extending slowness
matching methods to general Hamilton-Jacobi equations for computing multivalued
solutions; and applications of paraxial Liouville equations for geometrical
optics, wave propagation and transmission tomography. This investigation
advances the state-of-the-art in geometrical optics, wave propagation and
seismic travel-time tomography.

These fields and applications are of great strategic value in the US oil and gas
industry, in environmental sciences, and in medical imaging. Recently, for
example, the price of gasoline soared dramatically in the United States. One way
to reduce the cost of production of oil involves lowering drilling costs by
advancing the seismic data processing techniques that oil companies use to find
good drilling sites. The investigator's new methods expedite routine data
processing, provide new tools for exploration geophysicists to use for ground-
breaking applications, and enable substantial cost savings in seismic
explorations, as the speed and reliability of the underlying computational
engine allows ``rig-site'' adjustments to both seismic survey and drilling
decisions.
