
* 0545044
* High Frequency Cavity Eigenmodes: Rapid Computational Methods, Applications and Asymptotics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2005,08/30/2005
* Alexander Barnett,NH,Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2009
* USD 102,520.00

The investigator seeks to develop efficient and robust numerical tools for
calculating the resonant modes of cavities in two or more dimensions. These
modes describe behavior of a wide variety of linear wave systems of
technological importance, such as electromagnetic, optical, and acoustic
cavities, elastic membranes, transverse modes of metallic waveguides, and bound
energy states of quantum particles. It is hard to overestimate the impact that
mathematical understanding of waves has had on society over the last century,
particularly in communications technology. At high frequencies the wavelength
becomes much smaller than the cavity size, and conventional numerical
discretization methods become impractically slow, making the problem
computationally challenging. Boundary integral equation methods, by using the
known propagation across a uniform medium, solve the same problem with a much
smaller number of degrees of freedom (scaling like the boundary area rather than
the cavity volume), but suffer from the need to locate each resonant frequency
(eigenvalue) individually.

Building on exciting developments which emerged from the quantum physics
community, the investigator has pioneered methods which combine this small
number of degrees of freedom with the ability to compute a long sequence of
modes simultaneously. This is based upon the `scaling method', a little-known
variant of the Method of Particular Solutions. The remarkable efficiency gain
compared to other boundary methods scales like the number of wavelengths on the
boundary (its `electrical area'), and has been shown to be a thousand times
faster than any other known method at very high frequencies. However, the
mechanism controlling the size of errors intrinsic to the method is unknown. The
investigator proposes to apply the tools of numerical analysis to understand
these errors, to seek to widen the range of cavity geometries, and boundary
conditions, to which it can be applied (for instance, cavities with re-entrant
corners, or in three dimensions), and to write a robust software package that
can allow other researchers to benefit from these new efficient methods.

The investigator will continue to apply the method in two exciting areas to
which it is well adapted: i) the design and modeling of micro-cavity dielectric
lasers, which can give higher powers for optical fiber communications and could
enable fabrication of integrated optics `on a chip', and ii) `quantum chaos',
the semiclassical (high frequency) behavior of resonances of cavities whose
shape leads to chaotic ray motion. Understanding the distribution and statistics
of wave intensities in such modes has impact in atomic physics and chemistry, as
well as for mathematical questions arising in automorphic forms and number
theory. Quantum chaos can also model electronic transport and dissipation in
quantum dots, nanoscale laboratories for coherent wave electron effects, which
are promising candidates for quantum computers. Finally, the development of
rapid solvers for resonant modes, especially for the Maxwell equations, would
have far-reaching benefits for the design and shape optimization of optical and
microwave resonators used throughout the engineering world.
