
* 0602942
* DIMACS/Georgia Tech Special Focus on Discrete Random Systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,05/19/2008
* Fred Roberts,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2010
* USD 191,500.00

During the past decade there has been tremendous interplay among discrete
mathematics, theoretical computer science, probability theory, and statistical
physics. This project brings together researchers from these various fields to
explore topics at their interface, the field coming to be called Discrete Random
Systems. The focus is on probabilistic algorithms and models that arise in the
study of physical systems and combinatorial structures, with strong themes
running through these interactions including: phase transitions; probabilistic
combinatorics; Markov-Chain Monte Carlo and other random walks; and random
structures and randomized algorithms. A series of workshops will address
properties of large graphs, complex networks and applications, Markov chain
sampling (theory vs. practice), and phase transitions in random structures.
Focused working groups of researchers will concentrate on the interface between
Markov chains and phase transitions, on heuristic and rigorous approaches to
identifying and analyzing phase transitions in algorithms.

Discrete Random Systems is a relatively new field that solidified during an
interdisciplinary series of workshops held at the DIMACS Center and the
Institute for Advanced Study ten years ago. Since then it has matured
considerably, and the truly bilateral exchange between discrete mathematicians
and theoretical computer scientists on the one hand, and probabilists and
statistical physicists on the other, has radically impacted research directions
and understanding in all of these fields. The field explores algorithms and
models that arise in both the study of physical systems and the mathematical
structures arising from the fields of combinatorics and theoretical computer
science, with an emphasis on analogous behavior such as phase transitions. The
current project seeks to foster and speed the development of this
interdisciplinary field and to bring to it coherence as well as rapid scientific
development. The project will be organized around a series of workshops,
tutorials, research working groups, and a visitor program, all intended to
facilitate new interactions. Workshops allow a cross-fertilization of ideas and
techniques from the disparate disciplines. Less formal groups of researchers
will convene for concentrated collaborative research on specialized topics, and
additional working groups will evolve during the project. Exploration of new
areas of application of Discrete Random Systems will be enhanced by parallel
DIMACS programs in Biology, Epidemiology, the Social Sciences, and Homeland
Security. The ideas developed in this project will have impact on a myriad of
fields and create many new cross-disciplinary connections. A visitor program
will encourage senior and junior researchers, including students, to participate
in collaborative research spawned by the workshops and in the work of the
working groups. Each workshop will have a fund for support of graduate students
and postdocs and workshops will have a substantial educational component through
significant tutorial components. The topic lends itself well to undergraduate
research and participating faculty will coordinate topics with an undergraduate
research program (REU program) already in existence. The project is expected to
have a long-term impact well beyond its two year duration since the workshop,
working group, visitor, and dissemination components of the project will allow
the ideas developed to reach hundreds of people nationwide and worldwide. The
project should significantly influence the careers of a large number of
outstanding junior researchers and it should play an important role in the
training and development of scientists who are well-prepared to become leaders
in the field of Discrete Random Systems.
