
* 0602837
* L-CAMP: Extremely Local High-Performance Wavelet Representations in High Spatial Dimension
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,05/21/2008
* Amos Ron,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 322,054.00

+The mathematical development of wavelet theory and the accompanied
computational algorithms reached a mature, satisfactory, level in one dimension.
The situation is far less satisfactory in higher dimensions. As a matter of
fact, the current approaches for the construction of high-D wavelet
representations scale poorly with the dimension. On the one hand, intrinsic
constructions become hopelessly complicated already at relatively low
dimensions. On the other hand, the simple approach of lifting univariate systems
to higher dimensions becomes eventually immensely non-local. As a result, the
construction of effective, efficient, wavelet representations in high dimensions
remains a major challenge and an elusive target. The premise of this proposal is
that the only way to meet this challenge is to fundamentally change the
principles of wavelet constructions. The ambitious goal of this project is to
develop representations that scale correctly with the spatial dimension:
constants in the complexity estimates of the algorithms that are independent of
the dimension; linear functionals that have limited, controlled, overlapping in
their supports; and performance grade that does not degrade with the growth of
the dimension. The project is expected to contribute in tangible ways to NSF's
broad criteria. This is first and foremost due to the intrinsic importance of
the research area, and the fact that the problem attacked in this project is a
major hurdle in the relevant research area. In addition, the initiative offers a
highly valuable training and education opportunity to mathematical science
students, education in areas that are at the interface between mathematics on
the one hand and science and technology on the other hand.

Our era is marked by breathtaking improvement in sensor acquisition
capabilities and an explosive increase in communication over wired and wireless
channels. As a result of these and similar trends, the correct handling of
massive datasets is, these days, at the core of almost every technology that
deals with scientific data. The most fundamental issue in this regard is the
fact that the size of the dataset is merely an artifact of the acquisition
technology; it is not related to pertinent information that the data encode, nor
to the actual applications that are sought for. Data representation is the
scientific discipline that deals with challenges like the above. It resolves the
above problem by transforming the data into a new format which allows an
efficient and effective extraction of information, storage, transmission, and
the like. There is probably no way to overstate the importance of research on
data representation: Development of novel data representations is ranked among
the top scientific priorities of our nation. Indeed, the innovators in this
field are richly recognized for their contributions: even after restricting
attention only to research on the mathematical and statistical aspects of data
representation, one finds, in the last eight years alone, two Medal of Science
awards, as well as five or more elections to the National Academy of Science.
The wavelet representation is among the most important contributions of the data
representation community to science. It was introduced in order to provide an
answer to the main shortcoming of the Fourier representation, i.e., the fact
that the latter never provides a sparse representation to transient events. The
research community succeeded in constructing very good wavelet representations
in 1D. Those systems are computed and inverted by fast algorithms and strike as
good balance as can be between performance and localness. The same it not true
in high spatial dimensions. Armed with that observation, the intent of this
ambitious project is to develop novel classes of wavelet representations that
are efficient and effective in high dimensions.
