
* 0607355
* Nonlinear Hyperbolic Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,07/11/2009
* John Hunter,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2010
* USD 164,000.00

Waves are a phenomenon of fundamental physical and technological importance. For
example, the observation of waves from distant sources (whether gravitational
waves generated by the collision of black holes or sound waves generated by a
submarine) allows one to make useful conclusions about the nature of those
sources, and the manipulation of waves has many technological applications (such
as the use of ultrasonic surface acoustic waves in signal processing devices).

<br><br>

Nonlinear hyperbolic waves are an especially interesting and important class of
waves. They include the shock waves generated by aircraft in transonic or
supersonic flight, the seismic waves (and possible Tsunamis) generated by
earthquakes, and the gravitational waves predicted by Einstein's general theory
of relativity.

<br><br>

The dominant properties of hyperbolic waves are described mathematically by
hyperbolic systems of partial differential equations. In a first approximation,
hyperbolic waves are non-dispersive, meaning that the velocity at which they
propagate, and their other properties, do not depend on the wavelength of the
waves. This contrasts with dispersive waves, such as light waves in an optical
fiber or Rossby waves in the atmosphere. The effects of nonlinearity on
hyperbolic waves have a unique character; for example, the formation of
singularities, such as shock waves, is a ubiquitous phenomenon, and one with
significant physical implications.

<br><br>

The goal of the proposed research is to study nonlinear hyperbolic waves from a
unified mathematical perspective in close connection with various physical
applications. Specific topics include the reflection of shock waves and related
questions in transonic fluid flows; the propagation of nonlinear hyperbolic
surface waves, including Rayleigh (or surface acoustic) waves in elasticity; and
the effect of nonlinearity on gravitational waves in general relativity.
