
* 0608720
* Computation of Multiscaled and Multivalued Solutions to High Frequency Waves in Multimedia
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2006,06/30/2010
* Shi Jin,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 548,542.00

High frequency waves arise in a variety of applications, such as geometric
optics, seismology, underwater acoustics, quantum physics, and electromagnetic
waves. The computational challenges originate in the need of numerical
resolution of short wave length signals over large domains, which is
prohibitively expensive even by modern computational equipments. In the last few
years, the proposer, with a number of collaborators, has developed several new
computational methods quite effective in computing the semiclassical limit of
linear Schrodinger equation, geometrical optics, and high frequency waves
through inhomogeneous media. With X. Li, the proposal developed a moment method
for multivalued solutions in the semiclassical limit of the linear Schrodinger
equation. With S. Osher etc., he constructed level set methods for the
multivalued solutions that arise in high frequency limit of general linear
symmetric hyperbolic systems. With X. Wen, he introduced Hamiltonian-preserving
schemes for high frequency waves through potential barriers or material
interfaces. In the next few years the proposer plans to further the development
of these methods, to establish a solid theoretical foundation for these methods,
and to explore new applications in elastic waves, high frequency waves through
curved interfaces, Monte-Carlo methods for Hamiltonian systems and Liouville
equations with discontinuous Hamiltonians, coupling of classical and quantum
mechanics for multiscale computation of electron transport in nanostructures,
and multivalued solutions in vacuum electronics device modeling.

High frequency wave propagation is a classical field in applied mathematics
originated from the study of geometrical optics. Today it is a rich field with
applications in electromagnetic scattering, seismology, photonics, microwaves,
semiconductors, quantum physics and medical imaging. The proposer plans to
develop state-of-art computational methods for high frequency waves with
multiple time and space scales, and through heterogeneous media. These methods
are expected to have a profound impact in a variety of modern industrial
applications, including nanotechnology, semiconductors, quantum dots and
seismology. This line of research will also provide new teaching materials in
multiscale modeling and computation for graduate education in applied
mathematics.
