
* 0608984
* Predicting Climate Change Via the Fluctuation -Dissipation Theorem: A Practical Computational Strategy for Linear Response on a Chaotic Attractor
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2006,06/13/2006
* Rafail Abramov,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2010
* USD 123,037.00

The response of climate dynamics on the planetary scale to changes of various
global physical parameters is an area which is being extensively studied in
contemporary atmospheric and ocean science. The physical parameters controlling
the planetary climate dynamics range from solar radiation, to volcanic activity,
greenhouse gas, ozone, polar ice melting, and many others, which are normally
modeled via direct numerical simulation for an appropriate climate model, which
is typically a complex nonlinear partial differential equation or a system of
such equations. In the context of the Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem, the main
idea is to model the statistical behavior of planetary climate dynamics under
the tacit assumption that the dynamics is close to its statistical equilibrium,
and then to apply the fluctuation-response formula, which is the key part of the
Theorem, to predict the average climate response (the response of various
statistical quantities of the climate state) to small changes of the physical
parameters of the climate dynamics. Unlike a straightforward numerical
simulation, this approach does not require one to actually simulate each
appropriate scenario of climate development for various changes of parameters
(which usually poses a computational problem of substantial complexity), instead
providing the whole variety of possible responses to a wide range of small
parameter changes for just a single numerical simulation with a climate model.
Obviously, this latter property will facilitate climate response modeling to a
great extent. However, the classical Fluctuation-Dissipation Theorem as
formulated in statistical physics is not directly applicable to climate modeling
due to the fundamental mathematical incompatibility of the statistical states of
virtually all nontrivial climate models with the classical version of the
Theorem. Here we propose a novel mathematical framework to perform climate
response modeling with a suitably amended version of the Fluctuation-Dissipation
Theorem, which is designed to circumvent these difficulties. However, this
framework requires extensive further development of mathematical and
computational approaches to become practically usable for climate response
modeling. The detailed strategy for this development is set forth in the current
proposal.
