
* 0608727
* Quantum and Classical Complexity of Multivariate Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COMPUTING PROCESSES & ARTIFACT
* 09/15/2006,09/07/2006
* Joseph Traub,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 398,082.00

Information-based complexity (IBC) studies optimal algorithms and computational
complexity for the continuous problems which arise in physical science,
economics, engineering, and mathematical finance. IBC has studied such
continuous problems as path integration, partial differential equations, systems
of ordinary differential equations, nonlinear equations, integral equations,
fixed points, and integration. Usually these problems have to be solved
numerically and therefore approximately to within error e. Often these problems
involve a very large number of variables numbering in the hundreds or thousands.
If a worst case assurance of an e-approximation is demanded, then the
computational complexity depends exponentially on the number of variables; the
problem suffers the "curse of dimensionality". The investigators and their
colleagues attempt to vanquish the curse by settling for a stochastic assurance
(average, probabilistic, randomized) or by using domain knowledge about the
application. The investigators are also studying the power of quantum
computation for continuous problems. To understand the power of quantum
computation for continuous problems one must know the computational complexity
of these problems on a classical computer in various settings. This is exactly
what has been studied in IBC. Recently the investigators introduced a new
quantum setting in which randomized queries are permitted. They have shown that
for path integration there is an exponential improvement for the qubit
complexity compared to the standard quantum setting. This is important since the
number of qubits is a critical resource for the foreseeable future. Among the
questions the investigators and their colleagues stydying are: What are the
query and qubit complexities for other continuous problems? Are there trade-offs
between query and qubit complexities?

For some forty years, computing has been driven by Moore's Law which is the
empirical observation that computing power doubles about every 18 months.
Powerful computers have been crucial for our economic strength and our national
security. They have made the internet possible. For a number of reasons the
consensus among experts is that Moore's Law using current silicon technology
will end in some 10 to 15 years. These reasons include the shrinkage of logic
gates and wires to atomic size, the tre- mendous heat generated as chips get
smaller and faster, and the cost of fabrication facilities. Since it is so
important to maintain the Moore's Law trajectory, new ways to compute are being
considered. One of the most promising ideas is to use the principles of quantum
mechanics to do quantum computing. The investigators and their colleagues are
studying the following question: If physicists and chemists succeed in building
quantum computers, which continuous problems arising in science and engineering
can be solved much faster on a quantum computer than on a classical computer?
