
* 0609824
* Convergent Solvers for High-Frequency Wave Scattering
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2006,06/16/2006
* Christophe Geuzaine,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2009
* USD 129,999.00

The calculation of wave scattering from acoustically or electromagnetically
large objects is one of the most interesting and challenging problems in
computational science. Nevertheless, current state-of-the-art simulation
technology is limited by the competing demands of accuracy (which requires an
increasing number of degrees of freedom to resolve the fields on the scale of
the wavelength) and efficiency (which favors coarse discretizations). The PI
proposes to develop and rigorously analyze new integral equation methods that
overcome these limitations by avoiding the need to discretize the fields on the
scale of the wavelength, while retaining error-controllability. The PI proposes
to develop such methods for acoustic scattering by impenetrable bodies in two
and three dimensions, with the longer-term goal of developing methods for full
electromagnetic scattering in three dimensions. The methods the PI proposes to
develop will combine existing, high-order discretizations techniques based on
smooth partitions of unity and FFTs with new, asymptotically-derived integral
equations that can be solved numerically with a prescribed error tolerance for
arbitrarily high frequencies, within a fixed computational time. The development
of these methods calls for a number of intellectual innovations. The PI proposes
to (i) further advance his work on high-order high-frequency integral equation
solvers for surface scattering by smooth, convex obstacles. Here the effort will
concentrate on an extension of the convergent, localized singular integrators
developed in the two-dimensional setting to three dimensions; (ii) develop
methods suitable for non-convex obstacles, using the infinite frequency limit of
the problem (i.e., geometrical optics) to approximate the phase of the highly
oscillatory unknowns; and (iii) introduce new high-order accurate integration
schemes in small regions near geometrical singularities of the scatterers, in
order to deal with complex obstacles with sharp features such as corners and
edges.

The proposed research has the potential to impact numerous scientific and
engineering disciplines dealing with acoustic and electromagnetic wave
propagation phenomena, which arise in a wide range of applications. Examples
include antenna design (from consumer electronics devices like cell phones to
satellites and space exploration probes), non-destructive testing, medical and
biological applications (using ultrasound, tomography), electromagnetic
compatibility testing and certification, evaluation of propagation effects on
communication systems, design of low observable military hardware, automatic
target recognition, etc. The ever increasing frequencies involved in these
problems places many of them beyond the capabilities of currently available
computational methods, thus requiring new and innovative mathematical
approaches. This proposal is focused on the development of such an approach,
leading to solvers whose computational cost is virtually independent of
frequency, and which are thus able to accurately solve such problems for a
tremendously larger range of frequencies than current techniques.
