
* 0609661
* Finite Volume Methods for Hyperbolic Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2006,06/30/2008
* Randall LeVeque,WA,University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 299,864.00

Hyperbolic systems of partial differential equations arise in many applications
where wave propagation or transport phenomena are important. Often these
equations and/or their solutions involve discontinuous functions, giving
difficulties for standard finite-difference approaches to discretizing the
differential equations. In particular, nonlinear wave propagation problems often
give rise to shock waves, discontinuities in the solution which can arise
spontaneously even from smooth initial data. The goal is then to approximate a
weak solution to the underlying integral conservation law. Often the problem
must be solved in a heterogeneous medium where the material properties vary with
space, often discontinously at sharp material interfaces. This results in
discontinuous coefficients or flux functions in the equations to be solved. This
proposal concerns the further development of multidimensional high-resolution
finite volume methods for solving such problems, the development of software
implementing these methods, and the application of these methods to particular
problems. The P.I. has previously developed a multidimensional "wave-propagation
algorithm" that yields a very general framework for solving such problems, and
has implemented this method in the CLAWPACK software. These algorithms and the
software will be further developed and brought to bear on a variety of problems.
Some particular applications to be studied include: tsunami propagation and
runup, pyroclastic flows arising from volcanic eruptions, the simulation of
seismic waves, and elastic wave propagation in heterogeneous media, including
shock wave propagation in tissue and bone.

A wide range of practical problems arising in science and engineering are
modeled using "hyperbolic differential equations" and have a very similar
mathematical structure, allowing researchers in applied and computational
mathematics to make contributions that are widely applicable. The goal of this
work is to further develop methods and software for approximating the solutions
to these equations. These methods are implemented in the CLAWPACK software
package written by the P.I. and co-workers, which is freely available on the web
and allows students and researchers studying a wide range of phenomena to use
state of the art methods for these mathematical problems. This software has been
downloaded by more than 5000 registered users over the past several years and
applied to numerous scientific and engineering problems by the PI, his students,
and other users. Specific practical problems will also be studied, building on
work already performed by the P.I. and students. One project involves modeling
the effects of tsunamis on coastal regions, both to aid in scientific studies of
past tsunamis and as an aid to hazard mitigation and preparedness. Other
geophysical projects involve the study of flows arising from volcanic eruptions
and the propagation of seismic waves in the earth following an earthquake or in
oil exploration. A project with biomedical applications is the study of shock
waves propagating in tissue and bone, with potential application to the study of
"shock wave therapy", in which ultrasonic shock waves are used to treat a
variety of medical conditions including nonunions (broken bones that fail to
heal), plantar fasciitis, and tendinitis.
