
* 0609575
* Some Problems on Analyses and Applications of Centroidal Voronoi Tessellations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,07/24/2006
* Lili Ju,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2009
* USD 122,781.00

Centroidal Voronoi tessellations (CVTs) are special Voronoi tessellations having
the property that the generators of the Voronoi tessellation are also the
centers of mass, with respect to a given density function, of the corresponding
Voronoi cells. CVTs have been very usedful in a wide range of research fields,
including image and data analysis, vector quantization, computer graphics,
resource optimization, cell biology, numerical solution of partial differential
equations, optimal control, mobile sensing networks, and so on. This project
aims at further analysis on CVTs' properties and algorithms, and the broadening
of applications for which CVTs and related concepts can be used as a basis for
more efficient and accurate treatments.

In the theoretical aspects, the convergence and acceleration schemes of popular
algorithms for computing CVTs and generalization of CVTs in other metric
settings and with hierarchical structures will be studied. In the application
aspects, the investigator will develop and implement robust CVT-based mesh
generation and optimization algorithms, and then incorporate them in adaptive
computations of numerical partial differential equations using finite element
methods or finite volume methods, and in the solution of some challenging
physical problems on the sphere and other surfaces such as geophysical flows, in
light of the high-quality CVT-based surface meshing.

Also considered will be the cortical surface-flattening techniques based on the
CVT methodology, which are very important to brain-imaging data analysis,
including quantitative mapping of functional variability and construction of
probabilistic brain-surface atlases. The proposed research will offer new
insight into a number of outstanding theoretical issues and lead to renovation
of computational algorithms for diverse important applications in science and
engineering. The software resulting from this project will be actively
disseminated, so that it can be used not only by researchers in the scientific
computing area, but also by practitioners in a much broader community for
application to problems in interdisciplinary sciences.
