
* 0609715
* Computational Uniformization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2006,06/14/2006
* Kenneth Stephenson,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2010
* USD 201,595.00

The investigator applies emerging computational methods in circle packing to
study conformal structures on surfaces, with particular emphasis on complex,
nonplanar surfaces. The global realization of conformal structures which are
local in nature is known classically as uniformization. Circle packing methods
have led to notions of discrete uniformization which both mimic and approximate
the classical notion. However, the geometric nature of the discretization raises
computational issues outside traditional numerical mathematics. In particular,
uniformization is a self-assembly process which is extremely challenging in
practice --- for instance, with circle packings containing millions of circles.
In the central computational work, the investigator implements a recursive
framework for managing this self-assembly which avoids global distortions while
accommodating efficient parallel implementation. The computational issues are
not considered in isolation, but rather in relation to ongoing applications by
the investigator and his collaborators to topics including brain imaging,
conformal tiling, dessins d'enfants, and conformal welding. Of the many
theoretical issues raised in applications and experiments, the investigator pays
special attention to the notion of ``flow uniformization'' and to its potential
use in discrete conformal welding and shape analysis.

Surfaces --- a smooth soap film, the convoluted gray matter of the brain, a
faceted crystal lattice --- are ubiquitous in the natural and physical sciences,
engineering, computer visualization, and scores of other areas. The tools for
studying and describing surfaces mathematically came out of work in the
nineteenth century, with a particularly rich geometric vein associated with
angular measure going by the name "conformal structure". Among the most
celebrated results in mathematics is the Riemann mapping theorem of 1851 which
proved that every surface with a conformal structure, no matter how complicated,
can be identified with one of three very simple familiar surfaces --- a ball, a
plane, or a disc --- in a way that preserves conformal structure, that is, that
preserves angles. Wonderful as this theory is, and despite the availability of
huge computational resources, it has been only in the last decade that new
mathematics in the form of circle packing has provided a practical means for
actually realizing Riemann's theorem. The investigator develops the mathematical
and computational aspects of circle packing in the context of several
applications. Among these are the flattening of human brain cortical surfaces to
aid analysis by neuroscientists, the study of plane shapes through a process
known as conformal welding for use in computer vision, and the construction of
mathematical Riemann surfaces in various topics which are now amenable to
experimentation for the first time.


