
* 0609874
* Multiscale Modeling and Computation of Multiphase Energetic Materials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,05/13/2009
* Donald Schwendeman,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 346,271.00

Multiscale systems abound in science and engineering. Their comprehensive
treatment requires accurate mathematical modeling of processes at the fine
scales and a mathematical framework for flow of information across scales. This
proposal addresses this problem in the context of heterogeneous explosives.
These have a complex microstructure with fragments of the energetic material,
voids and pores existing within the granular aggregate. When subjected to a
sufficiently strong shock, a detonation is initiated. Although the crystalline
homogeneous explosive has a high ignition threshold, relatively weaker stimuli
are sufficient to initiate the heterogeneous aggregate. This is caused by the
appearance of discrete sites, or hot spots, where burning commences and then
spreads to consume the entire bulk. The multi-scale nature of the system is a
daunting obstacle in the way of any attempt at ab-initio modeling of the
detonation phenomena, at least at the present time. Two major approaches to
mathematical modeling have been proposed. Both generate continuum equations at
the macro scale, wherein a certain degree of homogenization is implicit and
fine-scale processes have been included as subgrid models. The first approach,
typified by the ignition-and-growth model, treats the explosive as a homogeneous
mixture of two distinct constituents, the unreacted explosive and the products
of reaction, at pressure and temperature equilibrium. To each constituent is
assigned an equation of state, and a single reaction-rate law is postulated for
the conversion of the explosive to products. The second approach explicitly
recognizes the two-phase character of the explosive mixture. The resulting model
has separate balance laws of mass, momentum and energy for each phase, plus a
rule that allows compaction of the solid phase driven by pressure difference
between the phases. Terms representing interfacial exchange of mass, momentum
and energy appear, corresponding to the nonequilibrium processes of reaction,
drag and heat transfer. These models are systems of hyperbolic partial
differential equations that can be considered as generalizations of the Euler
equations of gasdynamics. This proposal is aimed at studies of existing
continuum models as well as the investigation of fine-scale phenomena. The
primary objective will be to study how the strength and distribution of hot
spots depend, in a quantitative way, upon the constitutive properties of the
explosive and the size of the igniting stimulus, thus providing important
information that can be used in attempts at multi-scale descriptions.

Many areas in science and engineering, including weather, combustion,
pollution, and biological systems, among others, involve behavior at the scale
of observation that is determined by the events occurring at micro scales. A
thorough treatment of such systems requires, on the one hand, a fundamental
understanding and accurate mathematical modeling of processes at the micro
scales, and on the other, development of a theoretical and computational
framework that would facilitate flow of information across scales, so that
behavior at the scale of observation can be predicted reliably and accurately.
Attention to such systems is particularly timely and apt in the context of
science-based stewardship of explosive devices, and it is problems from this
arena that form the core of this proposal.
