
* 0609844
* Fast Simulation of Wave Scattering and Propagation in Inhomogeneous Media with Complex Geometries
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2006,08/29/2006
* Shan Zhao,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2007
* USD 73,074.00

The goal of the proposed project is to develop innovative numerical approaches
to produce fourth order accurate simulation of electromagnetic waves in
inhomogeneous media with complex geometries, by using only simple Cartesian
grids. The rapid growth of computer capability in the past few decades not
withstanding, our ability to model three-dimensional wave propagation and
scattering involving geometrically complicated dielectric interfaces is severely
limited. Mathematically, the wave solutions are usually non-smooth or even
discontinuous across the material interfaces, so that our effort in designing
efficient algorithms is easily foiled, unless the complex interfaces are
properly treated. The complex interfaces and geometries are commonly tackled by
using body-fitted grids in the literature. Even though considerable progress has
been made in grid generation, the formation of a good quality body-fitted grid
system in geometrically complex domain remains a difficult and time-consuming
task. Alternatively, in this project, the investigator will explore how to
accommodate dielectric interfaces with complex geometries by using Cartesian
grids including the staggered Yee grids. The resulting Cartesian grid methods,
which in some sense fit the numerical differentiation operators to the
complicated geometries, are less well studied in the literature, in contrast to
the body-fitted grid methods. The development of high order Cartesian grid
methods with complex interfaces being accurately treated, is of imminent
practical importance to efficient wave simulations, but remains unsolved. In
this project, innovative fourth order Cartesian grid approaches will be
constructed based on the matched interface and boundary (MIB) method newly
developed by the investigator and his collaborators for solving partial
differential equations (PDEs) involving material interfaces or inhomogeneous
media. To address a widespread variety of electromagnetic applications, a
complete set of fourth order MIB methods will be developed for different
electromagnetic formulations including the Helmholtz equation, the wave
equation, and Maxwell's equations, and for different scenarios including the
transverse magnetic mode, the transverse electric mode, and fully three-
dimensional mode.

Computational electromagnetics (CEM), an interdisciplinary field where one
witnesses mutual contributions from mathematicians and engineers is of paramount
importance for a wide range of applications, including analysis and synthesis of
antenna, calculation of radar cross section (RCS), simulation of ground or
surface penetrating radar, to name only a few. The proposed numerical approaches
aim to address challenging CEM applications involving large-scale and
irregularly shaped structures, for which currently existing methods encounter
great difficulties. By delivering more accurate and efficient wave simulations,
the proposed methods will lead to breakthroughs in resolving long-standing
problems in the real CEM applications. Moreover, the proposed methods will have
considerable impact on other challenging interface problems in scientific
computing, such as the immersed interface and moving interface problems in fluid
dynamics, electrostatic interface problems for structural prediction of large
biomolecules in computational biology.


