
* 0609995
* Mathematical Foundation and Numerical Simulation for Foamy Oil Flow in Porous Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2006,06/02/2006
* Zhangxin Chen,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2009
* USD 225,637.00

A technical description of the project: Heavy (dense and viscous) oils are
considered an alternative energy source because they constitute one of the
largest reserves of previously unexploited fossil fuels on earth. The fraction
of the original oils in place that can be recovered by solution gas drive
decreases with increasing oil viscosity. For heavy oil reservoirs, the expected
recovery factor (percentage of the oil in the reservoir that can be recovered)
by solution gas drive is typically lower than 5%. However, a number of heavy oil
reservoirs under solution gas drive show anomalous primary performance: low
production gas-oil ratios, high oil production rates, and high oil recovery.
Ultimate oil recovery can be as high as 20% in the primary performance of such
heavy oil reservoirs. The oil samples at the wellhead produced from these
reservoirs are in the form of oil-continuous foam, which has the appearance of
chocolate mousse and contains a certain volume fraction of gas. The term "foamy
oil" is often used to describe such oils. The flow behavior of foamy oils is
very complex, and remains controversial and poorly understood. This project is
directed toward experimental, theoretical, and numerical investigations of the
flow behavior of foamy oils.

A nontechnical description of the project: The world needs enormous new crude
oil reserves. During the next several decades, there is not and there will not
be an economical, abundant substitute for crude oil in the economies of
industrial countries, even with the price of a barrel of oil over $70.
Maintaining the supply needed to support these economies and enable them to grow
means that significant additional crude reserves must be developed. The
conventional (light and medium) oil resources discovered up to the end of 2002
will last at most 40 years at 2002's production rate. Thus additional
development will be primarily in the form of the sole alternative: heavy crudes.
Two crucial issues must be addressed before or during the design of any
production project for these heavy oils: What is a suitable method for
evaluating the foamy oil drive mechanism that plays a major role during such oil
recovery, and what is a reasonable percentage of ultimate oil recovery for each
project? Unfortunately, these two issues have not been fully addressed and are
still not understood. The laboratory experiments, theoretical investigations,
and numerical simulations proposed in this project will greatly improve our
understanding of these issues.
