
* 0609727
* Adaptive Multigrid Methods for a Multiphase Fuel Cell Model
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2006,07/24/2008
* Jinchao Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2009
* USD 268,623.00

The purpose of this project is to develop advanced computational techniques in
order to perform large-scale, state of the art simulations of two-phase
transport problems arising in proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells. Because
of the complexity of the underlying mathematical models for fuel cells, current
solution techniques are far from being satisfactory, and therefore more
efficient numerical techniques are urgently needed. While there is still a long
way before we can solve all the coupled systems efficiently, this proposal will
be devoted to solution techniques for an important subsystem posted on the gas
diffusion layers and the gas channel. This subsystem of equations possesses a
number of critical numerical difficulties caused by anisotropy, large
discontinuity, degeneracy and nonlinearity. The goal of the proposed project is
to address these difficulties simultaneously by developing proper discretization
techniques and robust iterative methods for solving the discretized systems. The
discretization techniques to be developed will be mainly based on adaptive
finite element/volume methods and the iterative methods will be based on
multigrid techniques. The accuracy of the discretization scheme and the
efficiency of the iterative methods for solving the discretized system will be
studied.

The importance of the fuel cell technology can hardly be overemphasized as PEM
fuel cell engines can potentially replace internal combustion engines in the
future. Since a PEM fuel cell simultaneously involves electrochemical reactions,
current distribution, two-phase flow multi-component transport and heat
transfer, comprehensive mathematical modeling and computational simulation are
required in order to: (1) understand the many interacting, complex
electrochemical and transport phenomena that cannot be measured experimentally;
(2) identify limiting steps and components; (3) simulate dynamic responses under
vehicle driving conditions; and (4) provide a computer-aided tool for design of
future fuel cell engines with much higher power density (kW/liter) and lower
cost. The integration of the different expertise of the PI and co-PI is expected
to lead to significant progress and likely breakthroughs in the field of fuel
cell simulations. Newly developed numerical techniques will be immediately
employed in the existing library of numerical codes that have been developed for
years by the Penn State Electrochemical Engine Center (ECEC), lead by the co-PI.
It is hoped that the new numerical techniques to be developed will lead to at
least an order of magnitude improvement over the existing methods. Application
and impact to national security/enviroment and to industries are naturally
expected for this research because of the close tie of ECEC with national labs
and automobile manufactures. Moreover, this work will provide a unique
interdisciplinary research opportunity for graduate as well as undergraduate
education.
