
* 0609315
* AMC-SS: Analysis and Computation of Multi-Scale Stochastic Chemical Kinetic Systems with Application to Genetic Regulatory Networks
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 06/15/2006,06/12/2006
* Di Liu,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2010
* USD 101,199.00

Proteins play an essential role in the development and functioning of organisms.
The synthesis of cellular proteins is a multi-step process inside living cells.
The genetic information stored in DNA directs the production of proteins through
a bio-chemical process called gene expression. When a specific gene is
expressed, its DNA is first transcribed into a single stranded sequence of mRNA.
The mRNA sequence is then translated into a sequence of amino acids as the
protein is formed. These steps form the three levels of gene expression:
transcription, translation, and post-translational modification. Genetic
Regulatory Networks (GRNs), consisting of genes, proteins, small molecules
within cells in relatively low concentrations, and their interactions, function
to regulate gene expression process for the production of proteins in response
to certain physical, chemical, and biological stimuli. GRNs can only be
effectively modeled as stochastic systems with random molecular fluctuations
instead of deterministic systems. Very often GRNs are multi-scale in terms of
multiple steady states, reaction rates, and molecular concentrations, making
standard simulation algorithms inefficient. Simplifying and reducing complex
chemical and biological models enables easier conceptualization and
interpretation and efficient simulations of inherently stochastic systems. The
main objective of the proposed research project is to provide simplified
dynamics and to design efficient numerical schemes for complex stochastic
chemical kinetic systems exhibiting multiple steady states and multiple time and
concentration scales. Applications will be emphasized on Genetic Regulatory
Networks, for which only stochastic modeling incorporating random molecular
fluctuations has proved to be successful. On the mathematical side, using
asymptotic analysis and probability theory, the transition rates and transition
pathways of chemical kinetic systems with multiple steady states will be
investigated, and the effective dynamics for stochastic chemical kinetic systems
with multiple well-separated time and concentration scales will be studied. On
the numerical side, computational methods will be developed to simulate the
reduced dynamics obtained from the mathematical work. Computer-based
optimization methods will be adopted to find the transition rates and pathways
of multi-stable systems. Convergence and error estimates for the proposed
numerical schemes will be proved mathematically. Issues like efficiency,
robustness, adaptivity, and parallelism of the computing schemes will also be
studied. The proposed research will advance the frontiers of Applied Mathematics
through significant generalizations and developments of the modeling,
analytical, and computational techniques for stochastic and multi-scale systems.
It will help to understand functional issues of chemically reacting networks at
the system level, which is becoming the new focus of genomic research. The ideas
from the stochastic and multi-scale analysis can be applied to a spectrum of
biological, chemical, physical, and other scientific problems involving multi-
scale modeling and can broaden the scope of research topics in the related
fields. The research projects will also promote interdisciplinary interactions
between applied mathematicians, chemists, and biologists.
