
* 0609815
* PDE-based Image Restoration and Segmentation and Their Applications to Medical Imagery
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,09/23/2009
* Hyeona Lim,MS,Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2010
* USD 135,042.00

The investigator and his colleagues develop novel diffusion-like PDE models and
computational methods for image restoration and segmentation of medical imagery
acquired from ultrasound, magnetic resonance (MR), computed tomography (CT),
positron emission tomography (PET), and single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) scanners. For restoration, the project investigates various
PDE models and related numerical procedures that can effectively preserve and
restore important image features, not only fine structures but also slow
transitions, for various medical images in 2D and 3D. Given basic models derived
from variational approaches, non-variational variants will be developed in order
to optimize their performances in image restoration, by integrating noise
characteristics and by incorporating appropriate diffusion modulators and
dynamic constraint terms. Conventional level set formulations of the Mumford-
Shah functional in segmentation work well for essentially binary images;
however, they may fail to detect desired edges for general images, due to
ambiguity in the computation of the complementary function (the piecewise
cartoon image) and the ability to detect smooth boundaries. In order to overcome
the difficulty, the project will develop various mathematical and numerical
techniques. The innovative models and computational algorithms will broadly
impact various other fields, while enhanced knowledge on medical images will
institute advancements on medical scanner design.

The project develops state-of-the-art algorithms in image restoration and
segmentation for medical imagery in both planar and volumetric formats. Although
there have been remarkable advancements in medical scanner design, medical
images can easily incorporate certain noise and various artifacts. It is
extremely important to suppress such artifacts for an accurate medical
diagnosis. On the other hand, in various modern medical diagnoses and
operations, computer algorithms are being utilized to detect-and-measure body
parts automatically; however, these algorithms are yet to be improved for more
accurate feature detection. The investigator and his colleagues study various
mathematical and computational algorithms in order to enhance the image quality
and segment important image features effectively. Besides, the project will
advance imaging techniques for the reduction of radiation exposure to the
patient at X-ray computed tomography (CT). Here the goal is to keep patient
radiation exposures from CT as low as possible while achieving the required
image quality and medical benefit. The planned research will have an important
impact on improved understanding of the current mathematical image processing
techniques, advance knowledge on medical images, and institute advancements on
medical scanner design. The research project will support a graduate student and
accelerate activities in a research group at Mississippi State University,
called the IMage Processing And Computational Techniques (IMPACT) which is
organized by the investigator. All developed software will be freely shared with
the community.


