
* 0609747
* RUI: Postprocessing High-Order Approximations of Discontinuous Functions - Algorithms and Software
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2006,06/12/2006
* Scott Sarra,WV,Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2009
* USD 73,172.00

In this project the PI develops algorithms and software to facilitate the
removal of Gibbs oscillations from the approximation of discontinuous data by
high order approximation methods such as pseudospectral and radial basis
function methods. Current postprocessing techniques are somewhat successful in
one dimension. However, the most powerful methods require that the exact
location of the discontinuities (edges) be pinpointed and that function
dependent parameters be specified in each piecewise smooth region. One focus of
the work is in developing Edge Detection free (EDF) postprocessing methods. The
EDF methods are easily extended to multiple dimensions and in some case to
irregularly shaped domains. The ultimate goal is a "black box" postprocessing
algorithm. A second focus of the work is in software development. A Matlab
toolbox which implements both classical and modern postprocessing methods will
be developed. The software will include a user friendly graphical user interface
facilitating use by the wider community. The software will be used on benchmark
problems to provide illustration of the methods for both the specialist and
nonspecialist and to stimulate further research. The software is designed to
make it relatively easy for students to learn about the methods and for
researchers to apply them.

For the most accurate methods available to numerically approximate the equations
that govern natural phenomena, postprocessing methods are vital. This is because
many phenomena in nature are inherently discontinuous, and numerical methods do
not perform well when the solution to the governing equations are discontinuous.
The discontinuities result in the methods producing solutions with nonphysical
oscillations that do not truly represent the phenomena being modeled. Areas for
which postprocessing methods are important include: gas dynamics, weather
forecasting, earthquake and tsunami prediction, astrophysical modeling,
multiphase fluid flow, the flow of glaciers, the propagation of waves in elastic
solids, the separation of chemical species, aerodynamics, detonation waves,
acoustics, etc.
