
* 0609766
* Numerical Methods for Balance Laws with Applications to Shallow Water and Multiphase Flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,06/19/2006
* Smadar Karni,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 205,538.00

This project is concerned with the development, analysis and implementation of
numerical methods for balance laws. The focus is on systems which arise by
averaging the multidimensional Euler equations of fluid dynamics. The averaging
process produces source terms that are inherently in nonconservation form, whose
presence has major consequences for the theory as well as for computations of
solutions. Computational difficulties include nonuniqueness of solutions, loss
of strict hyperbolicity, lack of guiding principles in discretizing
nonconservative products and difficulties to compute accurately near steady-
state solutions. The aim of this project is to understand, from a numerical view
point, how these various characteristics are interconnected, to identify
numerical features that need to be respected and provide design principles which
lead to simple and efficient numerical schemes. This research program will be
carried out by studying a series of nonconservative models, and offer numerical
frameworks within which the computational difficulties may be addressed: (i) a
relaxation approach addressing the loss of hyperbolicity, and inaccessibility of
eigenstructure; (ii) discrete averaging models, giving accurate estimates on
closure terms and providing unambiguous approximations for nonconservative
products; (iii) hybrid algorithms for two phase flows, which preserves the
correct jump conditions across discontinuities in coefficients. As an
application, the methods will be used to study two layer exchange flow between
reservoirs, and extended to multilayer shallow water flows through a channel
contraction. Analytical predictions are available and will be used for
validation.

Physical equations of the type considered in this project are used to model a
wide range of fluid flows. They are used to model large scale atmospheric and
oceanic flows over terrains, and to describe ground flows in porous media. They
model river and coastal flows, dam breaks and flooding, such as the flow in the
Rigolets strait connecting the Gulf of Mexico and Lake Ponchartrain near New
Orleans. They are used in hydraulics, to describe and control exchange flow
between reservoirs. In multiphase flows, they model the dynamics of droplet
suspensions such as sprays in environmental applications, or cloud dynamics,
which may be important in visibility military applications. Alongside
experiments and theory, numerical simulations constitute a major tool of study
in these applications areas, and the issues addressed in this project are
fundamental to their development. To date, numerical methods for balance laws
are still facing major challenges, and provide incomplete and unsatisfactory
answers. The directions outlined in this project address these challenges, they
are original, they are new and they emphasize general design principles that can
be exported to other systems of similar structure. The completion of the
proposed project is expected to have a significant impact on computational
practices in these communities.
