
* 0609755
* Finite Element Approximation of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,06/14/2006
* Richard Falk,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 189,878.00

The first area of proposed research involves the study of compatible
discretization schemes for partial differential equations, an approach that
attempts to produce numerical approximations that inherit or mimic fundamental
properties of a partial differential equation, such as conservation and
symmetries. Several problems, modeling phenomena in elasticity and fluids, will
be studied from this point of view. The new approach taken is based on the
construction of piecewise polynomial exact elasticity sequences, which are
closely related to the development of stable mixed finite element schemes. Other
work in this area includes a new approach to the construction of hierarchical
bases for scalar and vector-valued finite element spaces in arbitrary space
dimensions, and exact sequence properties of rectangular and quadrilateral
finite elements and their applications to the stability of mixed finite element
approximation. The second area of study is the approximation properties of
several types of finite element spaces defined on irregular hexahedral elements
obtained by trilinear mappings from a reference cube. Such spaces are used to
approximate three-dimensional vector functions and arise naturally in many
applications, including the approximation of Maxwell's equations and the use of
mixed and least squares finite element methods for second order elliptic
equations. Although it is often implicitly assumed that approximation results
known for regular hexahedrons extend to these spaces, in fact this is not the
case. The research is to determine precisely what is needed for optimal order
approximation and construct families of finite element spaces that have this
property. The third area of research is to study convergence rates for
discontinuous Galerkin methods for linear hyperbolic problems. Although optimal
order convergence rates are often seen in practice, the theory guarantees such
rates only for uniform meshes, while a lower rate is known to be the best
possible on specially constructed meshes. The proposed research is to classify
the type of meshes for which the optimal convergence rate is achieved.

Mathematical modeling of physical and biological processes using partial
differential equations has become the standard method of studying a host of
important problems. Such models capture in a concise and precise way the
fundamental features of the process being modeled. Unfortunately, the resulting
equations rarely have solutions that can be expressed by simple mathematical
formulas. Hence, the development of reliable and efficient numerical
approximation schemes are necessary to make this method into a practical
approach and is central to progress in many areas of science and engineering.
Part of this development involves the investigation of the theoretical
underpinnings of numerical methods. Such investigation can lead to a greater
understanding of existing methods and to the development of new methods with
desirable properties. Thus, such study has the potential to improve the accuracy
of, or even make possible, essential computer simulations performed by
scientists and engineers. This project is concerned with the study of numerical
methods for approximating equations modeling phenomena in elasticity and fluid
flow. One central theme is to develop approximation schemes that preserve
discrete versions of some of the fundamental properties of the mathematical
model, in order to more accurately capture the fundamental features of the
underlying process being modeled.
