
* 0610430
* Development of Robust, Efficient and Highly Accurate Numerical Methods Based on Godunov-Type Central Schemes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,05/09/2006
* Alexander Kurganov,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2010
* USD 214,235.00

Development of modern technology requires robust, efficient and highly accurate
numerical methods for solving time-dependent partial differential equations,
including multidimensional systems of hyperbolic conservation laws, balance
laws, convection-reaction-diffusion equations and related problems. A family of
simple, universal and high-resolution finite-volume central schemes has been
recently offered as an appealing alternative to more complicated and problem
oriented upwind methods. The main goal of the project is applying the central
schemes to various multi-phase and multi-fluid flow models, the Saint-Venant
system of shallow water equations (which describes flows in rivers and coastal
areas), multi-layer shallow water equations (arising in oceanology), models of
transport of pollutant in shallow water, several chemotaxis models, reactive
flows (in particular, the models describing stiff detonation waves), shallow
water equations on a rotating sphere, heterogeneous elasticity, granular
material flows, dusty gas models (which describe volcanic eruptions), and
others. Naturally, these applications, especially in the cases of high space
dimensions, complex geometries and moving boundaries/interfaces, require
development and implementation of additional numerical techniques such as
different adaption strategies, hybridization with Lagrangian-type methods,
accurate and efficient operator splitting, numerical balancing between the terms
that are balanced in the original system of partial differential equations
(development of well-balanced schemes), and others that will be in the focus of
the proposed research project.

Central schemes have proved to be a reliable and robust tool for solving
multidimensional systems of partial differential equations that describe a
variety of fundamental conservation laws in fluid mechanics, gas dynamics,
geophysics, meteorology, magnetohydrodynamics, astrophysics, multi-component
flows, granular flows, reactive flows, semiconductors, non-Newtonian flows,
geometric optics, traffic flow, image processing, financial and biological
modeling, differential games, optimal control, and many other areas. However,
the models used in most practical applications are more complicated than just
hyperbolic systems of conservation laws, and therefore central schemes may only
serve as a basis in designing robust, efficient and highly accurate numerical
methods. This project is aimed at developing a series of supplementary
techniques that are essential for the extension of applicability of central
schemes to many practically important problems, some of them are currently out
of reach because the existing numerical methods are either too
inefficient/inaccurate or not applicable at all.
