
* 0610013
* Leaping methods for the simulation of intracellular stochastic chemical kinetics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2006,06/14/2006
* Muruhan Rathinam,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 143,011.00

The investigator Rathinam aims to develop efficient and robust leaping methods
and their theory. Leaping methods provide an efficient and approximate way to do
computer simulations of continuous-time discrete-state Markov processes. These
are dynamical systems in which quantities change in time by discrete jumps, and
the size and time of the next jump occurs according to probabilities that depend
on the current value. Motivating applications are in intracellular gene
regulatory models which involve small numbers of large molecules and are
essentially discrete and stochastic in nature. Applications from other fields
include financial market models as well as internet traffic of data.

The leaping methods work in the same spirit as time-stepping methods for
differential equations which describe the time evolution of deterministic and
continuous dynamical systems such as a spacecraft. However, the state-of-the-art
time-stepping methods for differential equations are far more sophisticated than
any of the leaping methods which apply to stochastic and discrete systems. This
project aims to improve the existing leaping methods further as well as to
design new leaping methods so that they could be an effective simulation tool. A
particular focus of application will be to intracellular gene regulatory models
that involve several chemical species, most of which are present in small
molecular numbers, several reaction channels, and multiple time scales. The
project will develop methods as well as their quantitative analysis.

Broader impacts of this project include an increased collaboration between
systems biologists and mathematicians, enhancing cross-fertilization of ideas.
The participation of graduate and undergraduate students in this project will
provide them with the opportunity to develop skills in the research and
development of numerical simulation tools for stochastic dynamics, a valuable
expertise of future relevance in the financial, pharmaceutical, and
biotechnology industries. As an educational component the tools and techniques
developed will be incorporated into existing and new graduate courses on
stochastic methods.
