
* 0610039
* Petrov-Galerkin Enrichment Methods for Porous Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,07/31/2009
* Leopoldo Franca,CO,University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 250,932.00

This proposal aims to develop novel numerical methods in porous media. Initially
the Darcy model is examined under the framework of a Petrov-Galerkin enriched
method (PGEM). The method consists in enriching differently trial and test
funtions. The test function enrichments resembles residual-free bubbles, with
zero condition for the normal compoenent of the velocity. This allows for static
condensation and computation of the enrichment for the trial function. It turns
out that this enrichment is a variation of the Raviart-Thomas. This is
eliminated at the element level, so that the computational formulation of the
current method is in fact that of the original spaces span by continuous
piecewise linears and piecewise constants. A detailed study for the P1/P0
element and other higher order elements will be pursued along with their error
analyses.

The methods developed in this work are key to simulate intricate large
heterogeneuous domains which is a major challenge in porous media field, as in
oil reservoir, contaminant transport and water resource problems, just to cite a
few of them. The methods proposed herein contribute to decrease large scale
computations since the matrices are no longer semi-definite. The methods are
also competitive since the support of the unknows is equal to the original
Galerkin method. In summary, we are pursuing more efficient methods that can
overcome complex mixed methods which has dominated the field over many decades.
The problems we are addressing have impact on environmental, energy and are of
use to DOE.
