
* 0610778
* Collaborative Research: Generalized Finite Element Methods and Meshless Methods: Mathematical Analysis and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2006,07/26/2006
* Uday Banerjee,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 288,999.00

Models based on partial differential equations are widely used in science and
engineering, and numerical methods for their solutions are of central interest.
In the last several years, there has been steadily growing interest in two such
methods: Generalized Finite Element Methods and the closely related Meshless
Methods. They have become a focus of development and application -- especially
in the engineering community. These methods generalize the Finite Element
Method, and are of interest mainly for two reasons: (i) they are not based on a
mesh, or use a mesh only minimally, and hence avoid some of the problems in
meshing complicated domains; (ii) they permit the use of non-polynomial
approximating functions, and hence are applicable to problems with special
features, whose solutions are not accurately approximated by polynomials. This
flexibility has, in the past few years, been effectively used in handling
certain important problems. But a deep and precise theoretical understanding of
these methods is needed to broaden their applicability, in particular their
efficiency and robustness, to complex problems in engineering that otherwise
cannot be solved with existing methods, for example, the Finite Element Method.
This project involves careful and precise mathematical study of various aspects
of Generalized Finite Element and Meshless Methods. The broader impact of this
study will be reflected in the applicability of these methods to a wide range of
complex problems of technical and societal importance; for example, problems
with multiple scales. Multiscale problems are increasingly important; they
include the problems of composite materials and flow through porous media.
Finding robust, efficient, and reliable approaches to solve these problems is
one of the challenges of modern technology. Another impact of the proposal is
the training of graduate students in a vital, cutting edge area. Their
involvement in this project will not only help them become experts in the
mathematical underpinning of these important methods, but will also give them
the rare first-hand experience in working with practical engineering problems.
