
* 0610149
* Fluid Transport Models for Multi-Phase Flow Systems: Asymptotic Analysis, Homogenization, and Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,07/24/2006
* Long Lee,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2010
* USD 161,846.00

Multi-phase fluid transport is one of the most important mechanisms behind many
interesting fluid phenomena. Research on the mechanisms of multi-phase fluid
transport has directly or indirectly motivated the creation of many advanced
techniques in the fields of asymptotic analysis, homogenization, and scientific
computing. This project introduces two fluid transport models and an efficient
numerical algorithm to study multi-phase fluid dynamics that can be observed in
human lung pathways or in pores and throats of a porous medium. The multi-phase
flows under consideration in this project are the two-phase gas-liquid pipe flow
and the fluid-solid interactions. For the two-phase pipe flow, a multi-phase
fluid model is investigated, for which the air is turbulent and the thin liquid
film is either a viscous or viscoelastic fluid. Evolution equations for the
liquid interfaces is obtained through matched asymptotic expansions while
turbulence models are applied to the gas flow. The motivation for studying this
kind of flow comes from a need to understand the hydrodynamic feedback
mechanisms that govern mucus-air flow coupling in the human respiratory system.
Accordingly, the principle investigator (PI) has developed an implicit Immersed
Interface Method (IIM) for this two-phase pipe flow in three dimensions. The IIM
takes advantage of jumps of normal stresses across the interface, avoiding
smearing of the singular surface tension force, and thus preserves volume-
conservation and provides sharp resolution of the numerical solution across the
interface. In addition to studying dynamics of the two-phase pipe flow, the PI
probes the major mechanism for mucus removal in lung pathways by developing a
novel fluid transport model that portrays the three-dimensional fluid-solid
interaction occurring in the muco-ciliary system. Inspired by fluid-solid
homogenization problems, this novel model targets an understanding of multi-
ciliary dynamics in the mucus layer. This model is not only capable of
describing the essence of mucus-ciliary interaction, but also bears great
fundamental interest in the development of homogenization theory.

To study multi-phase fluid transport, model equations for the transport are
usually derived from the fundamental systems. The model equations are
mathematically simpler than the fundamental ones. They are derived by isolating
a certain physical mechanism that is thought to play the dominant role in the
fluid transport phenomenon. Although model equations are approximate to the more
complicated systems, the mathematical simplicity of these equations is
advantageous to the analysis and efficient numerics that can enhance the
predictive power of theories. While this project spans fundamental theories and
practical applications in biology or petroleum engineering, the overall goal is,
nonetheless, simple and clear. That is, to provide well-understood models as
well as the most efficient and accurate numerical algorithms for studying multi-
phase fluid transport. Multi-phase fluid transport occurs in fluid dynamics in
myriad ways. One example is mucus transport in human respiratory systems. In
lung pathways, there is air flow, a mucus layer, and a carpet of cilium layer.
The three phases interact with each other and create a unique transport pattern
for mucus clearance. The realization of the transport mechanism in lung pathways
has been of immense importance for drug delivery inside the lung airways of
cystic fibrosis patients. The Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) process is another
example of multi-phase fluid transport. In the process, compressed carbon
dioxide is injected into old oil wells, which induces a rearrangement of the oil
layer in porous rocks. Such a multi-phase transport increases the oil production
for wells that are in production for years. This EOR technique has been recently
introduced to the oil industry in several states, including the state of
Wyoming. The mathematical theory and analysis for understanding the transport
mechanism behind this technique is crucial to the success of such a practice.
