
* 0610097
* Fast Direct Solvers for Boundary Integral Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2006,07/13/2006
* Per-Gunnar Martinsson,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 151,160.00

The proposed research seeks to develop fast, accurate, and robust computational
techniques for solving a class of mathematical equations known as "linear
boundary-value problems". Such equations are ubiquitous in engineering and
science, and the task of finding approximate solutions to them is frequently the
most expensive component of numerical simulations.

There currently exists a multitude of computational techniques for solving
linear boundary-value problems, including some that are both highly accurate and
very fast. The emergence of such methods over the last two decades has vastly
increased our ability to simulate complex phenomena in science, engineering,
medicine, and many other fields. However, existing high-performance
computational techniques tend to be limited in their applicability, and somewhat
fickle, in the sense that software needs problem-specific tuning to perform
well. The principal goal of the proposed research is to eliminate these
drawbacks for a particular class of high-performance techniques, thus making
such algorithms accessible to a wide range of important computational problems.

Technically speaking, the proposed research is concerned with a class of
computational techniques based on formulating the problem as an equation on the
boundary of the computational domain. It is known that the resulting equations
can in some environments be solved extraordinarily rapidly. Existing techniques
for this task are based on so-called "iterative solvers", which construct a
sequence of approximate solutions that gradually approach the exact solution.
The proposed research seeks to develop "direct solvers" for solving the boundary
equations. Loosely speaking, a "direct solver" manipulates the mathematical
equation to produce an algorithm that determines the unknown variables from the
given data in one shot. Direct solvers are generally preferred to iterative
ones, but they have in many environments appeared to be prohibitively expensive.
However, recent developments indicate that it is possible to construct direct
methods that are as fast as, and sometimes even faster than, existing iterative
ones.

Many benefits would accrue from the development of direct methods for solving
the boundary equations associated with linear boundary-value problems; these
include: (1) The ability to solve certain problems that are beyond the reach of
existing fast algorithms. An example is the accurate solution of electromagnetic
and acoustic scattering problems involving large objects at wave frequencies
close to resonant frequencies of the scatterer. (2) An increase in computational
speed in environments where the same equation needs to be solved multiple times
for different data. Preliminary experiments involving the modeling of
biochemical processes and large scattering problems indicate that a speed-up of
one or two orders of magnitude is to be expected. (3) The availability of high-
performance computational techniques that are sufficiently robust to be
incorporated into general purpose software packages.
