
* 0611574
* RUI: Solving Symmetric Banded Linear Systems and Other Problems in Fiber Optic Design
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2006,09/22/2009
* Linda Kaufman,NJ,William Paterson University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 204,182.00

There are two main objectives of this research :(1) analyzing and implementing
various versions of the retraction algorithm devised in the Summer of 2005 by
the Principal Investigator (PI) for factoring a symmetric band matrix which may
be indefinite, and (2) studying methods for solving the inverse problem to
determine the chemical composition of a spooled optical fiber with particular
optical properties. The retraction algorithm preserves symmetry and the band
structure of a matrix and requires in the worst case 2/3 the space of Gaussian
elimination for banded unsymmetric matrices and theoretically about 1/2 the
operation count. The algorithm uses a sequence of 1 x 1 and 2 x 2 pivots to
transform the matrix to block diagonal form, and the elements of the transformed
matrix are bounded. One aim of this research is to extend the algorithm to other
structured systems. . The symmetric banded factorization may be used within a
shift-and- invert Lanczos algorithm for determining eigenvalues, and in fact the
fiber optics design problem involved finding several eigenvalues of a Sturm-
Liouville problem and was the impetus for searching for an indefinite band
symmetric factorization algorithm. In fiber optics design one wishes to solve an
inverse problem of determining parameters in Maxwell's equation, a partial
differential equation-eigenvalue problem, so that functions of the eigensystem
meet certain criteria. One such criterion that needs to be computed is the
dispersion, a function of the second derivative of the positive eigenvalues with
respect to frequency and its gradient with respect to the design parameters
which determine the refractive index profile of the various layers of the fiber.
This project involves determining the best method for calculating these
quantities for an extended model that takes into consideration fibers that are
wrapped around a spool.

The properties of an optical fiber are determined by the chemical composition of
the layers that compose the fiber. One fiber is not suitable for all situations.
For example, one would not use the same fiber for underwater transmission and
for a local area network. Until 2000 mathematical models were used only to
determine the optical properties of a proposed design. In 2000 the Principal
Investigator was part of a team at Bell Labs which decided to invert the process
and to predict the chemical composition of the fiber to meet certain optical
specifications. The modeling tool required the solution of thousands of systems
of linear equations with symmetric and banded matrices. Traditionally one would
ignore the symmetry, but taking symmetry into consideration, as in the algorithm
recently devised by the PI, decreases the computational requirements for each
individual system and provides information (the inertia) that could decrease the
number of systems that need to be solved. Solving structured symmetric linear
systems is also necessary when modeling the cavity of a linear collider or when
modeling buildings, oil platforms and bridges to help prevent serious post-
construction events, such as the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge. An
important element of this project will include application-oriented subprojects
for undergraduate students to give them the real world design and modeling
experiences they would not normally receive in the classroom and which they will
then be able to use when they undertake careers as secondary or middle school
teachers (math majors) or in local industry (computer majors).
