
* 0611681
* Radial Basis Functions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2006,05/09/2006
* Bengt Fornberg,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 266,767.00

Numerical computations in multiple space dimensions have traditionally been
based on structured grids (e.g. finite differences or spectral methods) or on
unstructured grids (e.g. finite elements). Even in the latter case, there is
structure in the sense that one needs to work out which subsets of nodes should
be connected into local triangles, tetrahedra, etc. Aspects associated with such
grid generations can at times consume as much or even more computer resources
than do the subsequent computations on the grid. Furthermore, it has been all
but impossible to achieve high (spectral) computational accuracy on such grids
without resorting to extensive use of domain decompositions. Numerous mesh-free
methods have been proposed recently. The Radial Basis Function (RBF) approach
stands out in several respects, most notably in that it generalizes traditional
spectral methods to entirely mesh-free settings. Furthermore, implementations
are usually remarkably simple. For example, 20-30 lines of Matlab typically
suffices for solving an elliptic PDE on an irregular 3-D domain, to spectral
accuracy. Both pseudospectral (PS) methods and RBFs were first proposed in the
early 1970's. The superior performance of PS methods for solving many PDEs was
demonstrated early on. A NSF proposal by the present investigator about 5 years
ago was the first time RBFs were presented in terms of being a direct
replacement for the traditional basis functions in PS methods. Recently,
significant progress has been made both on overcoming the high computer cost and
the numerical ill-conditioning that earlier were thought to severely limit the
RBF approach. Recent NSF-DMS supported work by the present investigator has
opened up numerous further opportunities in this area, which will now be
pursued. These include combining spectral accuracy with local node clustering in
a fully stable way, a new stable algorithm in the extremely high accuracy flat
basis function limit, developments towards faster algorithms, and the
application of RBFs to PDEs in the geometries that are most relevant in
astro/geophysics, etc.

In the last several decades, computational methods have become an increasingly
essential part of how science and engineering are conducted, partly because of a
rapid evolution of computer hardware, but equally much thanks to improvements in
computational algorithms. Very often, the task to be solved, when formulated in
mathematical terms, require the solution of partial differential equations
(PDEs), often in irregularly shaped regions in several space dimensions. The
Radial Basis Function (RBF) methodology, which is the subject of the present
grant, opens entirely new opportunities in this regard, combining very high
accuracy with unsurpassed geometric flexibility. One of several application
areas of particular interest (pursued in collaboration with scientists at NCAR
and NOAA) concerns geophysical and astrophysical modeling in spherical
geometries, which are critical issues for effective climate modeling and for
studies of solar dynamics.


