
* 0612751
* Locally Optimal Preconditioned Eigenvalue Solvers
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2006,06/26/2008
* Andrew Knyazev,CO,University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2010
* USD 249,542.00

The area of preconditioned iterative solvers for eigenvalue computations is
rapidly developing. Software implementations of several preconditioned
eigensolvers, in particular, the locally optimal block preconditioned conjugate
gradient (LOBPCG) method developed by the principal investigator (PI) earlier,
are being written. The recent progress opens new opportunities to develop
efficient preconditioned iterative solvers for interior eigenvalues and singular
value computations. The use of preconditioned eigensolvers in applications
raises new area-specific important issues, both practical and theoretical, which
need to be resolved. The proposed research addresses these issues based on the
success of the previous work of the PI. The PI expects to advance the theory of
some known methods, to discover new locally optimal algorithms, and to be able
to provide specific recommendations concerning the choice of methods. The
following specific and interrelated research projects are proposed: reducing the
LOBPCG costs for large block sizes; developing efficient preconditioned solvers
for interior eigenvalues and singular value computations; finite element method
error analysis for eigenproblems resulting from partial differential equations
with highly discontinuous coefficients. The projects form a balanced mix of
theoretical research and code development. Numerical simulations are to be
performed on modern parallel computing systems, such as the IBM BlueGene/L
supercomputer.

The ideas behind the proposed research are original, and build on prior work.
The project addresses mathematically difficult and practically important
problems. The broader impact resulting from the proposed activity is twofold:
Ph.D. education and advances in software. Funds are requested in the proposal to
support Ph.D. students. Improvement of the software currently used and
development of new codes for scientists and engineers creates potential
advances, e.g., in analyzing extremely large data sets, which is important for
national security.
