
* 0612608
* Computational Methods for Exploring the Geometry of Large Data Sets
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2006,08/15/2008
* Gilad Lerman,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2009
* USD 219,105.00

The principal investigator and his colleagues develop computational and
theoretical framework to analyze large data sets with low-dimensional intrinsic
structure. More specifically, they address the following challenges:
Constructions of underlying curves and surfaces in the presence of significant
outliers and noise; Improvement of recent nonlinear embedding techniques for
large data sets with significant noise; Analysis of large data sets generated by
special nonlinear partial differential equations with low-dimensional inertial
manifold. There are several important applications of the proposed research:
quantitative edge detection in images, detection of nuclear devices by muon
radiation, identification of protein-binding genomic regions (and even specific
sites), quantitative exploration of the functional domain in the gene ontology
and its relation with structural properties.

The broader impacts of the proposal are as follows: 1) The mathematics suggests
important applications, some of them are listed above. 2) The applications guide
and demand a broad framework for multiscale geometric analysis of data sets with
intrinsic low-dimensional geometric structures. 3) Interaction between different
areas of mathematics, in particular, computational harmonic analysis, scientific
computation, statistical learning, probability and mathematical modeling. 4)
Multidisciplinary collaborations, involving applied mathematicians, biologists,
computer scientists, statisticians and mathematical analysts. 5) Industrial
collaborations. 6) Training of young researchers in a promising new area of
mathematics.


