
* 0612878
* Computational Problems For Interfaces With Bending Stiffness In Strongly Anisotropic Thin Films And Inhomogeneous Biomembranes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2006,07/28/2006
* John Lowengrub,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2009
* USD 492,935.00

The main objective of this project is to investigate problems at the interface
between mathematics, materials science, and biology, by (1) developing and
applying state-of-the-art adaptive numerical methods to large-scale computation,
and (2) performing analytical, numerical, and modeling studies of important
constituent processes. At the interface between mathematics and materials
science, we will focus on fundamental studies of nanoscale, crystalline thin
films, where we will investigate the dynamics and coarsening of nanometer-scale
structures in strongly anisotropic systems. Our study is important not only for
gaining a fundamental understanding of thin-film evolution, but also for
elucidating mechanisms that can be used to promote spatially ordered
nanostructures, and thus has the potential to impact the design of novel
electronic devices such as high-efficiency lasers, and quantum cellular automata
architectures. At the interface between mathematics, materials science, and
biology, we will focus on fundamental studies of inhomogeneous biomembranes,
where we will investigate the coupling between shape deformation, fluid flow,
and surface phase segregation of the multiple lipid components that comprise the
biomembrane. Our fundamental study has the potential to impact the understanding
of many cellular and subcellular biological processes, since biomembranes play
an active and critical role in cell functions such as cell locomotion, adhesion,
signal transduction, etc. In spite of the very different physical origins of the
problems we propose to study, the mathematical governing equations have many
similarities and thus can be treated using common analytical and computational
techniques. For example, a key component of our study is to investigate the
central role that the surface tension and bending forces play in the dynamics of
both applications. As part of this study, we will develop new mathematical and
adaptive numerical techniques that will also have application beyond the present
context; examples include alloy microstructures, emulsions and polymer blends,
blood flow, tissue and solid tumor growth. Indeed, the ability of mathematical
analyses to elucidate, predict, and control fundamental processes in seemingly
disparate physical and biological systems, by exploiting the commonalities in
their mathematical descriptions, is what makes mathematics so valuable. Finally,
a course on crystal and thin-film growth for gifted high-school students will be
developed as part of the Calif. State Summer School for Mathematics and Science
(COSMOS) at UC Irvine. This course will also help to recruit new math and
science majors and enhance the participation of high-school students in
research. Two Ph.D students and one postdoctoral researcher will receive
interdisciplinary training while performing the proposed work. The proposed work
also broadens the participation of underrepresented groups, as one of the
students is a woman.
