
* 0612625
* Regularization Methods: new theory, analysis and applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2006,06/08/2006
* Ricardo Cortez,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 364,457.00

Regularization methods are numerical techniques based on exact solutions of
partial differential equations that are derived in the same way as fundamental
solutions when the Dirac delta is replaced by a smooth approximation, such as a
Gaussian. The vortex blob method is an example. The resulting solutions of the
PDEs are bounded approximations to the fundamental solutions. This project
advances the theory, the computational implementation and the application of
these methods to problems of Stokes flows. Regularized high-order elements, such
as doublets and quadrupoles, are systematically derived, the required properties
of blobs are proposed and families of blobs with such properties are developed.
The regularized fluid velocity expression forms the basis of new numerical
methods, whose convergence and efficiency properties are analyzed. Performance-
based guidelines for choosing the numerical parameters are provided. Finally,
several applications of the methods include the dynamics of microorganism
populations and the large-scale flow patterns they generate, the motion of cilia
as they beat to generate an organized net flow, flows across permeable walls,
and more.

The investigator develops mathematical tools necessary to design new reliable
ways to generate computer simulations of biological phenomena involving
microorganisms in a liquid environment. These include the motion of bacteria in
the human body, the synchronized motion of cilia in the lungs, the transport and
filtration of chemicals transported by blood, and other biologically important
situations. The computer simulation of these phenomena complement experimental
studies done in medical laboratories and are extremely useful, particularly for
understanding the behavior of the human body under circumstances that cannot be
tested in vivo. Often, computer simulations can detect responses that occur when
parameters are outside the range typically used in the laboratory, and thus
point to new experiments that should be pursued. The methods developed in this
work increase our understanding of how E. coli may move around the body or how
defects in the lung cilia can translate into decreased functionality and
possibly disease.


