
* 0612574
* Scalable Parallel Multilevel Domain Decomposition Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2006,08/07/2006
* Jing Li,OH,Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2009
* USD 84,203.00

Solving large linear systems of equations is often the most computationally
expensive part in many scientific and engineering problems. The design of
scalable parallel algorithms for solving large linear systems of equations is
one of the most important problems in scientific computing. Among the most
effective parallel iterative methods are parallel multigrid methods, multilevel
matrix preconditioners, and domain decomposition methods. Domain decomposition
methods are ideal for parallel implementation. But none of the current
multilevel domain decomposition algorithms has shown convincing parallel
scalable experimental results, and in practice the convergence rates often
deteriorate with the increase of the number of levels. On the other hand, a
uniform convergence rate has been proved, both theoretically and experimentally,
for the multigrid V-cycles for solving certain symmetric positive definite
problems. But the parallel performance of multigrid V-cycles is much less
satisfactory. The main goals in this project are the design and analysis of
scalable parallel multilevel domain decomposition methods, and the study of
connections between the related parallel multilevel iterative methods. A solid
theoretical foundation should be valid for these inherently related multilevel
preconditioners. Such a theory will provide a practical guide for the design of
scalable parallel multilevel iterative methods.

Applications of the proposed algorithms to important scientific and engineering
computational problems, e.g., elasticity problems, Stokes/Navier-Stokes
problems, elastic structure vibration problems, and acoustic scattering
problems, will be studied in this project. These problems are closely connected
with many technologies such as aircraft design, sonar, radar, geophysical
exploration, medical imaging and nondestructive testing.
