
* 0612448
* Multilevel Schwarz Preconditioners for Adaptive High-Order Discontinuous Galerkin Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,09/04/2007
* Luke Olson,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2009
* USD 178,418.00

Problems that exhibit wave-like behavior, such as the Helmholtz equation and
Maxwell's equation, often benefit immensely from the use of high-order
discretization schemes. However, as the resolution of the desired numerical
approximation increases, so does the computational complexity in solving the
resulting system of equations. A multilevel solution technique is needed to
achieve a (nearly) scalable process. A number of factors influence the
efficiency of a multilevel method, most prominently the grid structure and
underlying discretization scheme. Preconditioned Schwarz-based methods have
previously shown to handle a wide range of problems. Most notably, high-order
methods for positive definite problems, unstructured and non-nested grids, and
indefinite operators. The proposed research will study Schwarz-based
preconditioning for hp adaptive discontinuous spectral element discretizations
of the indefinite time-harmonic Maxwell's equation. The research will focus on
the discontinuous Galerkin method, which enables straightforward adaptivity, and
will utilize the previous success of domain decomposition methods to extend
recent results for the indefinite Helmholtz equation on similar grids.

Electromagnetic principles find application in a broad range of industries.
Consumer products such as cell phones, antenna development in the military, and
many energy applications at the national laboratories rely on the fundamentals
of electromagnetics. Computational simulation of this physical behavior is
increasingly popular from an environmental, financial, and practical standpoint.
Still, due to the underlying nature of these physical laws, the simulation
process on large supercomputers is not yet efficient in a number of cases. The
goal of this project is to further develop the solution techniques in the
simulation process in an effort to improve efficiency. More efficient numerical
algorithms lead to the ability to solve larger problems with higher accuracy,
offering scientists a better view of the physical model. Specifically, the
proposed research attacks the problem in a divide-and-conquer approach in a
number of different respects. First, the mathematical laws of electromagnetics
(Maxwell's equations) are approximated in a way that reduces unnecessary
computational cost, called adaptive spectral elements. The challenge is that
often this approach leads to an increasingly difficult second step by forming a
large matrix of dependencies. This second step is the focus of the proposed work
whereby the problem is decoupled by a process called domain decomposition. The
research concentrates on improving the robustness and computational scalability.
