
* 0612435
* A Divergence Free H(div) Finite Element Method
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2006,06/07/2006
* Xiu Ye,AR,University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2008
* USD 61,610.00

The objectives of the project are to develop a divergence free H(div) finite
element method for the Navier-Stokes equations and provide divergence free
subspace bases for the three dimensional H(div) elements for the method. The
finite element formulations using H(div) conforming elements for the
incompressible flow problems have been studied by the PI and other researchers.
The H(div) finite element methods have the advantage that the incompressibility
constraint is satisfied exactly. Furthermore, if a basis of the divergence free
subspace for the H(div) element is available, the velocity can be approximated
in the divergence free subspace. This eliminates the pressure and the whole
incompressibility constraint from the large complicated system. As a result, the
computational cost is reduced significantly. Therefore construction of the
exactly divergence free subspaces bases for the H(div) elements has theoretical
and practical significance. The proposed research will lead to an efficient and
accurate algorithm for a large class of the problems with a special feature: the
divergence free condition is satisfied exactly.

Partial differential equations may arise in all fields of science and
engineering. The study of numerical solutions for solving partial differential
equations is extremely important in practice. A large class of the partial
differential equations derived from different fields has the constraint that
some interesting variable is divergence free. For example, such equations arise
in the study of incompressible flow problems. Many numerical methods have been
developed for solving this kind of problem. However, very few of them satisfy
the exact divergence free condition. The proposed research will provide
engineers with a promising numerical algorithm for the problems arising from
computational fluid dynamics and other fields where the divergence free
constraint arises. The proposed project pays intensive attention to promoting
teaching, training, and learning.


