
* 0613032
* Design and Analysis of Iterative Methods for Order Reduction of Truly Large-Scale Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2006,07/31/2008
* Roland Freund,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2010
* USD 308,148.00

Over the last few decades, iterative methods, in particular Krylov subspace-
based algorithms, have become widely-used and indispensable tools for the
solution of large-scale computational problems in science and engineering. While
most Krylov methods were originally developed for the solution of large
eigenvalue problems or large systems of linear equations, starting in the early
1990s, Krylov techniques have also proven to be powerful tools for order
reduction of large-scale systems of ordinary differential equations or
algebraic-differential equations. The basic idea of order reduction is to
replace the original large-scale system with a system of similar type, but of
much smaller dimension. In recent years, a lot of Krylov machinery for order
reduction has been put in place. Still, the existing algorithms are not at the
same level as Krylov subspace methods for eigenvalue problems or systems of
linear equations. For example, Krylov subspace methods combined with powerful
preconditioning techniques are routinely used to solve linear systems with
millions of unknowns. However, the application of Krylov techniques for order
reduction to such truly large-scale systems remains prohibitive for a number of
reasons. First, most existing algorithms generate reduced-order models via
explicit projection after a suitable basis for the underlying Krylov subspace
has been generated, and thus they require the storage of all these basis
vectors. In the truly large-scale case, the resulting storage requirements
become excessive. Second, Lanczos-type algorithms generate reduced-order models
on the fly, and thus avoid the issue of keeping all basis vectors. However, in
general, the resulting reduced-order models do not preserve crucial properties
of the original large-scale system, such as stability or passivity. Third, all
existing Krylov techniques involve the solution of large sparse linear systems
of equations at each Krylov iteration. It is usually assumed that these systems
can be solved via sparse direct methods. However, this is not the case in all
applications. The goal of the proposed work is to develop new and effective
Krylov subspace-based methods for order reduction that overcome the above issues
and are thus applicable to truly large-scale systems. In particular, the focus
will be on techniques that allow the use of preconditioned iterative methods for
the solution of the inner linear systems, instead of sparse direct methods, and
on methods that allow flexible shift-and-invert preconditioners for the outer
Krylov iteration itself. The use of nonlinear semidefinite programming to remedy
the loss of stability or passivity of reduced-order models generated by Lanczos-
type algorithms will also be explored. The proposed research is expected to lead
to a more complete understanding of Krylov subspace-based order reduction and to
result in original algorithms that are on par with their state-of-the-art
counterparts for large eigenvalue problems and large linear systems.

The use of computational techniques and numerical simulation is ubiquitous in
the design and verification of today's complex engineering systems. For example,
a state-of-the-art computer computer chip contains about one billion
transistors. Despite this enormous complexity, the design and verification of
such chips is done almost exclusively with simulation, and first-time-correct
fabrication in silicon is the norm. However, even with today's computing power,
simulation of a complete system is often not feasible due to the extremely high
dimension of the mathematical model describing the system. Order reduction is a
key technology to make such simulation tasks possible by first replacing the
original model by a suitable approximation of much smaller dimension. The
proposed research is expected to lead to new order-reduction techniques that
will have applications in many important areas, including the design of computer
chips, microelectromechanical systems, nanotechnology, and structural dynamics.
