
* 0645035
* CAREER: High Performance Computational Method for Stochastic Design Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2007,06/13/2007
* Dongbin Xiu,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 439,994.00

The importance of uncertainty analysis and stochastic modeling has received
increasing amount of attention in recent years, especially from the
Computational Mathematics society. Extensive research efforts have been devoted
to uncertainty quantification and stochastic computations, and novel numerical
methods have been developed to efficiently deal with large and complex systems
with uncertainty. Although these methods have been demonstrated to be highly
effective in predicting the behavior of complex stochastic systems, the design
industry has not taken full advantage of these developments, and the design
procedures in many disciplines remain almost exclusively deterministic. The
research objective of this proposal is to develop new mathematical and numerical
methods for multidisciplinary design problems with uncertain inputs, with an
emphasis on the efficiency and accuracy of the new methods so that they are
applicable to large-scale, realistic engineering applications. This objective
will be attained through three major efforts: (1) employing rigorous
mathematical theory to form a unified framework that allows one to conduct
systematical analysis and error estimates; (2) employing the state-of-the-art
stochastic algorithms to construct a set of high performance design algorithms
for two major classes of uncertainty-based design: robust design and reliability
design; and (3) extending the new methods to large-scale complex systems and
developing fast and parallel solvers.

Quantifying uncertainty is of paramount importance in almost all aspects of
science and engineering. It is of particular significance in modern-day
strategic planning and risk management where decisions are made in a constantly
changing landscape with many unknown factors. Examples such as epidemic control,
aircraft optimization under extreme conditions, optimal response following
natural disasters, etc, are abundant. Such problems are essentially design and
optimization in a complex and multidisciplinary environment, with substantial
uncertainty interacting in a highly nonlinear fashion in the systems and
parameters. While simulation based design tools continue to be advanced at rapid
rates, little attention has been paid to incorporation of state-of-the-art
mathematical techniques in stochastic analysis and uncertainty quantification.
The traditional approaches, e.g., those by using safety factors to accommodate
uncertainty in a gross manner, are becoming increasingly obsolete and often
result in overly conservative decisions. This project is valuable for its multi-
disciplinary influence, its fundamental contribution to uncertainty-based design
problems, and more importantly, its high performance stochastic design
algorithms the provide better and sharper analysis for decision makers. The
project will unite a collection of uncertainty-based design techniques scattered
over various engineering applications with the cutting-edge stochastic
computation framework. It is a true synergy of Computational Mathematics tools
and practical demands, and can be extended to a large class of design and
optimization problems.
