
* 0645347
* CAREER: Reduced-order Modeling and Controller Design for Large-scale Dynamical Systems via Rational Krylov Methods
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/2007,04/20/2007
* Serkan Gugercin,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 04/30/2013
* USD 400,000.00

Proposal ID: 0645347 PI: Gugercin, Serkan Institution: Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University Title: CAREER: Reduced-order Modeling and
Controller Design for Large-scale Dynamical Systems via Rational Krylov Methods

Abstract

Direct numerical simulation of dynamical systems has been one of the few
available means for achieving accurate prediction or control of complex physical
phenomena that are of scientific interest or industrial value. The ever-
increasing need for improved accuracy leads to very large-scale and complex
dynamical systems. Simulations in such large-scale settings can overwhelm
computational resources; this is the main motivation for model reduction. The
goal is to produce a simpler reduced-order model approximating the original one
as accurately as possible. The resulting reduced model can then be used as an
efficient surrogate to the original, to replace it in a larger simulation or to
develop a simpler and faster controller suitable for real time applications.
Krylov-based methods have emerged as promising candidates for model reduction in
realistic large-scale settings. This project seeks to develop optimal, robust,
and systematic Krylov-based projection methods for efficient construction of
high fidelity and optimal reduced-order models. By carefully employing inexact
solves in a Krylov-based model reduction setting, the proposed research will
extend these optimal reduction techniques to realistic settings with millions of
degrees of freedom while maintaining the same quality of the error measures with
respect to the exact rational Krylov subspaces. In addition, systematic
approaches will be developed for the design of fast and effective, low-order
optimal controllers, and more generally, for reduction of interconnected
(coupled) systems. The project will apply the newly developed methods to several
test problems drawn from different application areas.

Large-scale simulations and computations play a crucial role in studying a great
variety of complex physical phenomena in many areas of computational science and
engineering. Examples include signal propagation and interference in electric
circuits, molecular dynamics, weather forecasting, wave propagation and
vibration suppression in large structures, temperature control in various media,
and behavior of micro-electro-mechanical systems. Computing in large-scale
settings leads to unmanageably large demands on the nation's computational
resources; hence there is a growing need to approximate the complex dynamical
systems with simpler, high fidelity models that will make these simulations much
easier and faster to compute. This project seeks to develop techniques that will
yield optimal, high fidelity approximations of complex systems; leading at once
to simulations that are more rapid yet still reliable. The mathematical tools
and high-quality software that will be developed through the course of this
project will contribute to research efforts of scientist and engineers working
with large-scale, complex multi-physics problems. In addition to the research
component, this project offers a comprehensive education plan that consists of
the supervision of undergraduate and graduate students; development of a
graduate course; and several interdisciplinary research projects available for
introducing students in a variety of areas of high-performance scientific
computing.


