
* 0650413
* Diffusion Multiscale Analysis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,09/22/2006
* Mauro Maggioni,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 81,368.00

In this proposal, the investigator and his collaborators address several
questions arising from the mathematical analysis of multiscale geometries of
sets, and multiscale decomposition of function spaces, that arise from the
action of a diffusion semigroup on a manifold, a graph and other rather general
metric spaces. While these multiscale geometries are partly implicit (and
classical) in differential geometry, in partial differential equations, as well
as in many branches in graph theory (with applications to problems in computer
science), only recently a very general, yet efficient, coherent and unifying
construction has been introduced by the investigator and his collaborators.
Multiscale function space decompositions that mirror these multiscale diffusion
geometries are also constructed, through the introduction of special wavelet
functions. This is a far-reaching, and long sought, generalization of wavelet
analysis, both mathematically and computationally. The investigator and his
collaborators have shown that algorithms for efficiently computing these
multiscale decompositions exist, which generalize the fast wavelet transform and
Fast Multipole Methods, yielding fast multiscale algorithms guaranteeing high-
precision. The investigator will study the construction of biorthogonal
diffusion multiscale decompositions, multiscale function approximation on rough
sets, multiscale diffusion analysis of data sets and its relationships with
geometric measure theory, multiscale Markov chains, numerical analysis of PDEs,
learning theory, hyperspectral imaging and document corpora analysis. The
investigator expects this novel multiscale construction to have impact in all
these disciplines, in a way similar to the impact wavelet analysis had on low-
dimensional signal processing and numerical analysis.

The present proposal stresses the inter-disciplinary nature of several aspects
of multiscale analysis, and the vast applicability of the ideas, tools,
constructions, to pure and applied mathematics, and to other disciplines such as
computer science, physics, engineering, astronomy and statistics, among others.
The introduction of these novel multiscale techniques reveals new and
interesting multiscale geometric structures of graphs and sets, together with
effective computational tools to discover them. The range of applications is
very wide, and includes the analysis and organization of large and complex
networks (e.g. computer networks, biological regulatory networks etc...),
document corpora for information extraction, hyperspectral imagery (for
applications to medicine, target recognition etc...), and large datasets in
general. It has also applications to the development of new algorithms for
learning and artificial intelligence, for the automation of complex tasks. The
investigator aims at strenghtening his existing collaborations, and establishing
new ones, with other institutions, both in the United States and abroad, across
several disciplines, in particular computer science, astronomy, biology, and
medicine. He will continue his existing collaborations with companies developing
next-generation instrumentation, for applications to hyperspectral imaging. He
will continue to actively participate in multi- and inter-disciplinary
conferences, workshops and research activities, and effectively communicating
and disseminating ideas and techniques to multi-disciplinary audiences, making
his work, including papers and computer code for the corresponding algorithms,
easily accessible electronically.
