
* 0701825
* Manifold Learning from Unorganized High-dimensional Data Points
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2006,04/26/2007
* Hongyuan Zha,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 44,774.00

The investigator and his colleagues use spectral methods to investigate a
challenging problem in unsupervised learning and data visualization: given a set
of unorganized data points sampled possibly with noise from an underlying
manifold, compute a set of global coordinates of the data points with respect to
the underlying manifold. The approach is guided by the general principle that
global structures can emerge from careful analysis of local interactions. The
central idea is the exploration of tangent spaces as representations of local
geometry on a nonlinear manifold using weighted PCA, and the global alignment of
those local tangent spaces to obtain the global structure of the manifold by way
of computing a partial eigendecomposition of the neighborhood connection matrix.
The study focuses on the following areas: 1) effective local geometric and
topological structures for manifold learning; 2) the interaction of the local
sampling density, noise level, the regularity of the manifold and the local
curvature structure, and their effects on the accuracy of manifold learning; 3)
local smoothing methods to make manifold learning more robust to noise and
outliers; 4) connections with infinite mixture models, one-class support vector
machines and level set methods; 5) efficient and scalable algorithms for large-
scale manifold learning problems. With the advancement in modern computing
technology, we are faced with the challenging problems of extracting useful
information from vast amounts of data. The data generated in a variety of
applications tend to have tens of thousands of attributes, leading to the
problem characterized by "curse of dimensionality." In many applications,
however, high-dimensional data points are governed by a few intrinsic degrees of
freedom. Think of the set of images depicting a horizontally rotating face: the
images are high-dimensional but the intrinsic degree of freedom of the image set
is simply one, representing the rotation angle of the face. The focus of this
proposal is the development of geometric, statistical, and computational methods
for extracting those latent intrinsic degrees of freedom by modeling the set of
data points as samples from nonlinear manifolds, and the discovery of the global
structure of the manifolds from careful analysis of local interactions. The
results, algorithms, and techniques developed have immediate applications in
bioinformatics, especially for gene expression analysis for detecting and
distinguishing diseases and disease types; in appearance-based modeling for
people detection using video sequences generated from surveillance cameras; in
helping intelligence analysts to sift through large amount of textual
information by more efficient modeling of text document collections; and in
enhancing computer-supported collaborative learning and performance measurement
in second language learning.


