
* 0708071
* High-Order Numerical Algorithms for Steady and Unsteady Simulation of Viscous Compressible Flow
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,06/05/2009
* Antony Jameson,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 421,614.00

The goal of this project if to produce an efficient high-order methodology for
3D, high-speed unsteady viscous fluid flow in complex domains. No existing
solver achieves all these goals, despite the fact that significant progress in
relevant research areas has been made during the last few years. To achieve this
goal, two major objectives may be identified. Firstly, the development of the
high-order Spectral Difference (SD) Method for unstructured grids will be
addressed. More specifically, the scheme will be extended to three dimensions,
and formulated for mixed-element grids. The latter is necessary for efficient
resolution of flows at high Reynolds numbers. Furthermore, upon analyzing and
validating viable viscous discretization techniques, the scheme will be extended
by the principal investigator and his colleagues to the Navier-Stokes equations
on mixed grids. The second major objective is to improve the efficiency and
robustness of the high-order methodology. Numerical schemes of third or higher
spatial order are not yet efficient enough for many problems of practical
engineering interest, in particular high-speed viscous flow. To keep the number
of degrees of freedom comparable to that of a second order method, the number of
grid cells must be reduced as the order is increased. To resolve discontinuities
sharply without oscillations h-p adaptively will be introduced. For both steady-
state and time- dependent problems a fast solution technique is necessary to
solve the arising systems of nonlinear equations. In order to meet this goal, an
h-p multigrid strategy will be combined with efficient time stepping and
relaxation schemes for both steady and unsteady flows.

Computational simulation has revolutionized the engineering design process and
is by now the single most important tool in a wide range of high technology
industries. That in turn has had a huge impact in many real life applications of
great importance to society and science, from aerospace to health to the
environment. The proposed research is targeted at advancing the state of the art
of numerical algorithms which will be needed for the U.S. to remain at the
forefront of computational simulation for both industrial and scientific
applications. In the Aerospace Industry simulation methods have been largely
responsible for doubling the fuel efficiency of long range commercial aircraft
since the advent of jet transport. The need for further improvement is crucial
for both the economics and environmental impact of air transport, a jumbo jet
releases its take-off weight (around 400 tons) in carbon dioxide emissions
during a single flight. The European Union has recognized the importance of
advancing simulation techniques with a variety of European wide and national
initiatives (such as the German Mega Flow and Mega Design programs.) Simulations
and optimized redesign of the 747 wing can save tons" of fuel, travel time and
reduce emissions. Computer simulation is equally crucial to advances in numerous
other applications. For example, simulations of blood flow through a beating
heart and its valves, helps doctors understand and repair the malfunctioning
heart; simulation of air traffic control patterns can move that industry faster
toward safer skies, reduce the occurrence of mid-air collisions and the time to
reroute flights around weather systems; modeling of air flow around computer
chips and over the surface of a fast spinning disk drive improve function and
reliability. Today's ability to model huge global weather system can change the
fate of nations struggling with tsunami's, floods, the devastation of
hurricanes; Astrophysics and many studies of importance to National Security all
rely on this new aspect of science and mathematics. At the heart of all these is
the development of more advanced numerical algorithms which provide the
cornerstone of computational simulation. The proposed research intends to extend
these to more efficient high-order 3D methods, While the immediate application
of the research is to fluid flow problems related to aerospace, an improved
fluid flow simulation capability is immediately transferable to other industrial
and scientific applications, including those mentioned above as well as many
others such as the automotive and marine industries, wind energy, and a wide
range of environmental issues. Even the flow patterns in urban areas around
buildings can be used to evaluate how germ or chemical particles would be spread
by winds circulating through the 'canyons' of clustered tall buildings. Further
advances in all aspects of computational simulation and its underlying numerical
methology is essential in order to maintain the Unites States' technological
leadership and competitiveness in the rapidly evolving global economy. The
results of these developments and techniques will play an increasingly pivotal
role and have major implications environmentally, scientifically economically
and socially as the results filter down into the many applications using them
today, as well as future applications that will need to evaluate complex
nonlinear partial differential equations for a variety of physics.


