
* 0708076
* Control and Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Intrinsic Shells
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2007,06/20/2007
* Catherine Lebiedzik,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2010
* USD 102,502.00

This research is in the general area of control theory for PDE models that
involve shell (curved surface) dynamics. While a great deal of research has been
done for plate and wave dynamics and other so-called flat geometries, very
little is known as far as rigorous control theory for shell models. This
particularly refers to problems such as controllability, stabilization and
optimal control problems. On the other hand, from the point of view of
applications this is precisely the more interesting case -- for example an
airplane or helicopter cabin is curved, so the structural acoustic case is
naturally modeled with shells. While the interest in studying shells need not be
defended on physical/application grounds, the mathematical analysis (in
particular in the context of control theory) is poorly understood with many
challenges. In fact, methods developed for flat geometries are no longer
applicable, and approaches such as microlocal analysis or geometric optics had
to be introduced in order to resolve the problem. The geometry of the problem is
responsible for these problems, and the idea pursued in this research is that a
solid understanding of that geometry is the key to surmounting these obstacles.
The goal of this project is to capture this geometry through the correct
modeling and exploit it in the proofs. The research builds upon recently
developed "intrinsic" models due to Michel Delfour and Jean-Paul Zolesio which
are coordinate free. This very fact, together with an appropriately developed
calculus rooted in geometry, provides a tool for deriving the appropriate
inequalities.

In previously funded work, models based on the intrinsic geometry have been
developed for linear, nonlinear, and thermoelastic shells. Answers to questions
such as stabilization, control, and well-posedness for these models have been
established, and the linear model has been numerically verified to be accurate.
The objective for the current research is to further investigate control and
numerical analysis of the nonlinear intrinsic shell model. As such, the
following issues will be addressed: Model verification for the nonlinear shell;
error analysis in order to derive the optimal rates of convergence for the
finite element approximation to the nonlinear shell model; control theory for
shells (i.e., issues of stability and/or stabilizibility of the nonlinear model,
long time behavior and attractors, and exact controllability from the boundary);
and numerical analysis of control problems. In part, the intellectual merit of
this work lies in the construction of a complete theory of the control of shell
structures. However, the methods involved are themselves of independent interest
as very special inverse-type inequalities are derived in the proofs which have
applications to other problems as well. In addition, the numerical libraries
developed can be applied to many different types of problem. The issue of the
shell is an issue of geometry, and the geometrical and topological aspects of
this work are very rich. The broader impact of this work will be seen in the
integration of education and research, participation of underrepresented groups
in mathematics, technology transfer and cross-fertilization with industry.
