
* 0710831
* Numerical Methods and Algorithms for Second Order Fully Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,07/10/2007
* Xiaobing Feng,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 227,909.00

Second order fully nonlinear partial differential equations (PDEs) arise from
many areas in science and engineering such as differential geometry, optimal
control, mass transportation, materials science, meteorology, geostrophic fluid
dynamics. They constitute the most difficult class of differential equations to
analyze analytically and to approximate numerically. In the past two decades,
enormous advances in the theoretical analysis has been achieved, based on the
viscosity solution theory, for second order fully nonlinear PDEs. On the other
hand, in contrast to the success of the PDE analysis, numerical solutions for
general second order fully nonlinear PDEs is mostly an untouched area, and
computing viscosity solutions of second order fully nonlinear PDEs has been
impracticable. In this research project, the PI plans to conduct an extensive
and systematic study of numerical methods and algorithms for second order fully
nonlinear PDEs based on a newly developed moment solution concept and a
constructive vanishing moment methodology. The specific tasks of the project
include (i) to continue developing the moment solution theory for Monge-Ampere
type PDEs and for general second order fully nonlinear elliptic and parabolic
PDEs in two and three dimensions; (ii) to develop finite element, mixed finite
element, discontinuous Galerkin, and spectral Galerkin discretization methods;
(iii) to analyze convergence and rates of convergence for all proposed
discretization methods; (iv) to design preconditioned Newton type nonlinear
solvers; (v) to develop computer code based on Comsol Multiphysics platform for
implementing the proposed discretization methods and solution algorithms on high
performance workstations.

The completion of the proposed project will have a profound impact on both
theoretical study and numerical approximations of second order fully nonlinear
PDEs. It will provide the first practical and successful methodology/approach,
which is backed by rigorous PDE and numerical theories, for approximating second
order fully nonlinear PDEs. As a by-product, the moment solution theory will
enrich the current understanding of the viscosity solution theory, and might be
very likely to provide a logical and natural generalization/extension for the
viscosity solution concept. The findings of the proposed research will provide
the much needed capability and enabling tools for computing correctly and
efficiently those challenging fully nonlinear PDEs from differential geometry,
general relativity, fluid mechanics, materials science, optimal control, mass
transportation, meteorology, image processing, especially, in the cases where
there are no theories. The educational component of this project is to engage
and train graduate students in developing necessary applied and computational
mathematics knowledge and skills so that they can pursue a successful career in
science and engineering in the future.
