
* 0712744
* Analysis, Algorithms and Computation of Some Model Problems in Interface and Defect Dynamics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2007,08/24/2007
* Qiang Du,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 213,840.00

This project is concerned with the study of interfaces and defects which are
ubiquitous in physical and biological systems and are essential to the materials
properties and biological functions. Building on the previous research work, the
PI will develop and apply analytical and numerical simulation tools to study
both deterministic and stochastic effects associated with various material
interfaces and defects with particular emphasis on defects in superconductors
and Bose-Einstein condensates as characterized by quantized vortices, and soft
interfaces as characterized by model biomimetic cell membranes. The
investigation will be largely following the general Ginzburg-Landau (diffuse
interface, phase field) formalism with connections to other multiscale and
stochastic modeling approaches. Systematic model derivations, analysis and
simplifications will be conducted. Adaptive algorithms and statistics retrieval
algorithms will be designed and analyzed. These research activities will enhance
the simulation capability of complex systems and the predictive power of large
scale numerical computation. While focusing on specific applications, the
central algorithmic development work in this project will be in tune with the
modern theme of integrated, adaptive and intelligent scientific computation.

This project lies at the interface of computational mathematics, physics,
materials and biological sciences. The physical and biological objects to be
studied through mathematical analysis and numerical simulations include
quantized vortices which are well-known signatures of superfluidity, and
biological membranes which are soft interfaces designed by nature as the
fundamental building blocks of life. The PI will develop new analytical theory
on the complex nonlinear models and new tools for extracting useful statistics
and exploring hidden structures from massive simulations. The research
activities will bring new advances to mathematics and provide better
understanding of various basic physical and biological processes. They in turn
may aid the efforts in discovering new technology based on the superconductivity
and superfluidity, and new design of drug and drug delivery vehicles based on
biomimetic membranes, both are of significant economic value and national
priority. In addition, this project will provide valuable training environment
and interdisciplinary research experience to the future generation of workforce
and young researchers that showcases the TEAMS (Training in Experiments,
Analysis, Modeling and Simulations) spirit.
