
* 0712809
* Algebraic and Geometric aspects of Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/24/2007
* Leonid Faybusovich,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 139,724.00

The following three topics are discussed in the project: computable self-
concordant barrier functions, Jordan-algebraic aspects of optimization, and
multi-dimensional trigonometric programming. The overall goal of the project is
to develop new computational and theoretical tools to address complicated
nonconvex optimization problems including NP-hard problems of combinatorial
optimization. In particular, computable self-concordant barriers for the cone of
so-called copositive matrices and more general polynomial cones are discussed.
Development of interior-point algorithms based on such barriers would open a
totally new venue for the numerical analysis of various complex practical
optimization problems, where the (approximate) knowledge of a global optimum is
desirable.

Concrete approaches are proposed to the use of Jordan-algebraic techniques for
constructing treatable convex relaxations for a very general class of nonconvex
optimization problems and to robust optimization. Proposed ideas for the
transformation of polynomial programming problems into trigonometric
counterparts may lead to significantly improved numerical stability of existing
algorithms based on semi-definite programming approximations.

Optimization problems play a very important role in a wide spectrum of
applications. But existing algorithms and software allow one to reliably analyze
only a very limited class of structured convex optimization problems, if the
goal is to find a global optimum. The present project aims to contribute to the
problem of finding global optimal solutions (or their reasonable estimates) for
a much broader and more difficult class of optimization problems which includes
(but is not limited to) various types of NP-hard problems of combinatorial
optimization.
