
* 0712997
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Space of Large Knots and Links
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,09/22/2009
* Claus Ernst,KY,Western Kentucky University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 55,000.00

The PIs propose to investigate the space of very large knots (with thousands of
crossings) through a symbiosis of theoretical research and computation. The
problems raised here are motivated by the applications of knot theory in
chemistry, physics, and biophysics. The main goal is to develop and implement
new algorithms that sample the space of large knots and that are capable of
embedding large knots tightly or semi-tightly in the simple cubic lattice. In
this research, theoretical work will enhance the algorithms to be developed and
the empirical results will support the theoretical approaches. The proposed
research project consists of several inter-related objectives: developing fast
algorithms capable of generating representative samples of large knot diagrams,
developing better algorithms capable of embedding large knots tightly in the
simple cubic lattice, and developing new theoretical approaches to improve the
upper and lower bounds of the ropelength in general or for special knot classes
such as alternating knots. These objectives are difficult and challenging. For
example, the distribution of large knots is unknown, determining the crossing
number of large non-alternating knots is known to be NP-hard, and theoretical
results concerning large knots are scarce in general. Concretely the PIs expect
to sample the space of large knots using and comparing three approaches: first
applying uniform prefix vectors to generate large Hamiltonian prime knot
diagrams; second, adapting a method based on uniform random polygons to sample
large prime knot diagrams; finally, using graph tensor products to construct
large non-alternating knots whose crossing number can be approximated by
computing the breadth of the Jones polynomial (via the Tutte polynomial);
sampling such non-alternating knots allows a comparison with alternating knots
of similar size. Furthermore, the PIs will work on developing a more efficient
embedding algorithm by extending the constructive proof of two of the PIs
regarding the embedding length of closed braids to general knots. This approach
also aims at improving the general upper bound on the ropelength of knots from
the current bound of crossing number to the power of 1.5. The main subjects to
be studied in this proposal are large physical knots, i.e. large knots that can
actually occur in the real world. Examples of such occurrences are long, knotted
polymer chains or circular DNA. The problems raised in this proposal are
motivated by the applications of knot theory in chemistry, physics and
biophysics. For example, DNA knots formed under extreme conditions of
condensation, such as those found in bacteriophage P4, can be quite large. Such
large and tightly packed circular DNAs are difficult to analyze experimentally.
Theoretical results or computational simulations on such systems would be of
great help. Yet theoretical studies on large knots are scarce. The proposed
project aims at gaining more knowledge about large knots: How much space is
needed in order to pack certain large knots? How efficiently can knots be packed
tightly? Is there a difference between packing a complicated knot in comparison
to packing a simple knot? What role does the topology (shape) of the knot play?
The PIs intend to develop computer programs that can generate large knots and
pack them tightly, based on theoretical results and algorithms they have
developed in the past. Empirical data can then be gathered through the repeated
applications of these programs. The proposed activities may have significant
implications in DNA research, polymer science, and other sciences. The
activities will result in tools for researchers to compute various geometric and
topological characteristics of the large knots they encounter in their field and
thus help them to better understand biological and physical systems where large
knotted molecules occur.
