
* 0712910
* Numerical Algebraic Geometry: Computation of Exceptional Parameter Values
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,06/25/2009
* Andrew Sommese,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 359,999.00

Sommese and Wampler propose constructing and implementing new algorithms to
numerically describe exceptional algebraic subsets of the solution sets of
systems of parameterized polynomial equations; and to solve polynomial systems
with few solutions, but with many defining equations. In applications, such as
the design of robots and mechanisms, the parameters represent constants of the
device, such as the length of a link, and the variables represent the device's
motion. A focus of the proposal is on techniques for the design of robots and
mechanisms where the objective is to find the exceptional parameter values so
that the device they represent has particular motion characteristics. These
techniques, which will apply to parameterized polynomial systems generally, such
as may arise in computer graphics, chemistry, robot vision, and other
engineering and scientific disciplines, lead to systems of polynomials that are
large in comparison to the systems presently being solved. To deal with these
large systems, Sommese and Wampler propose a new equation-by-equation approach,
that they call regeneration, to solve polynomial systems. This reduces the
solution of a polynomial system to sequentially finding the solution of systems
that starting trivial are gradually built up to the target system. Close
relationship between the subsystems of equations will likely result in new
algorithmic efficiencies. Sommese and Wampler propose further development of
Bertini, their freely available software for polynomial system computations,
including the development of parallel versions so that they can tackle
nontrivial systems arising in engineering and science. They propose also the
development of algorithms for computing invariants that algebraic geometers are
interested in, and which, while expensive to compute symbolically, are easy to
compute numerically.

Many technological problems, e.g., the design of artificial limbs, the design of
industrial robots and other machines, economics, and a detailed understanding of
critical chemical processes, such as those involved in combustion, lead to
systems of polynomials that are very difficult to impossible to solve by current
methods. Sommese and Wampler are developing new mathematical and computational
approaches to solve such currently intractable problems. They are also
developing Bertini, a freely available software package, so that engineers,
mathematicians, and scientists may solve the polynomial systems that come up in
their work without knowledge of the extensive theoretical foundations underlying
the work of Sommese and Wampler.
