
* 0712796
* Optimization of Density Functional Methods for Atomic Structure Calculations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CONDENSED MATTER & MAT THEORY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2007,06/17/2009
* David Luke,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 183,387.00

We address numerical challenges facing simulations of molecules built upon
atomic-scale physics and chemistry. Molecular structure calculations modeling
large-scale molecular systems are of fundamental importance to quantum
chemistry, physics, and materials science. They are being used by collaborators
with this project for the determination of charge density at oxide surfaces, for
atomic structure determination of nanoscale materials, for optimization of the
performance of nanoscale materials in solid-oxide fuel cells, and for exploring
ways to reduce chemical waste and improve the efficiency of catalysts.
Worldwide, these types of calculations are exhausting the limits of the world''s
supercomputing capacity; any advancements in the numerical algorithms behind
these calculations would have immediate impact by expanding our capabilities for
simulating ever-larger molecular systems. The mathematical challenges presented
by these types of computational problems are at the frontiers of mathematical
research; these challenges are dimensionality, nonlinearity, and model
inconsistency.

We approach the problem from two directions. In the first, we combine
conventional techniques for solving large-scale optimization problems -- so-
called limited memory techniques -- with a fresh look at ways to stabilize and
accelerate the techniques by directly accounting for the presence of multiple
scales as well as inconsistent approximations in the model. This involves an
investigation into the sensitivity of the local numerical model and the
development of a mathematical safeguard against imperfect or incomplete
information about the true state of the system. Our second direction of approach
to the problem is to divide the model into smaller, more computationally
tractable pieces -- known as operator splitting. Operator-splitting methods open
the door to a wide range of algorithmic options that allow one to combine
computations in novel ways that avoid problems common for more conventional
approaches; principal among these is the phenomenon of stagnation at a bad
''local solution''. New operator-splitting techniques developed by the PI for
problems related to molecular structure determination and that share similar
mathematical features have proven effective. The theory behind these algorithms
is still being developed by the PI and extends current theory to the important
cases of so-called nonconvex and inconsistent problems that are ubiquitous in
applications far beyond molecular structure calculations.
