
* 0712898
* Innovative Numerical Methods for Nonlinear Time-Dependent PDEs
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,05/24/2007
* Alina Chertock,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 272,015.00

The project is aimed at developing accurate, efficient, and robust numerical
methods for nonlinear PDEs, with particular reference to problems that admit
nonsmooth (discontinuous) solutions and problems that involve highly disparate
scales, and therefore, are difficult to solve numerically. The principal part of
the proposed research will be focused on the development of new techniques for
solving problems involving complicated nonlinear wave phenomena, problems with
complex computational domains, moving boundaries and material/layer interfaces,
as well as problems that include uncertain phenomena. The new techniques will be
based on particle methods and finite-volume methods, as well as their
hybridization. The latter approach will utilize major advantages of particle
methods, as mesh-free methods, and shock-capturing finite-volume methods,
especially in problems with complex geometries, free boundaries, and flows with
structural interactions. A combination of stochastic and numerical tools will
also be used for solving problems with uncertainties and problems, in which
multiple scales should be taken into account. The designed methods will be
applied to a variety of nonlinear problems, among which are the Euler-Poincare
equations, multi-phase and multi-fluid flow models, models of transport of
pollutant in turbulent incompressible flow, chemotaxis models, reactive Euler
equations describing stiff detonation waves, zero diffusion-dispersion limits
for conservation laws, and others. Stochastic initial-value problems such as the
randomly perturbed KdV equation and the Burgers equation with random force will
also be solved by the proposed methods. It is significant that, besides
providing the examples that corroborate the analytical approach, the foregoing
applications are of a substantial independent value for a broad class of
problems arising in modern science. In recent years, numerical methods for
solving partial differential equations have evolved into an important and
extremely efficient tool for the quantitative and qualitative study of many
phenomena in different applied ares that otherwise could not have been studied
at all. The proposed project will contribute significantly toward development of
computational methods and will provide considerably more powerful tools for
analyzing applied problems on the computer. In this proposal, a strong accent is
put on designing numerical methods for complicated problems such as multi-phase
and multi-fluid models, models of pollution propagation, polymer systems,
chemotaxis models, active fluid transport models, multi-scale and stochastic
initial-value problems, etc. These problems arise in a variety of scientific
applications in fluid and gas dynamics, geophysics, meteorology, astrophysics,
multi-component flows, granular flows, reactive flows, polymer flows, and other
fields. A wide spectrum of applications of the studied methods reflects also the
interdisciplinary character of the proposed project.




