
* 0712827
* Multiscale Total Variation Methods for Integral Equation Models in Image Processing
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2007,05/01/2009
* Yuesheng Xu,NY,Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2010
* USD 358,900.00

Models currently used in image processing are discrete. They are piecewise
constant approximations of the true models - integral equation models. The
discrete models impose bottleneck model errors which cannot be compensated from
the numerical methods developed based upon them. To overcome this drawback, the
PIs propose to directly use the integral equation models for image processing.
The integral equation models will offer us much greater flexibility for the in-
depth analysis of the corresponding images. An ideal method for image processing
should be sensitive to geometric features of images and computationally
efficient. Presently, the total variation method and the multiscale method are
two main mathematical approaches for image processing. They are complementary to
each other in their strength and weakness. The total variation method is
sensitive to geometric features of images but it is computationally inefficient.
The standard multiscale method is convenient for computation due to its
multiscale structure but it is not very sensitive to the geometric features of
images. Aiming at designing computationally efficient algorithms that are
sensitive to geometric features of images, the PIs propose to develop multiscale
total variation methods which combine the strengths from both of these two
methods. The PIs study the following four mathematical problems related to image
processing: (1) Multiscale approximation of images based on integral equation
models; (2) Multiscale total variation regularization; (3) Missing data recovery
with redundant systems; and (4) Design of application-driven wavelet and
framelet filter banks.

Image processing arises in a variety of scientific, medical and engineering
applications. Specifically, applications in medical sciences and technologies
range from computer tomography to diagnoses of diseases, applications in
environmental sciences include natural resources and pollution control via
satellite imaging, applications in art sciences have vision analysis and digital
restorations of cracked ancient paintings in digitized fine art museums and
applications in security identification include weapon, fingerprints and face
identifications. In these applications, a key issue is restorating images from
available data. This is an ill-posed problem. Solving this problem needs
advanced mathematical models and efficient computational algorithms. The main
objective of this proposal directly addresses this issue by proposing multiscale
total variation methods for integral equation models in image processing. The
projects in the proposal will enhance the integration of high level pure
mathematics with the contemporary digital and computer technology. These
projects will train graduate studetns in this important area to prepare them to
face the mathematical and computational challenge in future scientifical and
technological development. Moreover, th PIs will develop a multidisciplinary
course for upper level undergraduate students based on research results of these
projects.
