
* 0712925
* RUI: Adaptive Kernels for Partial Differential Equation Models in Image Denoising: Construction and Algorithms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2007,07/25/2007
* Jianzhong Wang,TX,Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 168,645.00

The investigator constructs adaptive kernels for diffusion PDE models in image
denoising and develops kernel-based denoising algorithms. An adaptive kernel is
a kernel that adaptively changes its kernel characteristics depending on the
image content within a local window. Discrete kernels are filters, which are
widely used in industrial image processing; and non-iterative filters can
realize the real-time denoising. The proposed adaptive kernels are mainly
derived from PDE models. Due to Rudin-Osher-Fatemi's influential work, there are
a considerable number of PDE models for image denoising. Based on the extensive
results in numerical analysis, highly accurate and stable algorithms have been
developed. However, most numerical PDE algorithms involve either iteration or
inverse matrices. They are time and/or memory consuming and therefore not
suitable for real-time pre-processing noise reduction. The investigator studies
the construction of adaptive kernels for some popular PDE models, designs
parametric adaptive filters from these kernels, and develops algorithms for
their implementations with emphasis on the extremely fast single-pass filter
process. The investigator creates the GUI software to perform noise reduction
based on the kernel-based algorithms, which provide a development kit suitable
for industrial demands. The infinitesimal method is the main tool for the
development of the adaptive kernels. He also applies Bayesian Decision Theory to
create the rule for the optimal selection of the parameters in the adaptive
filters, which are used to control the quality of noise reduction.

This research support the national interest in NANOTECHNOLOGY and INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY due to the demand for digital images/videos for low-cost security
cameras, mobile digital TV, cell-video phones, all of which are used for
HOMELAND SECURITY and DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE applications. The research also
impacts feature-preserve noise reduction techniques, which is on the rise. On-
line videos such as web-cams generally produce low-quality pictures. Even high-
quality digital cameras and camcorders used in low-light or artificial-light
environments produce noise. Feature-preserve noise reduction techniques provide
a low-cost solution for enhancing these low-quality images. There are many types
of software on the market for picture cleaning and computer enhancement, however
mobile videos and similar products require real-time processing that can be
built into the devices. The security demand for these techniques is very high,
especially in U.S. Border areas, while the number of solutions are low. This
project bridges the gulf between the highly developed theory and the
underdeveloped industrial applications.
