
* 0713812
* Novel Approaches to Empirical Force Field Models in Molecular Modeling via Multidimensional Scaling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2007,06/29/2007
* Robert Lewis,VA,College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Dalin Tang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 133,759.00

The project focuses on new computational methods for the determination of
biomolecular structure, which is crucial to our understanding of how
biomolecules such as proteins perform the functions they do. This functional
understanding, in turn, figures in the development of techniques for disease
diagnosis and treatment. A widely used approach to determining the structure of
biomolecules is the minimization of the molecule''s potential energy, computed
using a force-field model. The potential energy accounts for such features as
the stretching of bonds between atoms, the deformation of bond angles, and the
interactions of non-bonded atoms (e.g., electrostatic forces). Of interest are
molecular configurations that have very low potential energies, since
biomolecules fold themselves into shapes that tend to minimize the potential
energy: Nature is an optimizer. One seeks physically meaningful molecular
configurations by applying computational techniques to systematically vary the
locations of the atoms to reduce the potential energy. A serious difficulty
encountered when applying computational algorithms to energy minimization arises
when the search needs to move through configurations with high potential
energies on the way to configurations with low potential energies. For instance,
moving atoms close past one another increases the potential energy due to
repulsive forces. Minimization algorithms have difficulty dealing with this
situation since they cannot be sure in advance that allowing increases in
potential energy will ultimately lead to configurations with lower energy. As a
consequence, algorithms may halt at structures that minimize the potential
energy only among nearby configurations, but not overall, and are not of
physical interest. This project explores a new approach to address this
difficulty. We pose the problem in terms of the interatomic distances, rather
than the locations of the atoms, rewriting the potential energy in terms of
these distances. Roughly speaking, our approach corresponds to adding fictitious
copies of each atom, one for each of the other atoms. Of course, we must also
add conditions that ensure that all the fictitious copies of an atom ultimately
coalesce into a single atom. However, we use conditions that can be relaxed at
intermediate steps of the energy minimization process and are only enforced as
we approach a solution. This approach benefits from adding a large number of
extra dimensions to the search space. As an analogy, imagine a search for the
lowest point in North America, Death Valley, starting from Chicago. As purely
earthbound voyagers we might be fooled into stopping at a local low point at the
foot of the Rockies or around the Great Salt Lake, just as optimization
algorithms might halt at local energy minimizers. But if we relax the
requirement of traveling by land and allow travel by air, then we can pass over
local minimizers on the ground to arrive at the desired destination. Preliminary
tests have shown that our approach greatly improves the behavior of the more
notoriously troublesome energy terms. This project will investigate its use for
molecular structure determination and will examine extensions to other
applications such as drug docking and finding transition mechanisms for chemical
reactions.
