
* 0713256
* A Computational study of the spray characteristics of a liquid jet atomized by cross-flowing air
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,05/11/2007
* Mark Sussman,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2011
* USD 322,377.00

It is proposed to develop new numerical algorithms and mathematical models
predicting the breakup of liquid into droplets due to cross-flowing air and the
resulting gas-liquid mixture that follows. New numerical methods are proposed
which exploit large-aspect ratio computational elements. The investigator
together with two graduate students, shall develop new algorithms for including
the capability for large aspect ratio elements, as a part of a dynamic block-
structured adaptive mesh method. The study of large aspect ratio elements as a
part of an adaptive, unstructured grid framework has received significant
attention recently (albeit, not in the context of two-phase flows, as we propose
to study). In contrast, the study of moving mesh methods with large aspect ratio
elements, as a part of a block structured adaptive framework, has received very
little attention. An algorithm based on block structured adaptive mesh
refinement affords one the advantage of easy scalability in regard to parallel
computing, adoption of multigrid methodology and implementation of temporal sub-
cycling techniques. Numerical analysis issues regarding stability and
convergence of a numerical method when applied on a moving mesh, block
structured adaptive grid, shall be investigated. Also, algorithms defining the
motion of the moving mesh shall be investigated. It is important that the level
of skewness for the moving mesh can be controlled. Research developed in this
proposal can be applied to mathematical problems that exhibit moving boundary
layers, shock waves, ignition fronts, or sharp interfaces.

This proposal is concerned with the development of orders of magnitude faster
(100 times faster) numerical tools for the simulation of multiphase flow
problems as applicable to science and industry. These numerical tools shall be
specifically formulated for high-density ratio, high-shear flows at an
acceptable computational cost for engineering analysis of practical problems.
One immediate application of the proposed research is a jet-propulsion system in
which fuel injected as a liquid is atomized into spray by interaction with a gas
phase. Another application is the prediction of momentum and energy transfer in
the ocean due to hurricane force winds. In order to predict momentum and energy
transfer at the sea surface, one must take into account the sea spray generated
by the high speed winds. The ultimate benefits to society are reduced pollution,
increased engine efficiency, and improved hurricane predictive capability due to
a more accurate sea-spray parameterization. This proposal is motivated by
interactions between the PI and industry (e.g. UTRC). Success of this proposal
will not only have a direct impact on industrial applications relevant to
atomization type processes, but also a direct impact on any
industrial/scientific application of multiphase flow (e.g. navy ship
hydrodynamics, microfluidic applications for testing human serum, biological
fluid flows, nuclear reactor cooling systems, and underwater explosions). The PI
has ongoing collaborations with SAIC (ship hydrodynamics), Department of Applied
Chemistry at the Muroran Institute of Technology (non-newtonian multiphase flows
in chemical processing applications), the Center for Bio-Imaging and Modeling at
Rutgers University (CBIM, visualization and animation of multiphase flows), for
which all of these collaborations benefit from the proposed research on
simulating multiphase flows. The proposed research involves the participation of
graduate students; graduate students shall be trained on issues which are timely
and to which they have access to experts in the field.
