
* 0713836
* Rational Landen Transformations and Hurwitz Zeta Function: from theory to algorithms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/24/2007
* Victor Moll,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 219,999.00

.The problem of integration of rational functions was considered by J. Bernoulli
and Leibnitz in the 18th century. The main difficulty associated with this
procedure is to obtain a complete factorization of the denominator. The long
term goal of this project is to develop a complete solution to the problem of
definite integration in finite terms. This work will complement the work done by
Lazard, Rioboo, Risch and Trager in the case of indefinite integration. The
implementation of this solution will have a profound impact on the current
symbolic integrators. This project is an effort to investigate the mathematical
theory and algorithms associated with the symbolic evaluation of definite
integrals. Two classes of functions are considered: rational functions and
elementary functions of the Hurwitz zeta function. The work on rational
integrands centers around the rational Landen transformations developed by the
PI. The analysis and implementation of these transformations is complete for
definite integrals on the whole real line. We will concentrate on the finite
interval case. These transformations will be incorporated into an efficient and
robust symbolic algorithm for the evaluation of rational integrals, as well as
some simple extensions of this class.

Many problems in physics and engineering require the exact evaluation of
integrals in terms of the parameters appearing in those integrals. These
integrals come up in the study of particle physics and classical mechanics.
While it is not always possible to find such an expression, an efficient and
robust symbolic software package should give the result in closed form, or
decide whether such an expression is achievable. The goal of this project is to
develop algorithms that will expand upon the capabilities of existing software
packages that are widely used in industry and universities.
