
* 0713767
* New Models and Algorithms in Image Processing with Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,05/31/2007
* Selim Esedoglu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2011
* USD 257,360.00

The PI, together with his collaborators and students, will develop new models
and numerical algorithms for the solution of a number of fundamental problems in
image processing and computer vision. The models will be based on the calculus
of variations and partial differential equations (PDE) that describe curve and
surface evolutions. A main goal of the project will be to devise new models that
incorporate prior shape information into existing variational image segmentation
techniques such as the Mumford-Shah model and its variants. The new models will
be designed to find in given images objects resembling a specified shape
regardless of the objects' location and orientation in the image. In addition,
they will have convenient numerical implementations using techniques that have
already proven their utility in related vision applications, such as the level
set method. A second area of research will be to develop novel, efficient
numerical algorithms for the solution of PDE that arise in a number of computer
vision models and in other fields such as material science. Specifically, the
investigator will explore new computational techniques for the solution of high
order PDE that describe geometric motion of interfaces, such as the Willmore
flow and motion by surface diffusion. These evolutions are computationally very
expensive using current techniques. The new approach will be to reduce the
computation of these motions to alternating simple operations for which
efficient algorithms are already available. Also in this vein, the project will
develop new numerical algorithms inspired by models and techniques in image
processing for the computation of energy driven dynamics of multiple phases and
junctions.

Image segmentation is a fundamental procedure of computer vision. It is a
necessary preliminary step whenever useful information is to be extracted from
digital images automatically. Its goal is to identify parts of the image that
belong to distinct objects, often without knowing what objects might be present
in the image. In many practical applications, however, a specific object of
known shape is sought in the images. For example, in aerial imagery, the object
of interest might be a certain vehicle that has a distinctive outline. Or, in a
medical application, it might be desired to identify automatically the
individual vertebrae in x-ray images of the spine. It such settings, it would
help the success rate of the segmentation procedure if the algorithms could be
made aware of what is being sought. This project will develop models and
numerical techniques that incorporate prior shape information about objects of
interest into the segmentation process, thereby leading to better segmentation
methods.
