
* 0713012
* Novel Computational Methods for the Analysis, Synthesis and Simulation of Shapes of Surfaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,06/25/2010
* Washington Mio,FL,Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 667,981.00

The main goal of this project is to develop novel computational models and
strategies to analyze the shapes of spherical surfaces in Euclidean 3-space. In
recent years, there has been a substantial progress in the computational study
of shapes of curves with methodology based on the geometry of infinite-
dimensional spaces of curves. However, attempts to extend these approaches to
surfaces have encountered tall obstacles. In this project, an effective
computational solution is proposed that encompasses all fundamental aspects of
the problem. Shape spaces will be constructed equipped with geodesic metrics,
which will provide a natural environment for the quantitative study of shapes of
surfaces. A full set of computational tools will be designed and implemented to
quantify shape similarity and divergence, to develop statistical models from
samples, to synthesize shapes from learned models, and to analyze and simulate
shape dynamics. Techniques will be developed to convert a noisy point-cloud
representation of a surface of genus zero to a minimum-distortion
parametrization over the standard sphere. Alignment algorithms will be designed
to best match the geometric features of surfaces and to extract optimal
parametrizations for modeling a family of shapes. Riemannian metrics inherited
from weighted Sobolev spaces will capture geometric similarities and
discrepancies between shapes to any desired order. The project will focus on
first-order metrics, as they offer a good balance between geometric accuracy and
robustness for computations. Due to the typical complexity of the geometry of
surfaces, many algorithms will employ a coarse-to-fine approach both for the
processing of point clouds and triangular meshes. Localization of spherical
shapes in the frequency or spatio-temporal domains will also be employed for
statistical modeling and to achieve computational efficiency.

The proposed research on shapes and forms of 3D objects is motivated by a series
of problems arising in areas such as computer vision, medical imaging, and
computational biology. Shape is a key attribute associated with patterns arising
in geometric data and its effective computational representation and analysis
will have an impact on application domains such as the recognition of objects or
targets from various modalities of images, modeling brain anatomy and functions,
the simulation of biological growth and motion, and anatomical changes
associated with diseases and aging. As such, the proponents will make the tools
of shape modeling and analysis developed under this project available to the
broader research community and will also actively pursue collaborations with
researchers in these areas.


