
* 0713799
* Numerical Methods for Structured Polynomial Eigenvalue Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,07/10/2007
* Niloufer Mackey,MI,Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2010
* USD 177,681.00

Polynomial eigenproblems are playing an increasingly important role in
contemporary engineering design. Indeed, the computation of resonant frequencies
arising from extreme designs presents a real numerical challenge, as these
designs can lead to very large eigenproblems with poor conditioning. On the
other hand the underlying physics of such problems often leads to algebraically
structured polynomial eigenproblems, with concomitant symmetries in the spectrum
and special properties of the corresponding subspaces. Existing algorithms,
unfortunately, often ignore these structural properties. The types of structured
polynomial addressed in this project arise in a variety of applications:
T-palindromic (analysis of rail noise from high-speed trains, SAW filters),
*-palindromic (discrete-time optimal control), K-palindromic (differential delay
equations), alternating (corner singularities, gyroscopic systems, continuous-
time optimal control), and hyperbolic (overdamped mechanical systems).
Polynomial eigenproblems are usually solved by embedding the system into a
larger linear system called a ``linearization''. Until recently, the palette of
easily available linearizations has been very limited. Recent work, though, has
shown how to systematically construct a continuum of linearizations, from which
structure-preserving linearizations and linearizations with nearly optimal
conditioning can be chosen. This project aims to further this growing body of
work by developing algorithms that exploit these new theories, and in turn,
develop new theory and insight for the next generation of algorithms in this
critical area of scientific computation.

The problems studied in this proposal are ubiquitous in a wide range of
important problems in engineering and applied sciences. Numerical methods for
their solution are critical in structural mechanics, molecular dynamics,
vibrational analysis, the simulation of electrical circuits, elastic deformation
of anisotropic materials, and optical waveguide design, to give a few examples.
The trend towards extreme designs, such as high speed trains, optoelectronic
devices, micro-electromechanical systems, and ``superjumbo'' jets such as the
Airbus 380, presents a challenge for the computation of the resonant frequencies
of these structures. These extreme designs often lead to computationally
sensitive problems, while the physics of the underlying problem leads to
algebraic structure that numerical methods should preserve in order to obtain
physically meaningful results. The aim of this project is to increase our
theoretical understanding of mathematical transformations that preserve these
structures and thereby advance the development of computationally effective
algorithms. Consequently, this work will have direct benefit to scientists and
engineers across a wide range of disciplines.
