
* 0713872
* Computational Theory and Methods for Finding Multiple Solutions to Differential Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,08/04/2008
* Jianxin Zhou,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 221,270.00

Dr. Zhou, the principal investigator, proposes to develop computational theory
and methods for finding multiple unstable solutions to PDE (eigen) systems.
Multiple unstable solutions, lowly or highly, singly or multiply excited, to
many nonlinear systems have been observed with very different instabilities,
maneuverabilities and configurations. Hence they imply a variety of
applications. When multi-bodies (particles, molecules, species, etc.) are
involved in a system, they may interact with each other in many different ways,
such as strongly coupled vs. weakly coupled, cooperative vs. non-cooperative,
definite vs. strongly indefinite, variational vs. non-variational, etc. Thus
mathematically systems can be classified into many different types. Based on the
results obtained from the previous NSF funded project and several successful
preliminary investigations, the PI proposes a new game theory methodology that
treats each body in a system as a player. According to the interactions among
all bodies, two-level local optimization methods will be developed to solve
proposed problems and mathematical justification of those methods will be
established. Several important model problems in Bose-Einstein condensates,
nonlinear optics, biology and non-Darcian/Newtonian fluids/materials are
proposed to solve for testing the new theory and methods. The instability index
of unstable solutions is important information for application and thus will be
analyzed.

Unstable solutions appear only in a short time period, but may have much higher
performance index. They used to be considered too hard to catch by traditional
technologies or numerical algorithms and thus too difficult to apply. Thanks to
new technologies (synchrotronic, laser), scientists are now able to induce or
reach various unstable solutions and search for NEW applications, in particular,
in system design and control of EMERGENCY machineries for MISSION CRITICAL
SITUATIONS. So far, understanding of such solutions is still quite limited and
analytic solutions are too difficult to obtain. Thus, development of efficient
and reliable numerical methods to solve such problems for multiple solutions in
an order becomes very important to both research and applications. However,
there is no theory in literature to devise such a method. The outcome of this
project will (1) greatly enhance understanding of unstable solutions by
mathematical characterizations and lay a solid foundation for future study, (2)
provide efficient and reliable algorithms to compute multiple solutions so that
people can compare and then select the best one, and (3) promote new
applications with new solution configurations.
