
* 0713568
* Finite element exterior calculus and applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Douglas Arnold,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 298,564.00

The first step in simulating, understanding, predicting, and eventually
controlling a complex natural or man-made physical system, or even social
system, is often to model the system mathematically. For a wide variety of
systems--for example those based on solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, quantum
mechanics, electromagnetism, gravitation, acoustics, thermodynamics, certain
stochastic processes, and many others--the best mathematical models take the
form of a set of partial differential equations. For the complex modern
applications that arise in structural engineering, climatology, biology, or many
other fields, the resulting partial differential equations can only be solved
approximately using fast computers. The development of accurate algorithms to
approximately solve these equations on computers remains a tremendous challenge
as we tackle new and more complex applications. One of the greatest advances for
the computer solution of partial differential equations came in the past century
with the development of the finite element method, which has become an
indispensable tool for simulation of a wide variety of phenomena arising in
science and engineering. A tremendous asset of finite elements is that they not
only provide a methodology to develop numerical algorithms for simulation, but
also a theoretical framework in which to assess the accuracy of the computed
solutions. This project aims to develop new algorithms which extend the
applicability of the finite element method, and to develop new tools which allow
for better understanding of the performance of finite element algorithms, and,
in particular, allow precise certification of their accuracy. A particular
emphasis will be on the partial differential equations of elasticity, which
describe the deformation and possible fracture of a solid body subject to forces
like gravity, loading, and wind, and on the partial differential equations of
electromagnetism, which are used in a wide variety modeling situations involving
electric power transmission, transmission of light, radio waves, and magnetism.
But the framework considered will be quite general and the techniques will
extend to numerous other application areas.

Robust and reliable methods for solving the equations of elasticity are needed
in many industrial and engineering applications, especially in the most
challenging design applications, for example for aircraft, advanced buildings
and bridges, and offshore oil platforms. Recent design failures, some of them
catastrophic, have been traced to inadequate numerical algorithms for
elasticity. Similarly reliable methods for solving the equations of
electromagnetism are at the basis of much of modern technology. Thus this
project has the potential to contribute to national competitiveness and public
safety.
