
* 0713763
* Discontinuous Immersed Finite Element Methods for Interface Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,07/10/2007
* Tao Lin,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 153,000.00

Immersed finite element (IFE) methods have been developed to solve problems with
discontinuous coefficients and they are very competitive because of two
essential features: (1) they allow structured meshes and avoid mesh distortion
associated with Lagrangian and interface-tracking methods; (2) their basis
functions incorporate the interface jump conditions imposed by physics. The
objectives of this project are to combine IFE methods with the versatile
discontinuous Galerkin (DG) finite element methods to efficiently and accurately
capture solution discontinuities, simplify h and h-p adaptivity, and yield
efficient parallel methods for interface problems arising from modeling multi-
scale and multi-physics procedures in engineering and sciences. The PIs of this
project plan to construct and analyze DG methods with IFE spaces that attain
optimal or near optimal convergence rates under h and h-p refinement on meshes
not necessarily aligned with interfaces. The PIs plan to focus on three
representative types of boundary value problems with discontinuous coefficients
in two and three dimensions: (i) Second-order elliptic problems, (ii) Linear
elasticity systems and fourth-order equations for beams and plates, (iii)
Maxwell's equations. The PIs will investigate problems with linear and curved
interfaces on meshes consisting of triangles and quadrilaterals in two
dimensions, tetrahedrons and hexahedrons in three dimensions. The PIs will
perform error analysis and investigate the convergence of the IFE solution to
the true solution under h, p and h-p refinement. The PIs will also investigate
superconvergence properties of discontinuous IFE solutions and use these results
to construct efficient and reliable a-posteriori IFE error estimators for
assessing solution quality and guiding adaptivity.

Simulating a multi-scale/multi-physics phenomenon often involves a domain
consisting of different materials and leads to an interface problem consisting
of partial differential equations with discontinuous coefficients, boundary (and
initial) conditions, and jump conditions required by pertinent physics across
the material interfaces. It is well known that efficiently solving interface
problems is critical for numerical simulations in many applications of
engineering and sciences, including flow problems, electromagnetic problems,
shape/topology optimization problems, to name just a few. IFE methods are
competitive methods for solving interface problems and the methods developed in
the proposed research projects will have direct impacts on numerical simulations
in electric propulsion of plasma engine design/research, optimal packaging of
electronic devices, efficient and better image reconstruction in computer
tomography, polymer matrix carbon fiber reinforced composites and related
material technologies in aerospace and space structures, non-destructive/non-
invasive detection of suspicious materials in security check, design of optimal
shapes for lighter and stronger structures, and many other application areas of
great federal interests.
