
* 0713858
* A New Paradigm for Finite Difference Schemes on Adaptive Grids - Application to Free Surface Microfluidics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2007,05/29/2009
* Frederic Gibou,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2010
* USD 309,655.00

In this work, the investigator devises innovative computational methods for free
surface microfluidics in order to understand and control absorption and
evaporation processes in the sub-micron scale open channels, as well as to
understand how to efficiently control the effect of surface tension and
temperature profiles along the channels. In particular, efficient numerical
schemes on adaptive meshes are constructed in order to address the multiscale
nature of the problem and the limitations of computer resources. The
investigator introduces a new paradigm that allows the discretization of PDEs on
highly adaptive meshes as if the mesh was uniform, while attaining second-order
accuracy in the maximum norm. The numerical simulations are used to supplement
physical experiments in order to optimize the design of free surface fluidics
devices. The simulations take into account the temperature field in the liquid
and the surrounding channel walls, the temperature-induced variations in surface
tension, the subsequent surface tension driven flows in the transversal
direction of the main flow (Marangoni effect) and their effects on the transport
of airborne particles from the surface of the liquid to its bulk. Furthermore,
the simulations take the configuration of the whole air-liquid system into
account and determine the shape of the free surface in order to find a design
that maximizes contact between the air and the liquid surface for efficient
capture of airborne species.

In the past 15 years, significant advances have been made in using
micro/nanofluidic-based platforms for detecting chemical and biological agents.
However, all the `lab-on-a-chip' platforms reported in the literature can
process samples only after the samples are injected into a microchannel. This
longstanding technological and scientific barrier limits the viability of these
platforms for monitoring airborne species at time when the great importance of
this technology to national security issues has become clear. Free-surface
fluidics is an innovative technology pioneered by the investigator's
collaborators at UCSB which removes this barrier by enabling previously
impossible detection thresholds for certain trace airborne chemical agents and
pathogens. Airborne molecules can be directly absorbed through the free surface,
where they can interact with gold or silver colloidal particles and be detected
using Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. This platform could be used, for
example, for public safety in a variety of venues to detect explosives and toxic
chemicals, and for continuous monitoring of biological or chemical warfare
agents in air ventilation systems. In this work, the investigator devises
numerical methods in order to optimize the design of free-surface fluidic
devices and to better understand the physical phenomena involved. These methods
have an important impact on other fields as well, as they have key applications
in the fields of semi-conductor processing and in the energy industry, in bio-
nanotechnology and tissue engineering, in combustion as well as in the modeling
of tumor growth to name a few. In addition, the investigator develops a freely
available interactive web site on computational science and engineering which
guides the users through a computational science journey, exploring intriguing
topics such as microfluidics, crystal growth, single and multiphase flows. The
users have the possibility of further interactive exploration by altering
parameters to observe the effect on simulations, hence providing a tutorial on
computational science.
