
* 0713833
* Frontiers of finite element methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Jay Gopalakrishnan,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 162,901.00

Finite element methods (FEM) are an indispensable tool in the simulation of many
engineering devices and natural phenomena. The research proposed here aims to
expand the frontiers of FEM in various directions. The activities fall into four
categories. The first is a continuation of the activities pursued under previous
NSF support on hybridized finite element methods, which has resulted in a
paradigm shift in FEM design. The consequent new opportunities in designing
discretizations with exotic properties are explored. The second group of
activities is tailored to fundamental theoretical and practical issues in high-
order FEM. The third category deals with the analysis and construction of
mathematically sound FEM for axisymmetric problems. In the fourth category, a
number of modern applications in electromagnetics which can benefit from
combining other techniques with FEM are considered.

Broader impacts of the activities include many examples of specific engineering
applications which can potentially benefit, including simulation of nanophotonic
materials, design of antennas, engineering of devices for cardiac ablation, and
problems of interest to the petroleum industry like logging-while-drilling and
porous media flow. Such a range of applications can be considered because the
proposed research involves techniques of broad applicability. For example, the
research on hybridization techniques can be applied to many types of equations
representing various physical phenomena. Another theme of the proposed
activities is the design of efficient multilevel solvers for a wide range of
practical problems involving outgoing waves such as scattering and radiation.
The research on methods for axisymmetric problems can impact simulation of many
engineering devices such as coaxial cables, wave guides, and optical fibers. The
research activities on high-order methods touch upon questions that have
implications not only in applied mathematics, but also in pure mathematical
analysis.
