
* 0713670
* Dynamic Stability and Multiscale Computation of 3D Incompressible Flows.
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,07/10/2007
* Thomas Hou,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 313,830.00

The investigator and his colleagues study two fundamental problems in fluid
dynamics. The first one is the dynamic stability property of 3D incompressible
flows. The second one is to derive a systematic multiscale model to simulate the
long time solution of the 3D Navier-Stokes equations. The dynamic stability
property of the 3D incompressible Euler or Navier-Stokes equations plays a very
important role in our understanding of the fluid dynamic stability and dynamic
depletion of nonlinear vortex stretching. For a long time, many experts had
believed that the nonlinear vortex stretching term is mostly a destabilizing
term, which may lead to a finite time singularity of the 3D Euler or Navier-
Stokes equations with a smooth initial condition. In this proposal, the
investigator proposes a new strategy to study the dynamic stability of fluid
flows by exploiting the anisotropic scaling of the singular support and the
local solution structure. Furthermore, the investigator proposes a new
multiscale model for the 3D Navier-Stokes equations by using a
reparameterization of the solution in the frequency space and a nested
multiscale expansion with a multiscale phase function. Careful numerical
experiments will be performed to validate the multiscale model against direct
numerical simulations and study the statistical properties of turbulent flows
using the proposed multiscale model.

Many fascinating natural phenomena such as tornadoes, hurricanes, typhoons, and
tsunami waves are governed by the Navier-Stokes equations. The understanding of
the solution behavior of the Navier-Stokes equations and the development of
efficient computational methods to simulate their solutions have a tremendous
impact in improving the national technology and for the well-being of the
society. The advances in the proposed research could potentially improve the
ability in weather forecasting, studying environmental change, and in predicting
natural disasters. The proposed study on the dynamic stability and dynamic
depletion of vortex stretching could lead to important insights on the large
time behavior of the incompressible flows. This is one of the major open
problems in physics and science. A systematic multiscale analysis could lead to
a new generation of multiscale computational method to simulate turbulent flows,
with potential for great impact throughout science and technology. An additional
impact of this project will be the involvement of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows. The proposed research provides a solid training in
mathematical analysis, physical modeling and numerical simulation. The
interdisciplinary training they receive in this project will be very important
for careers in mathematics and science.
