
* 0713815
* Fully Locally Conservative Characteristic Methods for Transport Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATH PRIORITY SOLICITATION, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2007,08/24/2007
* Todd Arbogast,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 258,529.00

The transport of a chemical tracer within an ambient fluid (such as a
contaminant in groundwater), can be approximated by Eulerian-Lagrangian
numerical methods. These methods conserve tracer mass locally, but not the mass
of the ambient fluid. They therefore compute inaccurate densities, which can
seriously degrade the quality of the solution over time. The PI and coworker
recently defined the Volume Corrected Characteristics-Mixed Method (VCCMM) for
the simplest transport problem, by considering the transport problem not as a
single hyperbolic equation for the tracer, but rather as a system of two
equations describing the motion of both the tracer and ambient fluids, each of
which must be conserved locally. This project will: (1) Complete the development
of VCCMM, by placing it on a sound theoretical footing and developing a parallel
version of the software; (2) Improve and extend VCCMM to more complex flows; (3)
Develop a grid adapted version; and (4) Develop methods for nonlinear transport
problems, including miscible, compressible flows, and two-phase, immiscible
flows, for which the solution may contain shocks and rarefactions. The project
is expected to result in significant improvement in the approximation of
transport problems for long time simulation, because the discrete approximation
will have less numerical diffusion and preserve important physical principles.
The project is expected to have broader impacts, including: (1) Developing a
scientific software tool that can be applied to a wide range of practical
problems; (2) The training of one Ph.D. student in a multidisciplinary
environment; and (3) Societal benefits by allowing better modeling of, e.g.,
geologic basin formation, long-lived radio-isotope decay, miscible fingering,
and two-phase flows.

The ability to predict the movement of a chemical specie, called a tracer,
within another, ambient fluid is important in many applications. For example,
the need arises in ground-water contaminant migration studies. This project
investigates ways to improve the prediction of tracer transport through computer
simulation. State-of-the-art numerical algorithms of Lagrangian type simulate
tracer transport by explicitly calculating the movement of individual particles
within small regions of space. Tracer mass is conserved, meaning that no mass is
artificially created or destroyed by the numerical calculations. This is a
critical property for studies involving, e.g., contaminants, since even small
concentrations can be toxic to humans, and any creation or degradation of the
tracer must be due to physical and chemical processes and not to numerical
artifacts. However, Lagrangian methods do not conserve the mass of the ambient
fluid. This results in inaccurate tracer densities. That is, although tracer
mass is conserved, its concentration is incorrectly computed, which can lead to
serious inaccuracies in reaction dynamics and degradation in the predicted
movement over time. The approach taken by the PI to resolve these difficulties
is to consider the transport of both the tracer and ambient fluids, each of
which must be conserved. The research is expected to result in significant
improvement in the approximation of transport problems for long time simulation,
and the training of at least one Ph.D. student in a multidisciplinary
environment. This work has potential societal benefits as applied to problems in
the contamination of ground-water, petroleum and natural gas production, and CO2
sequestration.
