
* 0713097
* The Reproducing Singularity and Polynomial Particle Shape Functions for Meshless Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/23/2007
* Hae-Soo Oh,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 86,498.00

Meshless methods such as Reproducing Kernel Particle method (RKPM) and Partition
of Unity Finite Element Method (PUFEM), are much more effective than the
conventional FEM. However, these methods have the following limitations: (1) the
constructions of Reproducing Kernel Particle (RKP) Shape functions are
complicate. The partition of unity (PU) functions is essential in PUFEM and the
popular Shepard PU functions are generally complicated rational functions. Thus,
Meshless methods require a lengthy computing time for reasonable accuracy; (2)
RKPM and PUFEM have difficulties in dealing with essential boundary conditions.
To compensate for these limitations, the PI constructed the highly regular
piecewise polynomial Reproducing Polynomial Particle (RPP) shape functions that
satisfy the Kronecker delta property. Furthermore, he also constructed simple
piecewise polynomial PU functions for arbitrary partitioned patches.
Nevertheless, the RPP shape functions are not very practical if the solution
contains singularities (such as crack singularity). To deal with singularities
in the framework of Meshless Methods, the PI introduced the Reproducing
Singularity Particle (RSP) shape functions for two dimensional singularity
problems. Now, the PI proposes to extend his two dimensional RPP and RSP shape
functions to the three dimensional cases for three dimensional singularity
problems.

The annual cost of fracture-related damage in the United States is an
astronomical amount. Metal fatigue has been cited as the probable cause of
several recent airline accidents and the bridge collapses. Moreover, the safety
of aging bridges and airliners is a national concern. Material failures are a
major concern for other engineering structures (nuclear power plants,
hydroelectric dams, etc). Thus, for effective inspection and preventive
maintenance programs, an accurate fracture analysis is needed. The proposed
research is to provide accurate stress analysis of cracked materials. These
analyses are essential for precise estimates of three dimensional crack
propagation in materials. Practically, the results of the proposed research will
be applicable to the effective maintenance of aging bridges, off-shore oil
platforms, and numerous other engineering applications where structural
integrity should be closely monitored. Ultimately, this research will have
direct impacts on the safety of the public and the environment.


