
* 0713743
* Research Experience in Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations with Singularities
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Victor Nistor,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dalin Tang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 44,963.00

Computational methods are used in almost any area in which computers are used.
Improved numerical and computational methods are one of the main venues to
improve the speed of modern computer applications. The "Finite Element Method"
is a very popular numerical method that is used by engineers, physicists,
biologists, meteorologists, in financial mathematics, and in many other areas.
More concretely, the finite element method is used in the study of heat
propagation, radar detection, medical imaging, structural analysis of buildings,
design of aircraft wings, and in many other practical problems.

The first step in the use of the Finite Element Method is to fictitiously divide
the domain to be studied (the domain occupied by a building, aircraft, body to
be imaged) into many small triangles, parallelepipeds, or tetrahedra. This is to
a large extent an elementary task, but very time-consuming. Moreover, additional
care has to be paid close to the vertices and the edges of the domain. Without
this additional extra care in the way we divide our domain, obtaining the
desired precision in calculations would take much longer. For example, some
recent results in which the Principal Investigator is also involved lead to the
estimate that, for a precision of three exact digits, a careful division
procedure can decrease the time of calculation by one million times or more. For
a precision of five exact digits, the estimated improvement is one trillion
times or more.

While the mathematical techniques to decide the shape of the improved divisions
of the computational domain are quite sophisticated (anisotropic mesh
refinement, elliptic partial differential equations, non-compact manifolds,
functional analysis), once such a division algorithm has been formulated, it can
be taught to a good beginning undergraduate student. The main purpose of this
proposal is to train undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the-art
Finite Element Method techniques (including, but not limited to, anisotropic
mesh refinement, a priori and adaptive mesh refinement, meshless methods, and
multigrid methods for solving the resulting linear systems). The more advanced
the students, the more opportunities they will be given to learn about the inner
workings of these methods. Each of the students involved will be expected to
produce original research at their corresponding level of mathematical training.
The resulting training of the students will provide the necessary numerical
experience needed by the students, by the Principal Investigator, and by others
to conduct cutting-edge research in the future. Another important quality of the
Finite Element Method is that it can be taught to students with a very wide
scale of mathematical backgrounds and hence sophistication. As such, by training
more people with various backgrounds to use such methods and to do research on
them, it is expected, based on previous experience, that a wider range of
students, including underrepresented groups, will be attracted to mathematical
research.
