
* 0713848
* Fast and Accurate High Dimensional Function Approximation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,07/07/2009
* Fred Hickernell,IL,Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 243,999.00

This research will develop computational methods to approximate functions of
many variables based on function values which may be contaminated by noise. The
focus will be on kernel-based methods, such as radial basis function methods,
smoothing splines, regression splines and moving least squares methods. Non-
isotropic kernels, space filling designs, and new convergence proofs will be
used to make these methods practical in higher dimensions. Fast transform and
iterative algorithms will be developed to reduce the computational burden of
kernel methods. Both computational and statistical approaches will be brought to
bear on this problem. The theoretical development will provide practitioners
insight into how the quality of the designs (sample points) affects the accuracy
of approximation. The algorithms developed will be published as software
packages for widespread use.

In this information age there is an abundance of data generated from
instrumental measurements and computer simulations. Strategic corporate planning
and profitable product design both rely on accurate mathematical models to
describe this data. As the numbers of observations and variables increase,
existing methods for computing the best models fail to capture the complex
relationships and fail to compute an answer in a reasonable amount of time. This
research will develop a new generation of computational methods for modeling
data that overcome these drawbacks. These new methods will make our
manufacturing industry more competitive by facilitating more rapid prototyping
of products, and they will enable our service industry to assess and respond
more quickly to changing markets.
