
* 0713125
* New Approaches in Solving Saddle Point Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,06/17/2009
* Constantin Bacuta,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2010
* USD 118,086.00

This research project provides a plan for the development, analysis, and
implementation of faster and more efficient computational methods for partial
differential equations (PDEs), including second-order elliptic problems, Stokes
and Navier-Stokes systems, elasticity problems, and Maxwell's equations. PDEs
have applications to many fields such as mathematics, physics, chemistry,
biology, and engineering. The new methods for solving Stokes and Navier-Stokes
systems will contribute to modeling flow problems of increasing size and
complexity, e.g., modeling the air flow near a plane or modeling the flow near
immersible objects. The new approach for Maxwell's equations has practical
applications to photonics in computing modes for devices and in radar
scattering.

The research will focus on two areas: solving saddle-point problems and
discretization on non-matching grids. To build new and efficient algorithms, the
PI will combine his new ideas on solving saddle-point problems with already
known methods from distinctive fields of numerical analysis such as iterative
methods, multilevel methods, and adaptive methods for elliptic PDEs. The main
technique will be based on the new spectral results for saddle-point systems
found by the PI. The proposed work for solving saddle-point systems has
scientific and technical applications in optimization, optimal control,
computational fluid dynamics, linear elasticity, electromagnetism, electrical
networks, linear models in statistics, and image restoration. A second area of
research will be to investigate multilevel discretizations and multilevel
preconditioning techniques in the context of discretizations on nonmatching
grids based on the Partition of Unity method. The applications are to modeling
fluid and gas flow near complex objects and fluid flow in porous media.
