
* 0713807
* Tight Wavelet Frames for Data Compression
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/22/2007
* Ming-Jun Lai,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2010
* USD 215,855.00

The investigator and his colleague study the problem how to use tight wavelet
frames for image/data compression. They have related the problem to many useful
equivalent problems such as compressed sensing, cryptography, error correcting
codes, in-painting or recovery of lost data, and consistent recovery from
quantized expansions so that the ideas and mathematical techniques from the
equivalent problems can be borrowed to study the image/data compression based on
tight wavelet frames. They will use the method of virtual components, finite
state machine, new variations of orthogonal greedy algorithm, lp optimization
with p between 0 and 1, and harmonic frames to tackle the data compression
problem. Preliminary results show that they are very promising. An ultimate goal
of the proposed research is to build flexible methods for constructing
multivariate tight wavelet frames with required properties for data compression
and make them available for applications.

Images and data compression is absolutely necessary for internet, multimedia
communication, and data storage/transmission. Fifteen years ago, FBI established
a standard using a wavelet function to compress all finger prints for storage
and processing. Tight wavelet frames are more flexible to construct than
orthonormal wavelet functions. The investigator and his colleague will study how
to use tight wavelet frames for image and data compression. The expected
scientific results will enable better understanding how to find the most sparse
representation of data in redundant linear systems. The results will have
immediate impact on the modern design of communication systems like mobile
telephony, digital camera, and digital broadcasting as well as on the methods of
multimedia data compact representation.
