
* 0713771
* Hierarchical and Calderon Regularization of Time Domain Integral Equations for Electromagnetics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,07/10/2007
* Eric Michielssen,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2011
* USD 248,040.00

Marching on in time (MOT)-based time domain integral equation (TDIE) solvers
provide an appealing avenue for analyzing transient electromagnetic interactions
with large and complex structures. Unfortunately, these solvers often suffer
from temporal (low-frequency) and spatial (dense-mesh) breakdown phenomena when
applied to the analysis of low- to medium-frequency electromagnetic transients
on geometrically intricate and multiscale structures, thereby preventing their
application to many important scientific and engineering problems. This project
seeks the development of new plane wave time domain-accelerated, regularized
MOT-TDIE solvers that are immune to temporal and spatial breakdown phenomena.
The proposed techniques eliminate temporal and spatial breakdown phenomena in
MOT-TDIE solvers by leveraging hierarchical basis functions and new time domain
Calderon identities, respectively. In addition, they guaranty low-frequency
stability in MOT-TDIE solvers by exploiting the spectral properties of the
Calderon regularizer. MOT-TDIE solvers resulting from this effort will permit
the fast analysis of low- to medium-frequency electromagnetic transients on
geometrically intricate and mixed-scale structures. The educational objective of
this project is to develop a comprehensive set of educational materials
supporting a course covering all aspects of fast MOT-TDIE technology and to use
them in teaching and outreach.

The development of fast and higher-order accurate MOT-TDIE solvers that robustly
and seamlessly apply across spatial and temporal scales will permit the analysis
of a wide class of scientific and real-world electromagnetic engineering
problems that are intractable using present day methods. Given their grid-robust
nature, the electromagnetic simulators resulting from this effort will permit
optical scientists to rigorously analyze transient effects in nonlinear and
disordered metamaterials and nanostructures without resorting to homogenization
approximations, thereby creating a new avenue for controlling and directing the
flow and electromagnetic waves and light in fibers and on chips. In addition,
they will allow electronic engineers to design digital integrated circuits and
RF wireless sensors without resorting to ad-hoc spatial decomposition methods,
thereby resulting in significant savings in development time and costs. And
finally, they will permit automotive and aerospace engineers to appropriately
protect their designs from unwanted electromagnetic interference, thereby
improving safety and impacting national security by reducing the threat of
remotely generated system upsets.
