
* 0713718
* A 3D implicit immersed boundary method with application
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/22/2007
* Luoding Zhu,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2010
* USD 193,484.00

The investigator studies a 3D implicit immersed boundary (IB) method and its
parallel implementation with applications. The IB method has been widely used to
simulate problems involving interactions of an elastic structure and an
incompressible viscous fluid. Because of the attractive relative simplicity of
an explicit IB method numerous explicit versions of the method have been used in
practice. However, an explicit IB method has a drawback: the time-step size must
be small to maintain numerical stability of the immersed solid boundary which is
not economical in computational cost, especially for three dimensional problems.
The investigator develops a 3D implicit IB method by implementing an implicit
scheme for computing forces imparted by the immersed boundary to the fluid and
for updating the solid boundary configuration. Because the mixed Lagrangian and
Eulerian descriptions of the fundamental variables and their complicated
interconnections, a highly nonlinear algebraic system of equations has to be
solved for each time step to advance the solution. In order to reduce the
complexity of the 3D implicit IB method and to facilitate its parallel
implementation, the lattice Boltzmann method (the D3Q19 model) is used to solve
the incompressible viscous Navier-Stokes equations. In addition, The
investigator studies an efficient preconditioner based on inherent properties of
the problem for expediting the solution of the nonlinear algebraic system of
equations. The investigator applies the new implicit IB method to investigate
the drag reduction process associated with a flexible sheet of finite thickness
immersed in a flowing viscous fluid. The objective is to develop scaling laws
for drag with respect to oncoming flow speed, Reynolds number, dimensionless
bending modulus and dimensionless mass density. More advanced applications
include modeling and simulation of the primary cilia and the endothelial surface
layer interacting with viscous moving fluids.

Nature is very rich in problems involving interactions of a flexible body and a
fluid (e.g., a flapping flag in the air). Such interactions underlie a wide
range of phenomena in science and engineering which are very complicated and not
yet well understood. The investigator studies a numerical method for
investigating the fluid-flexible-body-interaction through large-scale scientific
computing using modern supercomputers. The method is applicable to many
important problems in science and biomedical engineering. One immediate
application is study of drag reduction induced by body flexibility. The major
energy expense for underwater propulsion is used for overcoming the resistance
(drag) of ambient fluid. One aim of a hydrodynamic design is to reduce the drag
experienced by an immersed body (e.g. a vehicle). Reduced drag means improved
propulsion efficiency and lowered energy cost. The investigator's study may
inspire genesis and development of novel designs of underwater propelling
technologies with improved efficiency and increased speed. More sophisticated
applications include modeling and simulations of the primary cilia of the
epithelial cells interacting with the moving viscous fluid in the kidney
tubules, which is related to the polycystic kidney disease, and studying the
genesis of atherosclerosis (leading cause of heart attacks and stokes) in which
blood flow with transport and reacting constituents interacting with a compliant
vessel wall covered by an endothelial surface layer. Such applications may lead
to greater understandings of the polycystic kidney disease and the
atherosclerosis.
