
* 0714050
* Multi-scale, Geometrical Study of Eddy-structure in Turbulence
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,07/10/2007
* Dale Pullin,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2011
* USD 207,460.00

The investigator and his students work to develop a new computational-
mathematical framework for the identification and characterization of eddy-like
structures in turbulence. The general methodology consists of a multi-scale
analysis of a turbulence volume data set followed by the eduction of structures
of interest and their geometrical characterization. The multi-scale analysis is
performed through the curvelet transform. The eduction of structures is achieved
by isocontouring the volume data sets for different scales. The geometrical
characterization is based on the probability density functions of shape index
and curvedness, in terms of area coverage,associated with each structure. This
allows a global characterization of the set of structures as well as the study
and comparison of relevant groups of structures contained within this set. The
investigator has already developed the basic framework which has been subjected
to validation testing based on reproducing the geometrical character of a
synthetic ``virtual turbulence''. The work is presently focused on studying the
geometrical structure of scalar turbulence obtained from 512^3 direct-numerical
simulation in a periodic cube. Further development is in progress to refine and
improve this framework at the extraction and classification levels in order to
better adapt it to the properties of turbulence data bases. The methodology is
also being applied to the 256^3, 512^3 and 1024^3 data sets of the same
turbulence image (at three different resolutions) provided by K. Horiuti (Nagoya
Japan). Turbulent fields under study include the scalar dissipation and
quantities derivable from velocity gradients such as vorticity, invariants of
the velocity-gradient tensor, functions of these quantities that identify local,
vorticity-dominant regions, and functionals of the pressure. The methodology
will also be applied to non-homogeneous turbulent fields such as those obtained
from turbulent channel flow.

From the time of Leonardo Da Vinci, who crafted detailed images of eddying
fluid flow, the to present era of enhanced computer graphics and the
visualization of natural phenomena, there has been an ongoing fascination with
both characterizing and understanding the natural geometry of turbulent fluid
flow. But despite intense study, the structure and morphology of turbulent
eddies remains elusive. A better understanding of this structure should both
elucidate one of nature's profound mysteries and at the same time provide a firm
basis for the development of improved predictive models for turbulent fluid flow
for application to many diverse areas of science and engineering ranging from
the galactic scale, through solar-system dynamics, star formation and stellar
interior dynamics, the solar wind, climate modeling of planet earth, to
environmental fluid dynamics and industrial and engineering applications. The
present research is motivated by the recent availability of high-fidelity data
bases representing very detailed and realistic turbulent flow fields obtained
from intensive computer simulation. The investigator and his students combine
novel pattern-recognition techniques from the field of computer science with new
applied-mathematical methods based on ``multi-scale'' analysis, to study these
data. The significance of this work is that it will provide a new methodology
for analysing the underlying geometrical structure and content of extremely
large, turbulent fluid-flow data fields. The computer codes developed in this
research will be made openly available, with documentation through publications
in thesis dissertations and in archival journals. This should allow potential
users to apply the modeling methodologies developed in this work to large data
bases obtained from both numerical-simulation and experiment. Applications
beyond fluid flows, to any set of continuous fields, are envisioned.
