
* 0714193
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Aspects for Wave Propagation Inverse Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/28/2007
* William Symes,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 99,829.00

Many natural materials exhibit structural heterogeneity across a wide range of
scales. Examples of such media with microstructure include virtually every part
of the Earth's crust, and manufactured composite materials such as concrete.
These materials also support wave motion, and various technologies have evolved
which use propagating waves for nondestructive interogation of material
structure. In their present state, these technologies (reflection seismology,
ultrasonic nondestructive evaluation, etc) are for the most part based on
theoretical understanding and computational methods developed for waves in
homogeneous (or near-homogeneous) materials. This divide between theoretical
basis and application context is bridged to some extent by effective medium
theories which attempt to express at macroscopic scales the effect of
microscopic heterogeneities. However rigorous justification of the effective
medium approach is largely limited to periodic material models, which do not
resemble disordered materials such as sedimentary rock. This study will attempt
to leverage recent advances in the simulation of acoustic and elastic waves in
media with microstructure to assess the feasibility of explaining simulated
experimental data by means of simpler models without microstructure. These
models may exhibit physical characteristics not present on the microscopic
scale, for instance viscous loss or anisotropic response. Our approach combines
various numerial simulation methods, including numerical upscaling, for
computing waves in highly heterogeneous models, with inversion or parameter
estimation to determine macroscopic models. The proposed work will rely upon a
previously developed computational framework for inversion.

For scientists to be able to produce oil and gas, to predict earthquakes and
other tectonic events such as tsunamis, to safely remediate contaminants, and to
bury excess greenhouse gases underground, they must first be able to image the
earth's subsurface. Rock layers, fluids, and faults need to be mapped and their
depths and lateral extent understood. To create an image of the subsurface,
energy is sent into the ground which generates a wave. The heterogeneous nature
of the subsurface causes a portion of these waves to be sent back to the surface
where seismometers (microphones) record the waves as they pass. From these
signals scientists try to infer the structure of the subsurface. This inference
is enormously complicated by the very complex mechanical nature of rock, which
is composed of microscopic grain particles in a porous lattice. The physical
characteristics of these tiny constituents and the fluids within the pores
combine in a complex and poorly understood way to yield the observable response
of the Earth. In our previous work, we have devised methods to simulate
propagation of waves through complex microscopically structured material, and
also procedures to determine the macroscopic material descriptions from
observable data. This proposal envisions the fusion of these two lines of work
and could shed light on which aspects of subsurface structure can, or can't, be
inferred from seismic recordings.
