
* 0715121
* Fast and accurate numerical algorithms for boundary value problems of elliptic partial differential equations on open surfaces in three dimensions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,07/10/2007
* Shidong Jiang,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2009
* USD 68,326.00

The focus of the proposed work is directed toward the development of fast,
accurate, and robust computational techniques for solving large-scale scattering
problems when the scattering surfaces consist of a collection of open surfaces
(i.e., surfaces with boundary). Though such problems are often initially
formulated as boundary-value problems of elliptic partial differential
equations, integral equations have been employed as one of principal tools for
the numerical solution of scattering problems, particularly for exterior
problems. Historically, most of the integral equations used have been of the
first kind, since numerical instabilities associated with such equations have
not been critically important for the relatively small-scale problems that could
be handled at the time. The combination of improved hardware with the recent
progress in the design of "fast" algorithms has changed the situation
dramatically. Condition numbers of systems of linear algebraic equations
resulting from the discretization of integral equations of potential theory have
become critical, and the simplest way to limit such condition numbers is by
starting with second-kind integral equations. Hence, there is increasing
interest in reducing scattering problems to systems of second-kind integral
equations on the boundaries of scatterers.

The investigator proposed to apply tools from potential theory and singular
integrals to construct second-kind integral-equation (SKIE) formulations for
open-surface problems (especially for those whose governing PDEs are the Laplace
or Helmholtz equations). After SKIE formulations have been obtained, the
investigator plans to apply them to develop and implement efficient and accurate
numerical algorithms for open-surface problems, using a combination of iterative
solvers and the fast multipole method. Since the Laplace equation and the
Helmholtz equation are ubiquitous in applied mathematics and many practical
problems involve open surfaces, the proposed research will have broad impacts on
many active research fields including acoustic and electromagnetic scattering
problems, fluid mechanics, elasticity problems, and inverse-scattering problems.
The proposed research is also expected to have long-term impacts on key
technologies such as reflecting antennas and integrated circuits.
