
* 0715060
* Reconstruction algorithms for inverse obstacle problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2007,09/14/2009
* William Rundell,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 296,083.00

Many parameters of physical interest cannot be studied directly. Examples
include: imaging the interior of the body or locating buried objects;
determining the location and size of cracks within solid objects; reconstructing
material parameters such as the conductivity of interior regions. When these
problems are translated into mathematical terms they take the form of partial
differential equations. However, since we have additional unknowns in the model,
these introduce unknown parameters in the equations that we must additionally
resolve by means of further measurements. A central theme of the proposal is the
question of when a unique determination can be made (what is the minimal amount
of data needed) as well as the design of algorithms for the efficient numerical
recovery of the unknowns. This proposal considers the practical and
computational aspects of this from a mathematical perspective. Specific problems
addressed include the recovery of the location, shape, and material properties
of interior objects from surface measurements. In such inverse problems two
things must always be understood. First, the reconstructions will be extremely
sensitive to small changes in the data, this is inherent in the underlying
physics; in mathematical terms these are highly ill-conditioned problems
containing both analytical and computational complexity. Second, the available
data is always subject to error. However, we may know a model for the data error
such as, for example, its mean and variance. This proposal seeks a formulation
that will allow us to provide similar information on the geometry of the
obstacle - namely a quantitative assessment of the ranges of reconstructions one
could expect with a given level of data error. This would allow us to assign a
probability that a particular feature would be identifiable or that, say, the
volume of the object is greater than a given value.

The proposal has a range of broader impacts.These include not only the breadth
of applications to science and engineering covered by these inverse problems,
but there is an important training aspect involved. Specifically, many of the
problems have simplified versions where both the experimental apparatus needed
as well as some of the corresponding reconstruction algorithms are within reach
of advanced undergraduates. This will enable a wider audience to gain an
understanding of both the challenges and possible solutions to these ubiquitous
but complex problems.
