
* 0715125
* AMC-SS: Multiscale Methods for Many-Particle Stochastic Systems: Coarse-Graining and Microscopic Reconstruction
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2007,07/18/2007
* Markos Katsoulakis,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 336,172.00

Problems in diverse areas of scientific, technological, and societal relevance,
ranging from the development of novel materials to understanding fundamental
biological mechanisms to weather and climate prediction, are intrinsically
multi-scale. In essence this means that information at very small spatial and
temporal scales, for instance properties and motions of atoms or molecules, can
profoundly impact intermediate- and large-scale behavior, such as the
permeability of a membrane or the viscosity of a fluid. From a modeling and
computational perspective, small spatiotemporal scales can be described in
detail with microscopic models such as Molecular Dynamics or Monte Carlo methods
that typically account for atomistic and/or molecular information. On the other
hand, understanding large-scale, macroscopic properties of materials requires
simulations with microscopic systems at prohibitively large spatial (e.g. 10^23
atoms), as well as temporal scales. One such example arises in the design of
novel materials with pre-specified properties, where numerical simulations--when
feasible--could be used as a flexible and inexpensive predictive tool. An
important class of computational tools that has been developed in recent years,
precisely to bridge such scales gaps by speeding up microscopic simulation
methods, is the method of coarse-graining. The idea of this approach is to
reduce the molecular system''s complexity by lumping together degrees of freedom
into coarse-grained variables, thus yielding an accelerated simulation
methodology. Such coarse-grained models have been developed for the study and
simulation of micro-reactors (e.g., portable energy sources), polymers,
proteins, and bio-fluids (e.g., red-cell flow in small blood vessels), among
others. Existing approaches can give unprecedented speed-ups to molecular
simulations and can work well in certain parameter regimes, such as high
temperatures. On the other hand, they can also give wrong predictions on
important features such as diffusion, crystallization, and phase transitions.
Along these lines, a relevant mathematical and statistical goal to numerous
applications, such as the ones mentioned earlier, is to develop systematic
diagnostics for determining when coarse-graining methods can give reliable
predictions, and how they can be further enhanced. Indeed, in our proposed work
we intend to carry out two related main tasks: (a) understand the validity
regimes of existing coarse-graining methods by developing a mathematical and
statistical error quantification analysis; and (b) develop improved algorithms
capable of operating in much wider parameter regimes, with the capacity to
automatically adjust once substantial deviations are detected during simulation.
In our proposed work, we plan to develop novel multi-scale mathematical and
computational methods, bringing together diverse techniques from probability
theory, statistical mechanics, information theory, statistics, and finite
elements. A critical component of the proposed work relies on the synergy
between applied mathematics and statistics methods, operating in a complementary
fashion, that can provide a mathematically systematic framework for developing
flexible and reliable coarse-graining algorithms for molecular simulations.
