
* 0715135
* Collaborative Research: Finite Element Methods for Discretizing Geometric PDEs with Nonlinear Constraints and Gauge Freedom
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2007,09/19/2008
* Donald Estep,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2011
* USD 146,581.00

This project is concerned with the approximate solution of certain systems of
evolution partial differential equations (PDE) arising at the intersection of
mathematical physics and geometric analysis. Such systems of equations, known as
Geometric PDE, with both constraints and gauge degrees of freedom, appear in a
wide range of physical and mathematical problems; examples include Maxwell's
equations (or more generally the Yang-Mills equations on a curved background),
and Einstein's field equations and other Hamiltonian systems with an infinite-
dimensional symmetry group. The Cauchy formulation for such systems yields a
constrained evolution system which has to be augmented with gauge-fixing
conditions in order to get a unique evolution vector field. The project will
involve constructing finite element discretizations for solving such geometric
PDE systems; various techniques for dealing with evolution systems with
constraints will be analyzed, including constraint-projection using variational
techniques (where the numerical solution is projected back to the constraint
manifold after some number of time steps), the use of special finite elements
which automatically solve the linearized constraints and thereby remain on a
piecewise-linear approximation to the constraint manifold, and finally least-
squares approaches which only control the constraints rather than enforce them.
In particular, stability results guaranteeing convergence of the numerical
solution to the continuum solution will be derived, at least for the linearized
equations. A posteriori error estimates will be derived for studying properties
of the discretizations, and for building adaptive methods.

This project involves the design, development, and implementation of new
mathematical and computational techniques for solving a large class of
important, challenging, and pressing mathematical problems in multiscale and
multiphysics modeling and simulation. The techniques developed will lead to the
aquisition of new knowledge in areas of science such as relatistic astrophysics,
by making possible more reliable and accurate simulations of phenomena such as
gravitational collapse, nonlinear stability of deformed rotating black holes,
binary black hole collision, and the production and emission of gravitational
radiation. Most of these problems are currently of great interest due to the
recent construction of gravitational wave detectors such as the NSF-funded LIGO
devices in Lousiana and Washington. The results from this project will have a
broad impact on areas of mathematics such as geometric analysis, as well as in
astrophysics and general relativity. The methods developed here will contribute
to the advancement of numerical methods for complex three-dimensional
constrained nonlinear dynamical simulations, and the technology produced will
provide powerful tools for the exploration of models in astrophysics and
relativity as well as in some areas of pure mathematics such as geometric
analysis.
