
* 0721585
* CMG COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Development of New Statistical Learning Theory and Techniques for Improvement of Convection Parameterization in Climate Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG, MATHEMATICAL GEOSCIENCES
* 10/01/2007,09/05/2007
* Michael Fox-Rabinovitz,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 351,863.00

This proposal focuses upon two interconnected and equally important problems.
The first of them is developing a new Statistical Learning Theory (SLT)
dedicated to modeling specific complex systems. The second one is to develop a
new convection representation for numerical climate models. Understanding
climate and weather is important to science, society and the economy. The
processes we focus upon (clouds, and particularly convection) are critical to
climate and weather. The proposal involves a novel approach to improving the
representation of those processes. Our goal is to combine a team of mathematical
scientists with expertise in SLT, and atmospheric scientists with expertise in
cloud modeling and climate system modeling to produce an innovative
representation for convection in the atmospheric models used for numerical
weather prediction and climate change studies. The project will develop an SLT
system that emulates the statistical behavior of a more realistic but very
expensive high resolution Cloud System Resolving Model (CSRM) in a variety of
cloud regimes. Employing even the simplest of these CSRM frameworks in a large
scale model increases the cost of today?s atmospheric models by factors of
thousands, which make their use impractical for many studies. By emulating the
behavior of these more realistic frameworks in a large scale model we develop a
new SLT parameterization, dramatically reducing the cost of the more realistic
representations of model convection, and providing an opportunity to address
problems currently viewed as critical within the scientific community. By
developing the application-oriented SLTs we hope to make the more realistic
cloud and convective formulations currently being explored, computationally
feasible and use them in climate models. This proposal combines research used in
the computational statistics scientific community with climate science. One of
the most important components of the climate system is the representation of
clouds. They control many aspects of the energy and heat that enter and leave
the climate system, and they interact with many components of the earth system
(agriculture, weather, society, and the economy). But clouds are so complex that
they can not be treated very precisely in models that are used for understanding
climate and weather. The equations required to represent clouds are so complex
that a precise treatment would slow down current models by factors of thousands
or millions. Current computational climate and weather models cannot afford a
precise representation of clouds so faster approximate treatments of clouds are
needed. Traditional representations for clouds in climate and weather models are
not sufficiently accurate, and progress has been slow in improving these model
components. This proposal employs advanced statistical-mathematical methods to
try and improve the situation. These methods (called Statistical Learning Theory
or SLT) allow one to represent very complex systems with accurate, and very fast
approximations. We are going to try to approximate very detailed, complex and
expensive models of convective clouds using SLT to produce an accurate
approximation for clouds with the goal of using this approximation (these
approximations are frequently called a parameterization in climate and weather
models). This research will push forward the knowledge base used in both the SLT
community, and the climate community.
