
* 0724331
* CMG Research: Constraints on the Earth's thermal history and probing the geomagnetic field beneath the core-mantle boundary using nonlinear inversions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG, MATHEMATICAL GEOSCIENCES
* 10/01/2007,09/11/2007
* Glenn Ierley,CA,University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 244,359.00

Current thinking on the Earth's thermal history is marked by notable
controversies on the age of the inner core and whether core radiogenic heating
is required in order to maintain the magnetic field. A key factor in this
balance is the power required to drive the geodynamo, dissipated internally as
heat. Present estimates, primarily based on numerical dynamo simulations
operating far from the relevant parameter range, vary significantly. The aim of
this project is to constrain the Earth's thermal history by finding rigorous
lower bounds for the dissipation of the present field. Building on an existing
bound based on constraints from observation and models for the Earth's nutation,
the proposed addition of the Taylor constraint will impose a significant
dynamical restriction long known to be appropriate for the core field. If the
resulting bound is sufficiently increased, then contentious scenarios for the
lifetime of the inner core without radiogenic heating may well be excluded.
Further, this variational formulation exposes some intriguing mathematical
issues germane to consideration of the geodynamo as a dynamical system. The
optimal fields resulting will be both three-dimensional and time-dependent and
thus for the first time give evidence of whether or not the large body of recent
observationally-derived findings of large-scale surface features are really
representative of the internal field.

Large scale computer simulation has fundamentally altered the way in which
science is done. Yet for all the numerous advances, many of the most demanding
computations in the area of geophysical fluid dynamics require that key
properties, notably viscosity (the fluid "thickness"), be set to artificially
high values. The effects of this adjustment on the numerical results are poorly
understood and will remain so short of a better theory of turbulence than any
presently in prospect. The so-called variational methods outlined in this
proposal will both complement and critique numerical simulations of the Earth's
dynamo. The results do not rely on artificial parameterizations and their
interpretation as providing a bound on heat generated by the dynamo process is
thus entirely rigorous. Key to this work will be a collaborative effort to link
extensive long term observational data with a mathematically appropriate and
numerically tractable formulation of the problem.
