
* 0733051
* Sparse Representations and High-Dimensional Geometry, Conference
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/28/2007
* Jared Tanner,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2008
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supplies funds to cover shared local accommodations and meals for
approximately fifteen US based junior researchers to attend the 2007 AMS von
Neumann Symposium "Sparse Representation and High-Dimensional Geometry" being
held from July 8th through the 12th, 2007. Junior researcher is defined as a
graduate student, or researcher who has received their PhD. during or after
2002. This conference is the first major conference in the USA dedicated to the
emerging topic of sparse approximation and as such is expected to play an
important role in the development of a cohesive research community. With its
relationship to fundamental questions in pure mathematics as well as important
implications for information acquisition, sparse approximation has received a
great deal of interest from both mathematicians and engineers. The conference
will be focused around the themes of: fundamental frameworks for where sparsity
is present and can be exploited, application areas and practical considerations,
the underlying high-dimensional geometric phenomenon allowing for sparse
approximation algorithms to work, the design and analysis of computationally
efficient algorithms, and presentations of application results. The conference
is truly interdisciplinary, including participants from google and other
industries, theoretical mathematicians studying banach spaces, and leading
electrical engineers.

This grant supplies funds to allow approximately fifteen US based junior
researchers to attend the first conference in the USA dedicated to sparse
approximation; for details of this conference see
"www.ams.org/meetings/vonneumann07.html." This topic concerns the development of
mathematical tools to simplify large data sets, through the construction of good
approximations which are as parsimonious as the data allows. These tools are
increasingly important in the modern scientific environment characterized by
ever larger data sets. Applications already under investigation include dynamic
visualizations of the human beating heart, next generation circuit components
for wireless communications, and faster sequencing of biological micro-arrays.
Funds from this grant will allow for the rapid training of early stage
researchers in this topic, increasing the rate and quality of expected advances
in both its theory and application.
