
* 0741471
* Large Scale Random Systems: Stochastic Partial Differential Equations and Random Matrix Theory
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2007,10/24/2008
* Toufic Suidan,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 97,545.00

The investigator studies two topics: statistical hydrodynamics, and various
combinatorial models with their connections to random matrix theory. With regard
to infinite dimensional stochastic equations and statistical hydrodynamics, the
investigator focuses on three questions. The first concerns the structure of
typical solutions for nonlinear stochastic partial differential equations such
as the two-dimensional stochastic Navier-Stokes equations and the stochastic
Burgers equation. The second concerns the uniqueness of steady states for
inviscid randomly forced equations on unbounded domains. The third concerns the
mechanism of energy transfer from high to low modes in stochastically forced
formally conservative systems. For each of these questions new analytic
approaches and new phenomena have been described. A goal of this work is to more
completely analyze these phenomena. In combinatorics, growth models, and random
matrix theory the investigator studies basic questions of Gaussian Orthogonal
Ensemble (GOE) random matrix theory, focusing on the connection of symmetrized
combinatorial models to limiting distributions of the Gaussian orthogonal
ensemble. The questions considered include problems of random tiling that arise
in physics, polynuclear growth models that arise in the study of random
interfaces, and percolation models that arise in condensed matter physics and
electrical engineering. A goal of the work is to prove new central limit
theorems in the context of GOE random matrix theory.

Understanding the small-scale structure of stochastically forced hydrodynamic
equations is related to turbulence theory and statistical mechanics. The small-
scale structure of solutions is of both theoretical and experimental importance.
It is this structure that matters in turbulent flows arising in many concrete
problems of aerodynamics and fluid mechanics. The particular questiuons studied
here contribute to the current understanding of this small-scale structure. It
has recently become clear that random matrix theory techniques answer a wide
range of questions in a variety of seemingly unrelated fields. Essentially,
random matrix theory affords a model that captures the fluctuations of many
distinct processes. The questions studied in this project widen this class of
problems and processes and improve the current understanding of the various
phenomena that lead to random matrix statistics.
