
* 0753111
* New numerical techniques for non-Newtonian flow simulations and their application to modelling of complex flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,10/15/2007
* Young-Ju Lee,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2010
* USD 82,726.00

The research of the investigator is on the timely study of the fluid dynamics of
non-Newtonian fluid flows. The investigator will examine systematically the
design and development of an efficient computational modelling package that can
handle various macroscopic models of complex fluids and also a wide spectrum of
physical parameters that have been elusive for conventional numerical methods.
In addition to general algorithmic developments including the fast solution
method like the multigrid methods, the investigator aims to study and understand
proper mathematical models for a great variety of new physical phenomena arising
in the area of experimental rheology. In particular, the investigator will
tackle an important challenge of modelling a continual oscillation of falling
sphere in worm-like micellar fluid flows. In contrast to the Newtonian fluid or
the polymeric fluids, the falling sphere in a worm-like micellar fluid undergoes
a continual and sustained oscillation as it falls. This part of the project will
involve testing various macroscopic models that are relevant for the worm-like
micellar fluids and will lead to identification of the right mathematical models
for a falling sphere experiment. The investigator will also address a
mathematical foundation for the so-called high Weissenberg number problem.
Despite recent significant progress, the successful computations are still
confined to very restrictive size of the Weissenberg number for a large class of
non-Newtonian fluid models including the well-known Oldroyd-B model. The
investigator will implement the new numerical methods for the computer
simulations of highly elastic fluid flows, namely, models with high Weissenberg
number to simulate and understand another newly observed intriguing physical
phenomenon, the elastic turbulence.

Fluids comprised of large macromolecules, known as non-Newtonian fluids or
complex fluids, can generate many new physical phenomenon. Examples of non-
Newtonian fluids can be found throughout our daily lives, including molten
plastics, engine oils with polymeric additives, paints, and many biological
fluids such as egg white and blood. The design, implementation, and the use of
numerical methods for the computer simulation of such physical phenomena
requires full grasp of non-Newtonian fluids and the results of the
investigator's research are expected to have significant applications, for
example in industry. Namely, a polymer engineer could perform elaborate Computer
Aided Design (CAD) studies in which the link between the molecular architecture
of the raw material and the final properties of the product would be
established, at least qualitatively. Production problems would be predicted and
partially overcome through improved design. One could also think of using an on-
line computational rheology model in concert with appropriate control algorithms
to provide for intelligent, physics-based process control techniques. There are
many more opportunities that the investigator's research results could generate.
