
* 0802609
* Computational Methods and Software for Structured Multiscale Models of Tumor Invasion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2007,10/17/2007
* Bruce Ayati,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2009
* USD 61,507.00

The investigator and student propose to develop computational methods and
software to solve systems of partial differential equations that arise in
multiscale models of tumor invasion. The behavior of these systems depends not
only on time and space, but also on physiological traits such as size or age.
The methods decouple time from the physiological variables. In doing so they,
unlike previous methods, prevent the often fine-resolution time discretization
from infl ating the number of nodes in the physiological variables.
Collaboration with cancer biologists is a critical component of this research
plan. The software will be developed and used in the context of models developed
and parameterized with cancer biologists at Vanderbilt University, with the
expectation that they will have a significant and near-term impact on
understanding the mechanisms of tumor invasion. This collaboration is also vital
to ensure the relevance and usefulness of the methods and software; methods
developed in an application vacuum tend to lack utility.

The investigator and his student propose the development of computer software
and algorithms -- the mathematical rules that determine how the software works
-- to study how cancer tumors, in middle and later stages of their development,
invade nearby tissue. In particular, the software will handle the complicated
situation where the different genetic profiles of the multitudes of individual
cells within a tumor, and the different stages in the cell-division cycle of
each of these cells, are linked to the physically larger complete tumor. This is
important, for example, in studying the overall effects of chemotherapy when
using drugs that affect cells differently depending on their genetic type or
what part of the cell-division cycle they are in. The mathematics behind the
algorithms in this proposal are significantly more advanced than what came
before, resulting in software that can be used effectively with the computers of
today and the near future. An important part of this research proposal is the
collaboration between the investigators and colleagues in mathematics and cancer
biology at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, TN, and at the University of
Dundee in Scotland.
