
* 0809189
* Wave Turbulence: Computational and Theoretical Investigations of a Story Far From Over
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,08/20/2008
* Alan Newell,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 150,000.00

Wave Turbulence is about understanding the long time statistical behavior of
solutions of weakly nonlinear field equations describing a sea of random waves.
The weak nonlinearity allows one to obtain a natural closure of the BBGKY
hierarchy of the Fourier space moment equations which includes a kinetic
equation which describes how the wavenumber density is redistributed throughout
the spectrum by resonances. These equations have especially relevant finite flux
solutions (Kolmogorov-Zakharov or KZ) which capture how conserved densities such
as energy flow from sources to sinks. What makes Wave Turbulence an open problem
is that these KZ solutions are almost never uniformly valid at all scales and so
one is left with the challenge of finding out what happens in the regions of
wavenumber space where they break down. The work in this proposal continues the
authors' efforts to fill in these missing gaps and to make the theory complete.
This is not an easy task because once breakdown occurs, the new states may
contain strongly nonlinear coherent structures. In particular, we are working on
the problem of condensation and whitecap formation.

Wave turbulence is about understanding the statistics of systems of waves.
Imagine the sea surface after a storm. There are waves of all wavelengths,
travelling in all directions. It is absolutely remarkable that one can, over a
large range of scales, say what the longtime energy spectrum looks like. The
energy spectrum is a graph showing how much energy there is in waves of
different lengths and different directions. Even though the initial graph may
reflect how the sea is first excited, the sea, because of resonances between
waves of different wavelengths and directions, relaxes to a statistically steady
universal state called the Kolmogorov-Zakharov or KZ spectrum. But not quite. If
the storm is strong enough, at the smaller scales, the statistics of the sea
surface is not described by the KZ spectrum. In fact, an observer will see that
the more stormy the sea is, the higher the density of whitecaps (locally
breaking waves which combine air and water into a frothy emulsion). The
challenge is to find out what replaces the KZ spectrum at these small scales. We
are developing a new theory of this behavior. In connection with this work, we
are also interested in a phenomenon which has been known by mariners for
centuries but which only now is being studied, the sudden emergence of freak
waves in an otherwise relatively placid sea
