
* 0809285
* Optimal Cross Parameterizations of Surfaces: Computational Methods and Scientific Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 12/01/2007,05/28/2008
* Xiangmin Jiao,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 225,574.00

Mesh-based computations, such as finite-element or finite-volume analysis, are
important for a wide range of scientific and engineering applications, ranging
from the design of aircrafts and rockets to the understanding of cardiovascular
disease. Many modern computational problems involve two or more surfaces or
multiple discretizations (such as meshes) of a common surface and require
correlating and cross-parameterizing these surfaces to analyze, match,
manipulate, or map data between them. Examples include non-conforming domain
decomposition, multiphysics simulations, analysis of biomedical images, shape
matching, and shape retrieval. The problem of robust cross-parameterization of
surfaces is challenging, because in many practical situations the domains do not
match well and some major discrepancies (such as singularities and topological
changes) may occur in numerical simulations as well as in the physical world.
Most existing methods used in practice often assume the distances between
corresponding points are at a local minimum. They do not offer theoretical
guarantees, may produce inaccurate and even unstable results in the presence of
singularities or large discrepancies, and do not offer the accuracy and physical
meaningfulness required by scientific and engineering applications. Addressing
these problems in a consistent and robust manner is critical for high-fidelity
numerical simulations of complex systems and other related applications.

In this project, we will devise and analyze a general and unified framework for
optimal cross-parameterizations of surfaces and deliver this enabling technology
to those numerical applications. Our framework will be based on efficient
solutions of variational problems motivated by careful analysis of the accuracy
and stability requirements of the underlying physical and numerical
applications. Unlike most existing methods, our framework will construct cross-
parameterizations directly on curved surfaces without intermediate
parameterizations on a template surface, and thus will avoid those spurious
sources of numerical errors. We emphasize theoretical foundations for optimal
cross-parameterizations, efficient and robust algorithms for static and dynamic
surfaces, and applications such as medical imaging, mesh optimization, and
manifold learning.
