
* 0810113
* Computational Methods for Heteroepitaxial Growth, Grain Boundary Motion, and High Frequency Wave Propagation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,04/16/2010
* Peter Smereka,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 256,429.00

This proposal involves three projects. The first concerns modeling and efficient
simulation of heteroepitaxial growth using kinetic Monte Carlo and will build
from prior NSF support which resulted in the development of a Fourier multigrid
method for the fast solution of discrete elastic equations for complex
geometries. This work will be extended to develop methods for obtaining
inexpensive upper bonds on rates, the use of local computations for elastic
equations, and the inclusion of intermixing of multiple species. The second
project involves the simulation of grain boundary motion in two and three
dimensions using a recently developed multiphase variational level set framework
which allows one to systematically deduce level set equations for a network of
grains moving under curvature flow. We plan to extend this formulation to allow
the simulation of thousands of seeds by using only a few level set functions.
The efficient computation of high frequency wave propagation and the semi-
classical limit of the Schrodinger equation is the third project. The proposed
algorithm is based on the observation that most of the time, in these limiting
regimes, the solutions are very localized in the wavenumber domain. This can be
exploited by solving the equations in this domain using a fast local
convolution. It is planned to update the solutions by the computation of the
matrix exponential using a Krylov subspace approach.

Each of the proposed projects has the potential to have a significant impact on
problems that are both fundamental and technologically important.
Heteroepitaxial growth is scientifically interesting since it has effects on
both nanoscales and mesoscales. It is technologically relevant since quantum dot
materials are made in this way. Our proposed techniques will greatly increase
the simulation speed thereby facilitating model development. The study of grain
boundary motion using curvature flow is a classic problem in applied and
computational mathematics which has importance in material s cience. Since there
are no robust simulations of a large number grains in three dimensions the
proposed project should have significant impact. The efficient computation of
high frequency wave propagation has important facets ranging from antenna design
to seismic sensing. On the other hand, fast simulation of the semi-classical
limit of the Schrodinger equation could provide deeper insight into chemical
reaction dynamics, molecular-surface scattering, and photodissociation, for
example.
