
* 0810602
* The optimization and control of flexible propulsors in inviscid fluids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2008,08/11/2008
* Silas Alben,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 152,000.00

The investigator will study five fundamental and interrelated problems dealing
with the motions of flapping appendages in inviscid fluids. The first project is
a study of the large-amplitude flapping of a rigid plate which sheds vortex
sheets into an oncoming fluid. This study will build on the method developed by
the proposer for computing the coupled motions of vortex sheets and a flexible
flag to consider leading-edge vortices and their interactions with a body and
with trailing-edge vortices. The second problem is an improved understanding of
how to approximate the spatial complexity of vortex sheets computationally, in
settings of vortex-vortex and vortex-body interactions. These approximations
will consist of truncations of the multipole expansion of the velocity field
induced by vortex sheets. The third project is a study of the optimal
flexibility for propulsion, in simple situations modelling two-dimensional
motions of fish fins. The work ranges from analysis of linearized solutions to
computational solutions of the full system of nonlinear singular
integrodifferential equations. The fourth problem considers the mechanics of
flexible fins in more detail, through a constrained optimization of a fin ray
model. The constraints will be chosen with both the relevant scientific
questions and the well-posedness of the optimization problem in mind. The fifth
project considers how to control and stabilize the fin ray using our
understanding of the mechanics underlying actual fish fins. This effort requires
finding optimal target trajectories when the fin stiffness is varied
periodically in time, and stabilizing the target trajectories against undesired
excitations from body-vortex coupling.

The project will develop methods to answer questions of broad biological
interest about swimming with fish fins and other flexible locomotory structures.
The project will also improve the quantitative understanding of strategies for
propulsion which can be readily assimilated into theoretical engineering fields
concerning how solids and fluids interact. Applications to propulsion technology
include improving the efficiency and maneuverability of submersible vehicles.
