
* 0810104
* New numerical methods for Hamilton-Jacobi equations, Gaussian beams, and kinetic inverse problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2008
* Jianliang Qian,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 170,576.00

The investigator, with his students and collaborators, develops novel and
efficient numerical methods for Hamilton-Jacobi equations, Gaussian beams, and
kinetic inverse problems. Hamilton-Jacobi equations arise from seismic wave
propagation, geometrical optics, optimal control, traveltime tomography, medical
imaging, computer vision, and material sciences. His previous works range from
fast sweeping methods for Hamilton-Jacobi equations on triangulated meshes,
level-set based Eulerian geometrical optics, to fast numerical methods for
traveltime tomography. These successful works lead him to develop more powerful
numerical methods for these equations and incorporate these new numerical
methods into seismic modeling and inversion, as well as other possible
applications. Problems under consideration include developing Legendre-transform
based fast sweeping methods for stationary Hamilton-Jacobi equations on
triangulated meshes, developing fast algorithms for kinetic inverse problems
based on discretizing eikonal equations on triangulated meshes, developing fast
algorithms for geodesic X-ray transforms in kinetic inverse problems, developing
Eulerian Gaussian beams for high frequency waves, and developing Eulerian
Gaussian beam methods for semi-classical quantum mechanics. This investigation
advances the state-of-the-art in numerical methods for Hamilton-Jacobi
equations, high frequency wave propagation and kinetic inverse problems.

These fields and applications are of great strategic value in the US petroleum
industry, in the medical imaging, and in material sciences and nanotechnology.
The current surge in price for crude oil and other earth resources increasingly
demands better imaging techniques in exploration seismology. The increasing
amount of data in global and exploration seismology requires more sophisticated
mathematical models. The techniques developed as part of this project will
provide crucial tools for the development of the next-generation seismic imaging
tools that enable substantial cost savings in seismic explorations and expedite
routine data processing.
