
* 0810862
* Approximation of Matrix Functions: Theory, Algorithms, and Software
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2008,06/30/2008
* Michele Benzi,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 229,481.00

This project has two main goals. One goal is to provide rigorous mathematical
foundations for a wide array of techniques developed by physicists, chemists,
and other scientists over the last 10-15 years to perform computer simulations
in fields ranging from theoretical chemistry and molecular physics to data
mining and statistics. A common theme in these areas is the need to quickly
compute approximations of functions of large and sparse matrices (such as the
exponential, the square root, the logarithm, and combinations thereof).
Scientists have had some success using a combination of physical intuition and
heuristics, but rigorous justifications and analysis are still lacking and are
sorely needed. On the other hand, computational mathematicians have until now
devoted scant attention to these types of problems. The present project
addresses this need. The main conceptual tool is a theory of localization, in
the form of decay bounds, that the PI has been developing in recent years.

Another goal is to construct better (i.e., faster and more accurate) algorithms
to compute the desired approximations. The PI will devote considerable effort to
this objective, in particular using various types of polynomial approximations
(interpolation, Chebyshev, Faber, etc). The resulting software will be
distributed to interested parties.

The ultimate goal of research in computational mathematics is to provide
scientists and engineers the algorithmic and software tools needed for the
solution of challenging scientific and technical problems of increasing size and
complexity. The competitiveness of American science and technology greatly
benefits from (and to a large extent depends on) the creation of innovative
computational methods and software and from the continuous improvement of
existing techniques. Progress in the solution of the problems targeted by the PI
will have a positive impact on science and engineering by enabling faster and
more detailed computer simulations. In addition, several graduate students (and
possibly a few undergraduates) will be impacted by this research either through
direct involvement, or through the positive effects this research will have on
the PI's teaching of computational and applied mathematics courses at Emory
University.
