
* 0810958
* Numerical Algorithms for the Detection and Simulation of Surface Water Waves
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG
* 07/01/2008,08/02/2009
* David Nicholls,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 155,140.00

The generation, propagation, and energetic transport of ocean waves play a
crucial role in many technologies including near-shore watercraft navigation,
the design of deep-sea oil-drilling rigs, and the generation and propagation of
tsunamis. However, the fundamental technologies for the remote detection and
measurement of these nonlinear waves are based upon the scattering of linear
acoustic or electromagnetic radiation from the surface or bulk of the fluid. Not
surprisingly, the state-of-the-art in theory, approximation, and numerical
simulation of these two disparate wave phenomena is quite different. In this
proposal the Principal Investigator (PI) advocates the development of a unified
computational approach to these two problems with the goal of producing a set of
highly accurate, stable, and error-controllable numerical algorithms for the
detection, simulation, and evaluation of waves on the surface of large bodies of
water. Over the past ten years the PI has developed a set of stable, high-
accuracy Boundary Perturbation (BP) algorithms for the study of both traveling
ocean waves and scattering returns from irregularly shaped obstacles. These BP
algorithms each involve an independent perturbation parameter and the PI
proposes to investigate a strategy of coupling these two disparate algorithms by
linking these parameters, thus realizing huge computational savings.
Additionally, the PI proposes to significantly extend and improve existing BP
algorithms for the simulation of linear waves in the high-frequency regime. In
short, the Geometric Optics solution points the way to a solution Ansatz which
can be represented with a frequency-independent number of unknowns. The PI, in
collaboration with F. Reitich, has demonstrated how this Ansatz coupled to
classical BP methods can be used to compute high-frequency scattering returns
from shallow surfaces with enormous computational savings. In this proposal the
PI advocates the further development of these algorithms to incorporate the
scenario of multiple reflections.

The generation and propagation properties of ocean waves are crucial in many
technologies including watercraft navigation, design of deep-sea oil-drilling
rigs, and the study of tsunamis. However, the methods for the measurement of
these nonlinear ocean waves are based upon the scattering of linear acoustic or
electromagnetic radiation. The state-of-the-art in both the theory and practice
of these two disparate wave phenomena is quite different. In this proposal the
Principal Investigator (PI) advocates the development of a unified approach to
the computation of these two problems with the goal of producing a set of
reliable and accurate numerical algorithms for the detection and simulation of
ocean waves. This will involve the PI bringing together two separate threads of
his research program to implement this unified approach. Additionally, he will
need to expand the capabilities of his algorithms to account for the highly
oscillatory character of the linear waves which arise in these applications. The
latter task will be particularly challenging and is the current focus of a great
deal of research by both civilian and military agencies.
