
* 0811025
* A New Real-Space Finite Element Method to Solve the Kohn-Sham Equations of Density Functional Theory
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2008,09/16/2008
* Natarajan Sukumar,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2011
* USD 48,000.00

First principles (ab initio) quantum mechanical simulations based on Kohn-Sham
density functional theory (DFT) are a vital component of modern materials
research. The parameter free, quantum mechanical nature of the theory
facilitates both fundamental understanding and robust predictions across the
gamut of materials systems, from metallic actinides to insulating organics.
However, the solution of the equations of DFT (coupled Schrodinger and Poisson
equations) is a formidable task and this has severely limited the range of
materials systems that can be investigated by such rigorous, quantum mechanical
means. Current state-of-the-art approaches for DFT calculations extend to more
complex problems by adding more grid points (finite-difference methods) or basis
functions (planewave and finite-element methods) without regard to the nature of
the complexity, leading to substantial inefficiencies in the treatment of highly
inhomogeneous systems such as those involving first-row, transition-metal or
actinide atoms. This project will overcome this basic limitation of current
approaches by employing partition-of-unity techniques in finite-element analysis
to build the known atomic physics into the solution process, thus substantially
reducing the degrees of freedom required and increasing the size of problems
that can be addressed.

The electronic structure and fundamental properties (mechanical, electrical,
magnetic, and optical) of materials are obtained via efficient and accurate
solutions of the equations of density functional theory. By virtue of its
generality, the proposed partition-of-unity finite element method for
electronic-structure calculations has the potential to change the way the
largest, most complex quantum mechanical calculations are done, thereby paving
the way for new applications in metallic, biological, and nanostructural
materials that were not possible before. The external collaboration with Dr.
John Pask at LLNL will lead to the development of an optimized, fully self-
consistent implementation, well-suited to large-scale parallel computational
platforms. This collaboration greatly strengthens the likelihood of maximum
impact with the realization of faster computational times on complex
simulations, such as melting of d- and f-electron systems, equation of state
studies, and structure and energetics of defects in new materials.
