
* 0811046
* Galerkin Lattice Boltzmann Methods for Direct Simulation of Liquid Slip on Superhydrophobic Surfaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2008
* Taehun Lee,NY,CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 181,200.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop an unstructured lattice
Boltzmann method (LBM) based on the Galerkin formulation (GLBM) for the direct
simulation of liquid slip on superhydrophobic surfaces and identify important
design factors that maximize the effective slip under practical conditions. The
large effective slip on superhydrophobic surfaces is expected due to the sizable
difference in viscosity between liquid and gas that is trapped in the
nanostructures. A successful numerical model should be able to deal with complex
shape of superhydrophobic surfaces and large viscosity difference between
fluids. The proposed two-phase GLBM on the unstructured mesh will overcome
several undesirable properties inherent to the LBM on the structured mesh as a
modeling tool for superhydrophobic surfaces; namely, instability at large
density/viscosity difference and geometrical restriction imposed by the mesh. It
will enable investigation of detailed flow physics on superhydrophobic surfaces
covered with complex nanostructures. The proposed research is to: (1) Develop
GLBM for immiscible two phase flows having a large density and viscosity ratio,
using implicit time marching on unstructured mesh; (2) Establish appropriate
boundary conditions at the liquid-solid-gas boundary based on the minimization
of the free energy and incorporate them into GLBM framework; (3) Examine the
physics of continuous and dispersed (droplets) liquid flows on superhydrophobic
surfaces with complex nanostructures; and (4) Find the optimum profile and
distribution of nanostructures for the maximum superhydrophobicity and effective
slip.

Superhydrophobic surfaces are of great interest in many industrial and
biological applications, because properties such as anti-sticking, anti-
contamination, and self-cleaning are expected. When a droplet rolls over a
contamination, it collects the particles from the surface and the contaminant
particles are removed from the surface. In microfluidic and biomedical
applications, superhydrophobic surfaces reduce the hydrodynamic drag at the
wall, and prevent cross-contamination of one drop by another one moving on the
same surface. The proposed research explores a new modeling capability that
could significantly change existing approaches to designing microfluidic devices
and help prescreen design alternatives reducing the design cost. The research
experience acquired from the proposed project will also enhance the course
materials for the advanced computational fluid dynamics courses.
