
* 0811002
* Experimental and Theoretical Approaches for Efficient Tree Distance Algorithms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS (TF)
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2008
* Sean Cleary,NY,CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 120,989.00

This project has involves research on several fronts in binary trees and
algorithms for their efficient use. Rotations are small changes to binary tree
structures used in balancing and optimizing search trees for efficient
searching. The rotation distance between two trees is the minimal number of such
small changes required to transform one tree into another. There are no known
algorithms for computing rotation distances effectively, and even precise bounds
on rotation distance are difficult to obtain. This project develops methods for
improving understanding of rotation distances and algorithms for computing or
estimating them. This research involves experiments to understand the general
properties of rotation distances, as well as developing abstract methods for
describing rotation distances based upon connections between rotation distances
and geometric methods in group theory.

This project seeks to improve methods and understanding of binary trees and
relevant algorithms. Binary trees are a fundamental structure, underlying
efficient storage of data sets for quick retrieval of items. The amount of data
routinely used in modern scientific and engineering settings is often
staggeringly large. Biological data sets, for example, are often gigabytes of
data. When working with large data sets, the efficiency of methods used to
analyze the data is of crucial importance- many questions which are immediate
for small data sets are far beyond the capability of even today's most powerful
computers for even moderate-sized data sets. Careful organization of large data
sets is essential for productive investigation


