
* 0811197
* Fast and Accurate Integral Equation Solvers for Mixed-scale Electromagnetic Simulation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS (TF)
* 07/15/2008,07/09/2008
* Shanker Balasubramaniam,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 231,022.00

In the electromagnetic simulation of realistic structures, the spatial
representation of the domain being analyzed depends not only on the frequency of
interest but also on the need to capture possible fine geometric features. Such
mixed scales cause havoc in standard integral equation based solvers on three
fronts; (i) discretized integral equations become poorly conditioned as the size
of the element becomes smaller, (ii) the function spaces used do not optimally
represent the underlying physics, and (iii) the overall computational burden is
exceedingly large. This largely limits the applicability of the existing
methods. The proposed project seeks to develop a demonstrably unified, robust
and accurate solution methodology that is well conditioned over a wide range of
frequencies and, at the same time, has the flexibility to handle complicated
(and possibly near singular) geometries. This is achieved by (i) developing a
well conditioned integral equation scheme (that are Fredholm equations of the
second kind) with provable bounds on convergence rates and accuracy to solve for
electromagnetic quantities over a large range of spatial frequencies; (ii)
enlarging the approximation space used for representing the unknown quantity so
as to include the local physics; (iii) designing a scheme that permits seamless
interplay between a variety of basis functions to model the unknown quantities
to be used with the above integral equation scheme; (iv) deriving error bounds
and convergence estimates on these schemes to demonstrate clear and easy user
control over the error, and (iv) developing a domain decomposition framework so
that these schemes can be integrated seamlessly with classical integral equation
and finite element methods to solve electrically large problems. The educational
objective is to develop a publicly available set of tutorials/teaching modules
based on this research.

The rapid progress in simulation methods in concert with the Moore's law has
made the analysis of electrically large problems possible on simple desktop
machines in reasonable computational times. So much so that fullwave or rigorous
simulation of realistic devices are within the realm of possibility. However, as
one tends towards this goal, new and more challenging problems arise. In
modeling mixed scale physics, it is necessary to correctly represent local
physics, develop methods to overcome conditioning issues, and develop means to
accelerate computation over multiple scales. This project addresses the
resolution of these problems. The methods developed herein will have a wide
footprint ranging from national security (design of conformal antennas) to
sensor technology (surface enhanced raman and plasmonics) to metamaterials to
nanotechnology (nano-structure crystal growth dynamics) to molecular dynamics.
In addition to training graduate students in engineering and mathematics,
existing channels are utilized to recruit women and minorities and undergraduate
students are involved through senior design projects and potential REU
supplements.
