
* 0811130
* An Optimal Time Stepping Method for Computational Science Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG, MATHEMATICAL GEOSCIENCES
* 09/01/2008,08/19/2008
* Jingfang Huang,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 277,789.00

The focus of this proposal is on the mathematical analysis and efficient
implementation of a new class of Krylov deferred correction accelerated "method
of lines transpose" for time dependent PDE's. The method first discretizes the
temporal direction using Gaussian type nodes and spectral integration, and the
resulting coupled elliptic equations are preconditioned using deferred
corrections, in which each correction procedure only requires the solution of a
decoupled system using available fast elliptic equation solvers. The
preconditioned nonlinear system is then solved efficiently using iterative
Newton-Krylov techniques. Preliminary numerical experiments show that this
method is unconditionally stable, very efficient, and can achieve arbitrary
order of accuracy in both time and space. In particular, no CFL constraints have
been observed and the time step size only depends on the smoothness of the
solution and hence is "optimal". Highlights of the PI's preliminary results
include (a) a time domain Maxwell equation solver which provides accurate
results for a long-time electromagnetic wave simulation problem for which most
existing time integration schemes fail; and (b) a symplectic Schrodinger
equation solver which preserves the structure of a Hamiltonian system with
singular potential while most existing numerical techniques quickly blow up.

It is well known that inaccurate numerical algorithms have caused many costly
project failures, examples include the sinking of the Sleipner A offshore
platform in Gandsfjorden near Stavanger, Norway, on August 23, 1991, which was
due to inaccurate finite element analysis and resulted in a loss of nearly one
billion dollars. The purpose of this proposal is to use advanced mathematical
analysis and develop numerical techniques that can efficiently provide accurate
and stable numerical simulation results to important science and engineering
problems. In particular, the PI will study and implement a novel class of
numerical algorithms for time dependent problems modeled by partial differential
equations. The success of this project will bring new tools and techniques to a
wide class of applications in science and engineering that are impossible to
solve efficiently and accurately using existing techniques, examples including
the design of optimal drug structures in biochemistry, the study of cosmos
structure in astrophysics, and improved understanding of the physics that govern
hydrologic processes in Earth system science. This project also focuses on the
training of a new generation of scientists capable of developing advanced
numerical tools using sophisticated mathematical theory.
