
* 0811314
* Analysis and Applications of the Discontinuous Galerkin Method
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/25/2008
* Ohannes Karakashian,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 169,629.00

In its broad outlines, the research program of the P.I. aims at the development,
analysis and computer implementation of numerical methods designed to
approximate the solutions of some partial differential equations (pde's) that
have important applications in the fields of engineering and physics. The
Discontinuous Galerkin method constitutes the core methodology of this effort.
The ultimate goal of the research is to make full use of this method to develop
convergent and efficient adaptive methods designed to reduce the run time of the
algorithms by finding optimal or quasi-optimal meshes. Other efforts will be
directed towards the development of domain decomposition and multigrid algorithm
for the fast solution of the resulting systems of equations on single as well as
multiprocessor computers. The P.I. will develop methods and adaptive algorithms
for second and fourth order elliptic problems, the incompressible Navier-Stokes
equations and the Cahn-Hilliard equations and use them to simulate phenomena
modeled by these equations. Adaptive methods will also be used to simulate
finite-time blowup of nonlinear evolution equations. Some areas of applications
are chemical reactions where the geometry of the domain plays an important role
and the simulation of tumor growth.

Scientific computing is playing an increasingly important role in the progress
of Science as a cost effective alternative to "real life" experiments which
could be very costly, say wind tunnel experiments in aircraft design, or even
impossible to duplicate, such as supernova explosions and other astrophysical
phenomena. It is worth mention that numerical simulations are playing a crucial
role in the identification of the potential effects of global warming. The U.S.
government, through its various funding agencies, has made important investments
by the creation of supercomputing centers equipped with the latest generation of
massively parallel computers. To extract the full power of these machines, with
some having tens of thousands of individual processors, efficient and "scalable"
methods and algorithms must be developed to keep pace with the advances in
hardware. Indeed, most current algorithms fall short of harnessing the full
power of these computers especially when the number of processors exceeds a few
thousand. The Discontinuous Galerkin method is a recently introduced methodology
with great potential and wide applicability. Its many attributes include
flexibility, ability to handle complex geometries and scalability. Further
understanding of this approach and the development of efficient and parallel
computer codes will have a positive impact on the ever increasing areas of
Science that make essential use of numerical simulations. Finally, two graduate
students are actively participating in this project as partial fulfillment of
their Ph.D. degree requirements. This will achieve another goal of this project
which is to contribute to the training of the next generation of researchers.
