
* 0811259
* Computational Modeling and Numerical Analysis of Solvation of Molecules
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2008
* Bo Li,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 160,000.00

This project concerns computer studies of the solvation of molecules---the
attraction and association of the solvent (such as water or salted water)
molecules with solute (such as alcohol, protein, etc.) molecules. The PI
develops a new continuum-solvent approach in which an equilibrium solute-solvent
interface is defined to minimize a solvation free-energy functional. There are
three essential components of this new approach: (1) a diffuse-interface
description of solute-solvent interfaces that incorporates different kinds of
molecular interactions; (2) the molecular mechanics of solute atoms; and (3) a
multiscale method for the solute-solvent molecular interaction and the motion of
solute atoms. All these are closely connected to other studies in applied and
computational mathematics such as geometrical motions of surfaces and multiscale
computations. The PI implements several new computational techniques, including
the construction of initial solutions, an efficient local method, and stable
calculations of free energy. He also carries out the related numerical analysis
on convergence, stability, and errors. The proposed theory and methods are
validated by the comparison with molecular dynamics simulations and known
experiments.

Molecular interactions determine structures and functions of biological systems.
For example, drug cure diseases because the correct molecular interactions
occur. While much effort has been made to the study of drug designs, it is now
widely accepted that new theories must be developed. In this regard, the
proposed research is of great interest, since it brings rigorous mathematics
into a challenging study of life sciences. It is hoped that results of this
project can be used to better understand why some drugs cure diseases better
than others, to make new biomaterial that can better protect our homeland, and
to develop sophisticated nanotechnologies that allow us to manipulate molecules
for our daily lives. In addition to potential applications to many areas of
national interest, this project creates an education and training program that
prepares mathematics students to do research in biologcal science. This is
clearly a needed and challenging task.
