
* 0811022
* Collaborative Research: Algebraic Multigrid Methods: Multilevel Theory and Practice
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2008,09/18/2008
* Scott MacLachlan,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 201,042.00

The primary goal of this collaborative proposal is to develop theoretically
based algebraic multigrid (AMG) solvers for Hermitian (and, where possible, non-
Hermitian) positive-definite problems. The team aims to improve understanding of
the performance of the family of AMG algorithms and, with this improved
knowledge, to develop AMG methods that offer provable, computable, a priori
information on the algorithm's performance. The project team represents a close
collaboration of experts in this area, each of whom has made contributions in
the field. Over the past several years, the team has begun to work collectively
on developing new multilevel solvers and rigorous theoretical results for the
convergence and complexity analysis thereof. Together, the team will have the
capability to take a step toward answering some of the fundamental research
questions associated with these two essential aspects of the analysis and design
of efficient algorithms.

We expect the work proposed here to: (1) directly impact computational
simulation codes currently employing multi-level solvers, by providing faster
and more reliable computational tools for the numerical computations at the core
of physical simulations; and (2) allow for simulation of phenomena for which
suitable solvers are currently unavailable. The results from the proposed
research will, thus, have a direct impact on scientific and engineering
problems, including those from energy, through both the simulation of particle
physics and processing of data from oil reservoir models, biophysics, in
surgical simulation, and the environment, in climate prediction and contaminant
remediation models. The algorithms to be investigated here are already in use in
many of these fields, but are often considered to be "expert-only" tools. The
goal of this proposal is to develop more reliable and robust versions of these
tools. The proposed research will have a strong educational impact as well, as
it provides for a solid base for training of graduate students in the modern
theoretical and practical aspects of numerical methods for modeling of
applications arising in science and engineering.
