
* 0811031
* Structured Nonlinear Least Squares Problems in Biomedical and Biomolecular Imaging
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/20/2008
* James Nagy,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2012
* USD 297,373.00

This project has significant mathematical and computational challenges, and at
the same time is focused on specific applications in biomedical (tomosynthesis)
and biomolecular (microscopy) imaging. The mathematical models addressed in this
project are difficult ill-posed inverse problems. Computed solutions of these
problems are very sensitive to errors in the data, and implementation for large
scale 3-dimensional images is nontrivial. New image post processing algorithms
developed in this project will be based on computing solutions of large scale
structured nonlinear least squares problems. Efficiency will be obtained by
exploiting algorithmic structure of the nonlinear least squares problem, as well
as structure that arises in the applications. Collaborations with researchers in
the School of Medicine and Winship Cancer Research Center at Emory University
will be used to test and verify developed methods, and will facilitate efforts
to transition new software to clinical use.

Improved image reconstruction and post processing algorithms for tomosynthesis
can have a profound impact on breast cancer screening. In addition to providing
better screening capabilities than mammography, tomosynthesis requires less
compression of the breast (reducing physical pain to the patient), and it
requires a smaller radiation dose than computed tomography (CT). In addition to
its application to breast cancer screening, tomosynthesis can be used for many
other medical imaging applications where standard x-ray and CT are used. Thus,
advances in computational methods for this application can have a very broad
impact in the medical field. In the case of biomolecular imaging, improved
computational approaches can help provide inexpensive, yet accurate, point-of-
care diagnostic imaging systems. This can significantly impact the monitoring of
infections that have serious consequences to society; for example, management of
HIV infected patients in poor regions of the world. Moreover, the application
considered in this project (deconvolution microscopy), can be used to examine
many other microscopic quantities, and thus development of new algorithms that
provide better and faster reconstructions, can have a broad impact in many
scientific fields, including biology, chemistry, neuroscience, and physics.
