
* 0811254
* The Fast Sweeping Method and Its Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/30/2008
* Hong-Kai Zhao,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2011
* USD 153,261.00

The recently developed fast sweeping method has been proved to be an efficient
iterative method for a class of Hamilton-Jacobi equations. In this project, a
continuing study and analysis of the fast sweeping method will be carried out.
Applications of the method to other problems will be pursued. In particular the
following work will be done: (1) Understand the connection to control/game
theory. (2) Study the contraction property of the fast sweeping algorithm in the
general framework of iterative method. (3) Error analysis for the numerical
solution and its derivative. (4) Develop fast sweeping method for other type of
hyperbolic partial differential equations, such as hyperbolic conservation laws
and radiative transport equation.

Hamilton-Jacobi equations are nonlinear partial differential equations that have
many applications in classical mechanics, optimal control, geophysics, geometric
optics and image processing. The nonlinearity of this type of problem poses
great challenges for mathematical analysis and for developing efficient
numerical algorithms. The fast sweeping method is a simple iterative method. It
can work efficiently for a class of difficult nonlinear problem, which is quite
remarkable and worth further understanding and development. The broader impact
of this project is not only to provide efficient numerical methods for real
applications in science and engineering but also to shed insight for
constructing iterative methods for other nonlinear problems. In addition
integration with education at different levels will also be designed.
