
* 0811188
* Practical Optimization Algorithms for Large-Scale Image and Data Processing
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2008,09/08/2008
* Yin Zhang,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/29/2012
* USD 242,015.00

Optimization algorithms are at the core of solving many problems in image and
data processing, and dedicated algorithms are often critical in real-world
applications. The principal investigator (PI) will conduct algorithmic research
in two important areas: image deconvolution and compressive sensing, to develop
enabling algorithms that make relevant methodologies practical for large-scale,
real applications. For image deconvolution, the PI aims to develop optimization
algorithms for total-variation-based models that are faster than existing
algorithms by at least one or more order of magnitude. Preliminary studies have
shown that this ambitious goal is well within grasp. The new compressive sensing
(CS) methodologies make it possible to significantly reduce the number of
measurements needed for reconstructing compressible data. The PI proposes to
develop algorithms for important real-world applications of CS, and study random
Kronecker-product measurement matrices that can drastically reduce data
reconstruction complexity.

MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is a widely used medical imaging modality that
creates an image from scanned data. A typical abdominal scan may take around 90
minutes. Recent progress in a new methodology called compressive sensing (CS)
makes it possible to reduce this time to 30 minutes by scanning only one third
of data, while maintaining good image quality. However, such a possibility can
be realized only when fast algorithms are available to do real-time processing
on incomplete data. This project is to develop and analyze such fast algorithms.
Another class of fast algorithms to be investigated is for improving the clarity
of fuzzy images. With such fast algorithms, for example, satellite or medical
images can be better analyzed in a more timely fashion. The results of this
project will impact applications ranging from information technology to
biotechnology.
