
* 0812800
* Numerical Spectral Analysis and Approximation of Functional Traveling Waves
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,08/28/2008
* Erik Van Vleck,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 150,808.00

Differential equations are used as models of physical and biological phenomena
in many areas of science and engineering. The focus of the investigator and his
colleagues in this proposal is on the approximation of solutions of differential
equations. The investigator is interested in the analysis and computation of
stability spectra (point spectrum of differential and difference operators,
Sacker-Sell spectrum, and Lyapunov exponents) and techniques for analysis and
approximation of discrete models similar to time dependent partial differential
equations but with a difference operator instead of a spatial differential
operator. Discrete models play a prominent role in the modeling of physical and
biological systems. Of particular interest are traveling wave solutions of
lattice differential equations. The approach taken is to combine dynamical
systems and numerical analysis ideas with the modeling and analysis of ordinary,
partial, and lattice differential equations. This project is concerned with the
development and analysis of efficient, accurate numerical techniques that are
useful for the computation and analysis of dynamical systems. Sacker-Sell and
Lyapunov spectral intervals are natural analogues of the real parts of the
eigenvalues that provide stability information for time varying differential
equations. The investigator develops, analyzes, and justifies the use of
numerical techniques for the approximation of these spectral intervals. A suite
of computational modules for the computation of stability information and for
functional traveling waves is being developed. It is backed by analysis of the
numerical techniques in a form that should prove useful to working scientists
and engineers.

The investigator and his colleagues consider issues in the approximation and
computation of solutions of differential equations. Differential equations are
commonly used to model physical and biological phenomena in many areas of
science and engineering. A differential equation is a rule, a relationship
between the solution and the rate of change of the solution, that determines how
an initial configuration evolves into future configurations. The focus of this
project is on the approximation of Lyapunov exponents and related quantities
that provide information on stability, the tendency for nearby configurations to
evolve and stay nearby, and instability, the tendency for nearby configurations
to move apart. This type of analysis is useful in understanding complex
biological phenomena that occur in the environment and in identifying
instabilities in, for example, models of weather prediction. The analysis and
computation of lattice differential equations, i.e., differential equations that
are discrete in space and continuous in time, are important in the modeling of
physical and biological systems in which the spatial component is naturally
discrete, in particular for microscopic models in materials and physiology.
