
* 0813648
* Capturing subgrid structures with level set methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2008,11/28/2011
* Rodolfo Rosales,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 491,981.00

This project tackles important problems arising from the need to find, represent
and track small structures using level set methods. A particular focus are fluid
dynamics applications of the new approaches developed. Level set methods encode
surfaces using level set functions defined on Eulerian grids, and evolve them by
evolving the function. Commonly used implementations suffer from mass loss, and
small structures can vanish over the course of a computation. To remedy these
problems, local mesh refinements and Lagrangian features have been reasonably
successful, but at the expense of the method's basic simplicity and
transparency. This research introduces a new solution to the difficulty:
incorporate gradient information into the process. Current approaches do not
carry, nor update this information. Instead (when/if needed) it is approximated
from the grid function. Knowledge of gradient information is not enough to allow
actual simulation of subgrid scale processes, but it enables the capture and
tracking of subgrid size objects. It is also expected to improve accuracy in
calculating quantities (e.g. stresses) where gradients play a role. The gradient
data must be updated in time, maintaining coherence between function values and
derivatives, while exploiting the extra information carried by derivatives. This
is done using characteristic properties of the exact solutions to the underlying
equation(s). The advantage of the proposed approach is that it captures small
structures, while preserving the simplicity of a purely Eulerian approach on a
regular grid. This new method uses gradient information with a computational
effort which is of the same order of magnitude as that of the current techniques
that ignore gradients.

Identifying and accurately tracking small or thin structures, and the boundaries
separating regions with different properties, is fundamental in simulating many
physical and biological processes, and in many other computational applications.
Examples arise in: medical imaging; image processing; evolution of thin liquid
and solid films, wafers, and fibers; bubbly flows; droplet formation; colloids;
etc. The research in this project should contribute to a better simulation of
such processes. A very useful technology for surface tracking is provided by the
level set method: the key idea is to model the surface as the locus where some
property/function changes sign, and to move the surface advecting the function
--- rather than the surface itself. This has many advantages; e.g. it allows an
easy interface with other associated calculations where the surface plays a role
--- in which it is usually preferable to have the data on a regular grid, where
the surface is hard to represent directly (e.g.: the pixels used to represent an
image). However, one standard difficulty with this approach is that parts of the
interface may be lost when below some level of resolution. In this research the
authors investigate a new approach to ameliorating this difficulty, by carrying
in the calculation gradient information, in addition to the level set function.
Unlike prior remedies, this approach does not tamper with the basic simplicity
of the level set method. In many practical applications gradient information is
available, but currently not fully used. Example 1: Data structures in computer
graphics store surface normals, which are not fully used in simulations of the
object. Equipping the data with gradients should improve the quality of further
processing steps, such as in visualization techniques for realistic rendering.
Example 2: The dynamic range of 2-D and 3-D MRI or CT-SCAN images is high, but
current technology does not make use this gradient information. Incorporating it
into the calculations should increase the effective resolution, thus improving
the detection of tumors in infants and the identification of small anomalies.
