
* 0813901
* Multiscale numerical modeling of multiphysics systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG, MATHEMATICAL GEOSCIENCES
* 09/01/2008,08/22/2008
* Ivan Yotov,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2011
* USD 264,546.00

This project focuses on multiscale and stochastic numerical methods for complex
multiphysics problems. A parallel computational framework for modeling various
multiscale applications will be developed. The models of interest will be based
on coupling the Stokes or the Navier-Stokes equations with single phase or
multiphase Darcy flow. The flow system will be coupled with reactive transport.
The research approach is based on a multiblock domain decomposition methodology.
The simulation domain is a union of subdomains (blocks). Each block is
associated with a physical, mathematical, and numerical model. Physically
meaningful interface conditions are imposed on the discrete level via mortar
finite elements. The formulation provides great flexibility for multiphysics and
multinumerics couplings. Furthermore, this domain decomposition approach,
combined with coarse scale mortar elements, provides a multiscale approximation
and an efficient way to solve the coarse grid problem in parallel. Uncertainty
in the physical characteristics is modeled via stochastic partial differential
equations. Approximation in probability space is achieved using stochastic
finite element and collocation methods. The main components of the research will
be 1) development of multiscale mathematical models, identifying appropriate
interface conditions, and analysis of the well-posedness of the models; 2) novel
discretization techniques for stochastic partial differential equations; 3) a
posteriori error estimates and adaptive mesh refinement algorithms in physical
and stochastic space; and (4) efficient parallel domain decomposition solvers
and preconditioners.

The research methodology can be applied for the design, analysis, and
implementation of computational methods for a large class of problems arising in
science and engineering applications. The project will emphasize accurate,
robust, and efficient numerical methods for problems exhibiting behavior on a
wide range of scales in space and time. The research also aims to quantify
uncertainty in the prediction due to to uncertainty in the input parameters
through stochastic modeling. The research results will be applied to two main
application areas: couplings of surface water with groundwater flows and
modeling complex multiscale processes occurring in the inflammatory response in
the human body. Computer modeling of subsurface and surface flow and transport
has a major economic impact on environmental and energy industries. Due to the
proximity of groundwater and surface water systems, contamination of rivers,
lakes, and wetlands can lead to contamination of aquifers and vice-versa.
Simulating these complex interactions is a major computational challenge. Acute
inflammation, which occurs in response to trauma or infection, may lead to a
systemic inflammation or sepsis. Sepsis frequently leads to organ failure and
death (with more that 500,000 fatal cases per year in the U.S.). Effective
treatments are lacking, due to the complexity of the process. Mathematical and
computer modeling is becoming a more common tool in the effort to gain insight
of the dynamics and spatial characteristics of the inflammatory process.
