
* 0839866
* International Conference on Spectral and High-Order Methods 2009 - ICOSAHOM'09; June 2009, Trondheim, Norway
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,08/27/2008
* George Karniadakis,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2009
* USD 15,000.00

The investigators propose to participate in organizing the next ICOSAHOM
(International Conference on Spectral And High-Order Methods) on June 22-26 2009
at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) in Trondheim,
Norway. They have been working in this field for several decades and have been
active participants in all past ICOSAHOM meetings. Selected papers from the
proceedings will be published as a special issue in a archival journal. They
also plan to produce a report for the funding agency that will provide feedback
from a round-table discussion we plan to organize. The theme of this round-table
discussion will be the future algorithmic trends and applications of numerical
methods and what is the role of high-order methods. Also, their transition to
computer codes that will be used for the simulation needs of the national labs
and in industry will be discussed, especially in the context of petaflop
applications. To this end, they plan to invite researchers with advanced
computing expertise and also have interest on high-order accuracy to participate
in this panel. The invited and contributed talks will contain new theoretical
and applications results of spectral and high-order methods which had not been
published yet. Spectral and high-order methods have become increasingly
important in diverse applications as aeroacoustics, electromagnetics, ocean
modeling, seismology, energy, non-Newtonian flows, nonlinear optics, plasma
dynamics, and uncertainty quantification. New developments in the last few years
have addressed issues of complex geometry, high-speed flows, fast solvers for
large-scale simulations, reduced order modeling, and stochastic modeling.

NSF has invested heavily in computer hardware in their last three decades in par
with the rapid growth of computer industry. However, simultaneous advances are
required in the development of algorithms and software in order to make
effective use of the new computer resources. This conference will advance the
state-of-the-art in algorithms of high accuracy that are required in order to
produce credible simulation results. In addition to the senior researchers
invited, we plan to sponsor young researchers, postdocs and PhD students,
especially from under-represented minorities, in order to educate a new cadre of
simulation scientists in these methods. Today, high-order accuracy (at least
second-order) is a requirement for publishing archival work in engineering
journals, and the planned panel discussion is expected to have great impact in
the engineering community. In addition, the important issue of numerical versus
modeling accuracy and issues related to Verification and Validation will be
discussed.


