
* 0913017
* Algebraic hierarchical matrix preconditioners for two- and three-dimensional saddle point problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2009,07/29/2011
* Allan Mills,TN,Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 137,149.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This project deals with the development, analysis and implementation of novel
techniques for the solution of large, sparse linear systems of equations of
saddle point type. Despite much recent progress, the solution of large systems
of equations remains one of the main bottlenecks in many numerical simulations.
Applications include fluid dynamics, magnetohydrodynamics, image processing, and
many more. This project deals with the further development of the technique of
hierarchical (H-)matrices. H-matrices provide an efficient technique for
computations involving approximations to fully populated matrices. The standard
construction of an H-matrix is based on the underlying geometry of the
application. Similar to the generalization of geometric to algebraic multigrid
methods, the PI proposes to develop an algorithm for the algebraic construction
of H-matrix preconditioners for saddle point problems. Sequences of three-
dimensional Oseen problems that result in the numerical solution of the Navier-
Stokes equations will serve as the major application of the novel techniques. An
additional topic to be considered in this project is the application of
H-techniques in only recently developed Kronecker product preconditioners. The
techniques of this proposal have a high potential to lead to robust and scalable
blackbox solvers for large, linear systems arising in the simulation of
scientific and technical problems of increasing size and complexity.

H-matrices have first been introduced in 1998 and since then entered into a
wide range of applications. The approach of H-matrices is of significant
importance within its own field of numerical analysis and also with respect to
practical large-scale computing challenges that scientists are currently facing.
Examples for applications include models for magnetic fusion, accelerator
design, electrochemical processes or the growth of ceramic nanostructures.
Progress in the areas targeted in this proposal will have a positive impact on
science and engineering by allowing for faster and more accurate computer
simulations.
