
* 0913491
* Study on Algorithms and Applications of Centroidal Voronoi Tessellations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,08/19/2009
* Lili Ju,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 180,000.00

This proposal is awarded using funds made available by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

Centroidal Voronoi tessellations (CVTs) are special Voronoi tessellations having
the property that the generators of the Voronoi tessellations are also the
centroids, with respect to a given density function, of the corresponding
Voronoi cells. In this project, we will continue to investigate algorithms for
computing CVTs and CVT-based applications for scientific and engineering
problems. Topics of the proposed project include: study of single limit-point
convergence analysis for the Lloyd's algorithm; development and analysis of
nonlinear conjugate gradient methods for computing CVTs; study and
implementation of parallel CVT/CVDT mesh generation on the distributed systems;
improving existing CCVT-based techniques for surface meshing; incorporating
these meshing schemes in adaptive solutions of partial differential equations,
especially for the convection-dominated problems; and further investigation and
improvement of the edge-weighted CVT model and corresponding algorithms for
image segmentation that combines the intensity information in the color space of
the image and the local edge information in the physical space. CVT-based
methodologies have been proven to be very useful in diverse applications in the
past decade, including but not limited to, image processing, vector quantization
and data analysis, resource optimization, optimal placement of sensors and
actuators for control, cell biology and territorial behavior of animals, high-
quality point sampling, mesh generation and optimization, numerical partial
differential equations, climate and atmospheric science, model reduction,
computer graphics and vision, mobile sensing networks, logistics system design,
and etc. The application list is still growing. The proposed project has a
comprehensive coverage of algorithm design and analysis, implementation and
applications of CVTs to diverse problems in science and engineering.
Mathematical tools are used to analyze these techniques to give guidelines for
their applicability; practical considerations including parallel implementation
issues are addressed to make the algorithms competitive in real applications and
large scale computations. The proposed investigation will offer new insight into
the understanding of the elegant Lloyd's algorithm and it will also lead to
exploration of transformative concepts and renovation of computational
algorithms for many important applications involving mesh optimization, adaptive
algorithms, energy minimization and image processing based on the CVT
methodologies. In addition, this project will also offer a unique educational
opportunity for graduate students with interests in computational and applied
mathematics, engineering and information technology by having them participate
in an interdisciplinary research program.
