
* 0913982
* Collaborative Research: Numerical Methods for Fully and Implicitly Nonlinear Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,06/10/2011
* Roland Glowinski,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 177,924.00

The main goal of this project is to further investigate the numerical solution
of fully nonlinear elliptic equations such as Monge-Ampère?s, in order to extend
previous work done with the support of NSF Grant DMS-0412267. The main findings
of these previous investigations are that, after regularization of the data
(which is not always necessary), well-chosen least-squares formulations in
appropriate Hilbert spaces lead to robust solution methods able to compute
classical solutions, or generalized ones if classical solutions do not exist.
The objectives of the present project are: (i) To improve the performances of
the iterative methods used to solve the least-squares problems. This will
require the development of novel algorithms to solve the many (one per grid
point) low dimensional nonlinear eigenvalue problems obtained from the
decomposition of the least squares problems, since this results in a number of
small but intricate constrained eigenvalue problems. (ii) To demonstrate the
effectiveness of these new algorithms on a variety of test problems (Monge-
Ampère, Pucci, Gaussian curvature, sigma-2, in dimension 2, 3, and even 4 for
the Pucci problem, using parallelization). (iii) To determine whether the
remarkable homogenization properties observed in two-dimensions for some of
these fully nonlinear elliptic equations when a coefficient in the operator
varies periodically or randomly in space persist in higher dimensions. (iv) To
apply, ultimately, the above methodology (or close variant of it) to the
solution of some implicitly nonlinear partial differential equations from non-
smooth differential geometry that model folding phenomena.

What motivates these investigations is the fact that fully nonlinear elliptic
equations play an important role in areas as diverse as material sciences,
nonlinear elasticity, fluid mechanics, atmospheric sciences, nonlinear
elasticity, shape design in electrical and structural engineering (antennas, car
shape,?), finance, applied and theoretical physics, differential geometry and
others. The related mathematical problems have generated a large literature. In
contrast these problems have the reputation to be difficult from a computational
standpoint explaining why the computational and applied mathematicians have not
made significant progress on their numerical solution. One of the goals of this
project is to close the gap between the various communities concerned with fully
nonlinear elliptic equations so that each of them will learn from the others,
setting an example of interdisciplinary science. Such an effort will also
benefit science and engineering professionals and students, via publications,
dedicated web sites and post-graduate courses, lectures at conferences, and of
course direct involvement for some graduate students. It will also stimulate the
contributions of other scientists to these important areas. Since computational
methods developed previously by the Principal Investigators and their associates
are currently used in many areas of Science and Engineering, Academia and
Industry, one can expect a similar endeavor for the results and products
originating from this collaborative project.
