
* 0913757
* Efficient numerical techniques of two-phase transport model in the cathode of hydrogen polymer electrolyte fuel cell
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,09/14/2009
* Pengtao Sun,NV,University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 90,000.00

This proposal is awarded using funds made available by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Public Law 111-5).

This project is to develop advanced numerical techniques in order to perform
efficient, accurate and state of the art simulations for two-phase transport
model in the cathode of hydrogen proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC). The
computational efficiency and accuracy for solving two-phase transport PEMFC
model depends crucially on the partition of mesh for precisely capturing the
anisotropic interface of single- and two-phase zones, the design of proper
discretization schemes and efficient iterative methods for solving a highly
unstable nonlinear system due to the discontinuous and degenerate diffusion
coefficient. The PI proposes to develop anisotropic adaptive mesh techniques,
and advanced algorithms in both discretization and iteration level in order to
design a better discretized model which can be solved more efficiently and
accurately by iterative methods on an optimal mesh. More precisely, for
anisotropic adaptive mesh method, the PI proposes an a posteriori error
estimator based on error equaldistribution by equalidistributing edge length of
finite element in Hessian matrix-metric. For the discontinuous and degenerate
diffusion coefficient, the PI proposes Kirchhoff transformation to skillfully
reformulate the original PEMFC model to a linear Poisson's equation, and
Newton's method to efficiently solve the resulting inverse Kirchhoff
transformation. In particular, for the case of wet gas channel in PEMFC, in
which Kirchhoff transformation brings the discontinuity back to the resulting
Kirchhoff's variable on the interface of gas channel and gas diffusion layer,
the PI proposes Dirichlet-Neumann alternating iterative domain decomposition
method to resolve this interfacial boundary problem. On the discretization
level, the PI will design a combined finite element-upwind finite volume method
to overcome the dominant convection in gas channel of PEMFC without losing the
benefits of FEM. For nonlinear iteration schemes, the PI will employ either
Picard's or Newton's method to linearize nonlinear PEMFC model, combining with
specifically preconditioned Krylov-type solver. The PI hopes to develop more
efficient and accurate numerical simulations for two-phase transport model in
the cathode of hydrogen PEMFC by uniting modern numerical techniques of
adaptivity and multilevel solvers with standard numerical methods.

Fuel cells have been called the key to abundant energy from secure and renewable
sources, e.g., fuel cells promise to replace the internal combustion engine in
transportation due to their higher energy efficiency and zero or ultralow
emissions. Hydrogen proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) is presently
considered as a potential type of fuel cells for such application. Since PEMFC
involves electrochemical reactions, current distribution, two-phase flow
transport and heat transfer, a comprehensive mathematical modeling of
multiphysics system and high performance computing combining with the advanced
numerical techniques shall make a significant impact in the development of fuel
cell technology. However, because of the complexity of the underlying
mathematical model, current numerical techniques are far from being satisfactory
due to poor performances on both efficiency and accuracy. Hence, advanced
numerical techniques are urgently required to significantly improve the
efficiency and accuracy of fuel cell simulation. The proposed numerical
techniques in this project will challenge a number of critical numerical
difficulties, which are caused by large discontinuity, degeneracy, nonlinearity,
dominant convection and anisotropy, by designing and analyzing the efficient
numerical methods toward fast convergence and precise solutions. The PI will
utilize the proposed efficient numerical methods to eventually develop an
efficient and robust in-house code for PEM fuel cell simulations by achieving
one to two orders of magnitude improvement on the existing commercial fuel cell
packages in computational performance. The PI hopes that the proposed numerical
techniques and numerical package for PEMFC will lead to a significant progress
and likely breakthrough in the field of computational fuel cell technology,
substantially impacting the commercialization of fuel cells and further helping
in the transition to hydrogen economy.
