
* 0913089
* Nonlinear Preconditioning Techniques for Coupled Multi-physics Problems on Massively Parallel Computers
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,08/26/2010
* Xiao-Chuan Cai,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

Mature technologies are available for solving many types of single physics
problems, but for coupled multi-physics problems, robust and scalable techniques
are badly needed, especially for large scale parallel computers. The focus of
the proposal is on some new domain decomposition based nonlinear preconditioning
techniques for the numerical solution of some highly nonlinear, coupled systems
of partial differential equations (PDEs) arising from multi-physics
applications. These PDEs often represent multiple interacting fields (for
example, fluid and solid), each is modeled by a certain type of equations.
Current approaches usually involve a careful splitting of the fields and the use
of field-by-field iterations to obtain a solution of the coupled problem. Such
approaches have many advantages such as ease of implementation since only single
field solvers are needed, but also exhibit disadvantages. For example, certain
nonlinear interactions between the fields may not be fully captured, and for
unsteady problems, stable time integration schemes are difficult to design. In
addition, when implemented on large scale parallel computers, the sequential
nature of the field-by-field iterations substantially reduces the parallel
efficiency. To overcome the disadvantages, fully coupled approaches are
investigated in order to obtain full physics simulations. The success of such a
fully coupled approach depends almost entirely on a nonlinear algebraic system
solver that is robust and scalable. Unfortunately, traditional nonlinear
iterative methods do not work well, for example, Newton-like methods often
converge very slowly because of the existence of local non-smooth components in
the solution and the lack of good initial guess. The new algorithms are
motivated by the nonlinear preconditioning methods recently introduced by the PI
and his co-workers for solving algebraic nonlinear equations that have
unbalanced nonlinearities. The scalability is obtained by incorporating the
multigrid methods into the algorithms. Several important applications will be
studied including the simulation of blood flows in compliant arteries using a
coupled Navier-Stokes and elasticity equations.


