
* 0914354
* Large-Scale Optimization for Biomolecular Modeling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2009,08/04/2009
* Zhijun Wu,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 124,594.00

Project Abstract

Two classes of optimization problems arising in protein modeling are
investigated. The first class is for solving a generalized distance geometry
problem for protein structure determination, where a large scale nonlinear
constrained optimization problem needs to be solved. The second class is for
solving a boundary-value problem for simulation of protein conformational
transition. A geometric buildup algorithm is to be developed for the solution of
the generalized distance geometry problem by determining the points (and their
spheres), one at a time, using the distance bounds between the determined and
undetermined points (and their spheres). The existence and uniqueness of the
solution of the optimization problem, the necessary and sufficient conditions
for obtaining a solution, and the convergence of the algorithm, will be
analyzed. The algorithm will be tested on a large set of problems generated from
existing protein structures, and be integrated into existing modeling software
for practical applications. A multiple-shooting scheme is to be developed for
the solution of the boundary-value problem. In particular, a constrained
nonlinear least-squares problem is formulated for the implementation of the
multiple-shooting scheme. The issues on the choice of the norm to be minimized,
the formation of the initial trajectories, and the convergence of the algorithm,
will be addressed. The algorithm will be tested on small to medium size problems
(with up to several hundreds of atoms and nanoseconds of simulations) and
extended to real and large scale simulation problems (with up to several
thousands of atoms and milliseconds of simulations). Many problems in
biomolecular modeling are formulated as optimization problems, such as the phase
problem in X-ray crystallography, the distance geometry problem in nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), and potential energy minimization problem
for protein folding. These problems are typically in large scale with the number
of variables or constraints ranging from tens to hundreds of thousands. They are
difficult to solve as well since many of them demand a globally optimal solution
and have proven to be computationally intractable in general. This project
involves the development of novel algorithms for the solution of two large,
difficult, yet critical classes of optimization problems arising in protein
modeling. It promises a significant increase in the power of the current
technologies for protein modeling, especially for NMR protein structure
determination and simulation of protein conformational transition. It has
potential impacts in such important biological and medical applications as
structural genomics, rational drug design, and cancer and AIDS research. The
problems to be investigated also represent two classes of interesting
mathematical problems. But they have not been well posed, studied, and solved
before. The proposed project will encourage research on these problems and help
to advance the theory and algorithmic development in related mathematical areas
such as distance geometry and optimization.
