
* 0914809
* The Flat Norm for Shapes and Images
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,07/15/2011
* Kevin Vixie,WA,Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 275,963.00

In this project, the Principal Investigator and his collaborators pursue an
integrated program of research and education aimed at elucidating and exploiting
their recent discovery connecting the flat norm from geometric measure theory
and the Chan-Esedoglu (CE) variational functional from image analysis. The
several threads in the research program cover application of the new multiscale
flatnorm to the study of shapes, integrated with supporting theoretical and
computational work. The central discovery making this program possible is the
realization by Vixie and his collaborator Simon Morgan that (1) minimizers of
the CE functional translate directly to minimizers for the flatnorm
decomposition, (2) this identification generalizes both the flat norm and the CE
functional and (3) the minimal values are the same. This opened the way for (1)
denoising of non-boundary and/or higher codimension sets (a generalization of
the CE functional), (2) a multiscale flat norm (a generalization of the
flatnorm), and 3) a practical way to calculate the flat norm through methods for
the CE functional. Taken together, they present us with new methods to analyze
shape and image data. This research is a part of a larger program promoted by
the PI and collaborators in which insights and innovations in geometric measure
theory and geometric analysis are exploited in the pursuit of solutions to
various data challenges.

In less technical terms, the investigator and his collaborators are developing
new ways to represent and characterize image and image-like data. The technical
aspects of the research program are both very interesting and amenable for the
training new generations of mathematicians who are capable of both serious
technical contributions and practical work on pressing problems related to the
information and data sciences. The mathematics, arising from an area originally
invented to study minimal surface problems related to question "What shape will
a bubble be if we dip this wire into a soap solution?", turns out to have
practical applications to the understanding of shapes and images. The
investigators focus on both the theoretical developments that support practical
applications and the development of practical algorithms for computing the
multiscale flatnorm, the centerpiece of this project. Applications of this new
multiscale flatnorm extends into many areas like image and shape denoising,
shape recognition and the detection of anomalies in image streams. It is
generally accepted that intelligent, efficient extraction of information from
massive data streams is a very important, largely unsolved problem. Examples of
such data streams include hyperspectral imagery from satellites and image
streams from extended time high resolution microscopic observations of dynamic,
living systems, to name just two. The tools being developed in this project
promise new ways to understand and analyze such large scale data sets.
