
* 0914345
* Tractability of High Dimensional Problems for Quantum and Classical Computers
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,06/05/2011
* Joseph Traub,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2012
* USD 473,383.00

New proof techniques and new optimal algorithms and complexity results will be
obtained under the grant. Many important scientific and engineering problems
have continuous mathematical formulations. Since digital computers can only deal
with numbers, continuous problem have to be discretized for input into the
computer. Hence the information about the continuous mathematical problem is
partial and contaminated and only an E-approximation can be obtained. Because
the information about the continuous problem is partial and contaminated one can
use adversary arguments pioneered by the investigators and their colleagues to
obtain computational complexity and optimal algorithms for important problems.
This may be contrasted with discrete problems such as integer factorization,
where one has to settle for conjectures about the complexity hierarchy. A
central issue is to determine for which settings and spaces a problem is
tractable; that is, its complexity is not exponential. There is a huge
literature on the computational complexity of d-dimensional problems. Most of
these papers and books obtain results which are sharp with respect to 1/E but
have, unfortunately, unknown dependence on d. But to determine if a problem is
tractable, we need to know the dependence on both 1/E and d. This requires new
proof techniques.

Many important scientific and engineering problems involve a large number of
variables. Equivalently they are said to be high dimensional. Examples of such
problems occur in quantum mechanics, molecular biology, and economics. For
example, the Schrodinger equation for p particles has dimension d = 3p; systems
with a large number of particles are of great interest in physics and chemistry.
This problem can only be solved numerically. In decades of work scientists have
found that the problems get increasingly hard as p increases. The investigators
believe this does not stem from a failure to create good numerical methods--the
difficulty is intrinsic. The investigators believe solving the Schrodinger
equation suffers the curse of dimensionality on a classical computer. That is,
the time to solve this problem must grow exponentially with p. (A classical
computer is any machine not based on the principles of quantum mechanics--all
machines in use today are classical computers.) The investigators hope to show
this problem is tractable on a quantum computer. Success in this research would
mark the first instance of a PROVEN exponential quantum speedup for an important
non-artificial problem.
