
* 0914514
* Applied Numerical Mathematics of Structured Multiscale Models of Biological Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2009,09/21/2009
* Bruce Ayati,IA,University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 67,920.00

The investigator proposes to develop computational methods and software to solve
systems of partial differential equations that arise in multiscale models of
various biological systems. The behavior of these systems depends not only on
time and space, but also on physiological traits such as size or age. The
methods decouple time from the physiological variables. In doing so they, unlike
previous methods, prevent the often fine-resolution time discretization from
inflating the number of nodes in the physiological variables. This family of
methods remains the one with the highest-order accuracy due to the fact that
approximation error is the only meaningful source of error in the computations.
Collaboration with biologists is a critical component of this research plan. The
software will be developed and used in the context of models developed and
parameterized with biofilm researchers at Montana State University and cancer
biologists at Vanderbilt University, with the expectation that they will have a
significant and near-term impact on understanding the mechanisms of biofilm
growth and tumor invasion. This collaboration is also vital to ensure the
relevance and usefulness of the methods and software; methods developed in an
application vacuum tend to lack utility.

The investigator proposes the development of computer software and algorithms --
the mathematical rules that determine how the software works -- to study how
biofilms develop and how cancer tumors, in middle and later stages of their
development, invade nearby tissue. Biofilms are bacteria that live in a material
casing of their own creation. They are involved in many of the most difficult to
treat infections and in industrial fouling, and are used in wastewater
remediation. The software will handle complicated situations where individual
cells within the biofilm or tumor differ in some important respect. For example,
different bacteria in a biofilm will have different abilities to grow and
divide, based on the number of divisions already undertaken. The different
stages in the cell-division cycle of cancer cells are linked to the physically
larger complete tumor. This is important, for example, in studying the overall
effects of chemotherapy when using drugs that affect cells differently depending
on what part of the cell-division cycle they are in. The mathematics behind the
algorithms in this proposal are significantly more advanced than what came
before and remain the state of the art, resulting in software that can be used
effectively with the computers of today and the near future. They can also be
expected to be useful for problems other than biofilms and tumors. An important
part of this research proposal is the collaboration between the investigator and
colleagues at Montana State University in Bozeman, MT and Vanderbilt University
in Nashville, TN.
