
* 0914957
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Multilinear Algebra Computations with Higher-Order Tensors
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2009,07/14/2009
* Misha Kilmer,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 221,216.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Many real world applications need to compress, sort, and otherwise manipulate
large volumes of multidimensional data arrays (i.e., higher- order tensors), so
there is an increasing need for theoretical and computational tools to deal with
multiway data. The subject of multilinear algebra and tensors has gained
increasing prominence in the past decade due to a surge in applications such as
approximation of Newton potentials and stochastic PDEs, image compression and
deblurring, network traffic analysis, biological assay interpretation, unmixing
of signals, and many more. Such applications with higher-order tensors involve
factorizations of the tensor. There are multiple possible extensions of matrix
factorizations to higher-order tensors (e.g. extensions of the matrix SVD), with
some more amenable to certain applications. The investigators are advancing the
state-of-the-art in both theoretical and computational multilinear algebra via
several newly developed tensor constructions based on new notions of tensor
multiplication, orthogonality and diagonalizability. Algorithms with compression
schemes based on these new constructions are being implemented by the
investigators and tested on several datasets from various applications including
handwritten digit identification, genomics, the spectral unmixing problem, video
compression, and computer image recognition.

Current applications in the sciences can involve analysis, classification,
searching and compression of large volumes of data that is "multidimensional" in
nature. Consider, for example, the problem of facial recognition, used to
identify a terrorist from within a database of images of known terrorists. The
database can be considered multidimensional data in the sense that for each
individual there corresponds a specific viewpoint, illumination, and facial
expression. It is critical in this scenario to have an accurate and fast
algorithm to match an unknown image against a database of images of known
terrorists. Another example where a multidimensional representation is useful is
genomic data. Here, DNA microarray two-dimensional tabular data from different
experiments is concatenated into a multidimensional array. Recently published
results have indicated that so-called 'factorizations' of this multidimensional
data can be used to discover new molecular-level interactions. Hence, along with
advances in computer architecture to store large datasets must come
mathematically sound models for the compression and/or analysis of such data.
Development of new concepts and ideas is therefore required to deal with the
different geometries that arise in the multidimensional case. The investigators
are contributing directly to this effort by developing innovative mathematical
theory for multidimensional objects that is consistent with two-dimensional
proven ideas. With theoretical constructs in place, the investigators are able
to create computational tools and algorithms to analyze and compress
multidimensional data. A significant component of the proposal is the
involvement of undergraduates, graduate students, and researchers. The
investigators are leveraging the strengths of both universities in a novel,
inter-institutional vertical integrative experience for all students
(undergraduate and graduate) involved in the research. This arrangement allows
students at all levels, mentored by leading researchers in the field, to advance
the state-of-the-art in the analysis and compression of multidimensional data.
