
* 0914107
* Algebraic and Geometric Computation with Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,09/13/2009
* Jesus De Loera,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 194,455.00

The goal of this project is to develop algorithms and software in both
algebraic-symbolic computation and computational geometry. The algorithms will
be useful in a wide variety of problems of discrete mathematics, optimization,
and computer science. First, regarding algebraic computation, the PI will use
ideas from commutative algebra, real algebraic geometry, large-scale linear
algebra, semidefinite analysis, and combinatorics to develop very fast
algorithms that can solve large, but highly-structured systems of polynomial
equations that carry an extra rich combinatorial structure (e.g., they are
defined from a graph and their solutions correspond to colorings or matchings,
or their group of automorphisms is very large). Although solving arbitrary
systems of non-linear equations is a very hard problem in general, we have been
able to provide fast solutions for unusually large polynomial systems with
thousands of variables. The second area of work is more related to the geometry
of convex polyhedra. It is common that software in Operations Research and
Optimization requires a quick way to decide when a polyhedron is integrally
feasible. Relying on computational geometry analysis, convex analysis and
probability, the PI intends to develop fast heuristics for detecting the
existence of a lattice point inside a polyhedron as well as for counting of all
its lattice points. The PI hopes to incorporate these ideas to mathematical
programming software.

Software and Algorithms that solve systems of equations and inequalities or
that decide whether a system of equations has a solution with integer numbers
are extremely useful in all areas of mathematics, engineering, and beyond. Most
of the problems we will consider are directly related to problems where one
wishes to find an optimal arrangement or make best decisions with scarce
resources. Examples include the problem of selecting the least expensive network
connecting given sites or selecting the least expensive tour for visiting a
given set of locations. Since such optimization problems appear in all areas of
society (data mining, finances and economics, transport scheduling and circuit
design, to name a few) but are very difficult to solve, researchers have
explored special structures to be able to solve them in practice (e.g., in the
case of the TSP) or settle for algorithms that compute near-optimal solutions.
In our project we use non-traditional tools based on recent mathematical
progress as a way to approach these very difficult problems. Last, but not
least, the project also has a strong educational component for this project. The
PI is committed to integrate this new knowledge within curriculum development,
undergraduate research projects, training of graduate students and postdocs, and
the development of new open source software tools for computational
optimization. Several graduate and undergraduate students will play important
roles in the project's development.


