
* 0914802
* Algorithms and Software for Singular Polynomial Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2009,03/04/2010
* Anton Leykin,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 158,365.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

In this project the PI will develop robust symbolic-numerical methods for
solving singular polynomial systems and decomposing singular varieties. These
algorithms would obtain information about a singular variety that the current
regular methods can not deliver: in particular, discover embedded components of
the solution set. This approach will lead to numerical algorithms that would
solve problems that are intractable by symbolic primary decomposition routines.
A major part of this project is software implementation. Macaulay2, a free open-
source computer algebra system created by Grayson and Stillman, will make a
platform for an efficient implementation of our algorithms. A package will be
written in the Macaulay2 language with computationally intensive routines
implemented in C++ in the Macaulay2 kernel. Since the basic routines for
homotopy continuation scale well, parallel implementation of the aforementioned
algorithms will be carried out where appropriate.

Polynomial systems are ubiquitous in various mathematical models in science and
engineering. Many, if not the majority, of the polynomial systems arising in the
real world contain singular solution components. The produced software will help
a broad range of scientists and engineers confronted with polynomial systems in
their work. The students appointed as research assistants through this project
will gain invaluable experience in mathematical research combined with
programming and development of algorithms.


