
* 0914813
* A novel framework for fluid/structure interaction in subject-specific surgical simulations involving elastic cardiac geometries
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,09/04/2009
* Joseph Teran,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 197,136.00

One of the most important applications of computational fluid dynamics has been
simulation of blood flow. However, practical difficulties have limited the types
and applicability of simulations performed, thus preventing numerical modeling
of blood flow from reaching its full potential. Extreme computational expense,
reduced order of accuracy due to complex geometry and lack of regularity in
solutions have restricted the scale and scope of blood flow simulations. One
exciting application currently outside the scope of existing methods is the
simulation of surgeries designed to repair diseased and malfunctioning heart
valves. The complexity of the valvular geometry and flow patterns in their
vicinity complicate considerably the development of reliable and predicative
numerical models. The ability to deliver patient specific prognoses demands an
algorithm that can accurately resolve these flows. However, cardiac geometry is
highly complicated and must be represented with both volumetric and membraneous
components, either of which might also exhibit intricate irregularities due to
the patient's valvular disease. The solid/fluid coupling algorithm must have
sufficient geometric flexibility to resolve these features and to adapt to the
changes induced by the virtual surgery. Ultimately, to provide meaningful
results the solid/fluid algorithm must deliver a certain level of accuracy and
stability without sacrificing adaptability. Existing methods for fluid-solid
interaction cannot guarantee this level of functionality. The general case sees
geometric flexibility traded for higher order accuracy. Also, practical demands
create the need for stable algorithms with minimal time step restrictions as the
desire to accurately predict postoperative behavior comes with the inherent need
to run simulations over longer time intervals. The challenging nature of
providing the functionality needed for effectively simulating valvular surgeries
requires addressing all these issues simultaneously and existing methods cannot
do this. The primary contribution of the proposed research will be the
development and application of a tractable second-order numerical method capable
of coupling a viscous incompressible fluid with thin and volumetric
geometrically complex elastic solids represented with Lagrangian meshes. The
fluid will be modeled by a cartesian Eulerian grid in which the solid
representations are embedded to avoid the prohibitive cost of re-meshing the
computational domain at each time-step in the simulation. Regular grids will be
used wherever possible. Geometric flexibility and the ability to impose a
variety of boundary conditions on arbitrary moving surfaces throughout the fluid
domain are key to accomplishing the stated goals and will be a primary guide in
developing the higher-order accurate Navier-Stokes solver.

The benefits of patient-specific computational fluid dynamics simulations of
blood flow near healthy and diseased heart valves can potentially revolutionize
the treatment of certain pathologies. Such functionality could allow the surgeon
to design new procedures tailored to the individual, to determine whether or not
surgery is needed by numerically predicting postoperative results and could even
be used to train surgical residents in state-of-the-art techniques. This effort
will focus on the development of a numerical method for examining blood flow
through such surgically altered tissues in the challenging case of corrective
valvular surgery. Specifically, we target improvements in treatment for
Tetralogy of Fallot and mitral valve repair. Patients born with Tetralogy of
Fallot require artificial replacement valves with inherently finite lifespan and
accurate determination of the time to replace these valves to correct for
pulmonary regurgitation is a matter of life and death. With procedures such as
mitral valve repair, the difficult choice lies in determining exactly which type
of correction best suits a particular individual. The determination of when to
make these critical decisions and many related others could potentially be
improved with the successful application of this effort.
