
* 0914580
* Mathematical Models & Computational Algorithms for Image Processing, computer Vision & Computer Graphics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,08/08/2011
* Christoph Thiele,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 600,001.00

Abstract - Thiele

This proposal addresses three sets of problems in the intersection of image
processing, computer graphics and computer vision: (1) image segmentation with
applications to object tracking in videos, (2) inpainting problems, both in the
pixel domain and the transform domain, and (3) applications of variational PDE-
based models to image processing on manifolds. The approach makes use of
powerful concepts from computational mathematics, such as duality,
convexification, non-smooth optimization, fast combinatorial optimization,
numerical PDE techniques, harmonic analysis, and computational differential
geometry. The research is focusing on key issues, such as computational
efficiency, feature extraction, object tracking, global analysis, and
optimization, and preserving both geometric and texture information, which are
keys to further advances. The research will impact many areas ranging from
entertainment through homeland security and medical imaging.

For image segmentation, typical models are generally nonconvex and admit many
local optimal solutions, making them sensitive to initial guesses. Moreover,
numerical algorithms can be trapped in local non-optimal minima. To obtain
better segmentation algorithms, we are extending a novel convexification
technique (through the deep connection between TVL1 models and level sets)
developed earlier for the Chan-Vese segmentation model to other segmentation
models, such as non-local segmentation models inspired by texture synthesis
techniques. For inpainting, recent advances include PDE and geometry techniques,
texture synthesis, and a hybrid framework for inpainting missing transform (e.g.
wavelets or Fourier). This research is examining the synergy between these
methods and deriving models and algorithms that combine the best features of
each. For image processing on manifolds, we are using conformal mapping
techniques and PDE-based image processing models to derive efficient algorithms
for general surfaces. New applications include the automatic tracking of
landmarks on general surfaces and the incorporation of shape information in
landmark matching.


