
* 0914937
* Collaborative Research: A Computational Framework for Assessing the Observation Impact in Air Quality Forecasting
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Atmospheric Chemistry
* 07/15/2009,02/22/2012
* Dacian Daescu,OR,Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 244,403.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This research develops the algorithmic and computational framework needed for a
judicious assessment of the observation impact in air quality modeling. Novel
algorithms in the framework of model-constrained optimization will allow to
account for the data location in the time-space domain, observation type,
instrument type, and data interaction in the presence of multiple observing
systems. Specifically, the research is focused on: development of high-order
adjoint-based observation impact techniques consistent to four-dimensional
variational data assimilation schemes; assessment of forecast sensitivity to
observation error variances and estimation of the forecast impact of
uncertainties in the specification of the input error statistics; development of
efficient computational approaches to allow for practical implementations of the
observation impact algorithms; validation of the novel techniques through
observing system experiments and assessment of the potential impact of new
observing systems.

The ability to accurately represent the distribution of atmospheric pollutants
in relation to various anthropogenic activities is essential for chemical
weather forecasting to protect the population, for answering science questions
related to the future of our planet, and for designing sound environmental
policies. An accurate representation of the chemical composition of the
atmosphere requires a close integration of models and observations through data
assimilation. Data assimilation is the process by which model predictions
utilize measurements to produce an optimal representation of the state of the
atmosphere. As more observations are becoming available and new measurement
networks are being planned, it is of critical importance to develop the
capabilities to best utilize the data, to better manage the sensing resources,
and to design more effective field experiments and networks to support
atmospheric chemistry and air quality studies. This research develops the
computational tools required to optimize the information provided by the
existing observing systems and to provide guidance for future improvements to
the observational network and instruments design. The new developments will also
help the design process of new field experiments and of new chemical monitoring
networks.




