
* 0915214
* Image Reconstruction In Diffuse Optical Tomography With Sparsity Constraints
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, International Research Collab, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 09/01/2009,08/03/2011
* Taufiquar Khan,SC,Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 182,334.00

In this project, the PI will investigate Sparsity Constrained Regularization
(SCR) for solving the Diffuse Optical Tomography (DOT) inverse problem. Two
recent algorithms are available for the implementation of SCR in DOT: the
Generalized Conditional Gradient Method with Sparsity Constraint (GCGM-SC) and
the Generalized Semi-smooth Newton's Method with Sparsity Constraint (GSNM-SC).
The efficacy of GCGM-SC has been demonstrated with both theoretical and
numerical results for linear and some non-linear problems. GCGM-SC, which has
also been derived for linear problems, minimizes a given functional, not
necessarily convex, with sparsity constraint with respect to a given basis. In
this project, the computational aspect of the DOT inverse problem will be
investigated to (i) develop a reconstruction algorithm for DOT using GCGM-SC,
(ii) devise a strategy for computing adaptive basis such as finite elements to
take full advantage of the sparsity constraint idea, (iii) extend GSNM-SC to
nonlinear problems and compare GSNM-SC to Tikhonov regularization, and (iv)
perform convergence analysis of the proposed GSNM-SC and GCGM-SC in DOT. The
interdisciplinary research project seeks to integrate education and research and
foster an international exchange of students. The educational activities in the
project will include: (i) international research experience for students, (ii)
student exchange between Clemson University and the University of Bremen,
Germany, (iii) the incorporation of much of the research activities into
teaching activities to help students bridge course materials with research, (iv)
exposure of high school students to applied mathematics research, and (v)
attraction of underrepresented groups to pursue applied mathematics.

Diffuse Optical Tomography (DOT) is a method for imaging a highly scattering
medium using near infrared and visible light. For example, optical tomography of
biological tissue has potential applications for the early detection of breast
cancer. One major advantage of DOT is that it is less expensive and non-invasive
as compared with x-ray mammography. DOT imaging technology also shows great
promise as a tool for initiating discoveries in physics, biology, and medicine.
However, despite its great potential, it has yet to be commercially or medically
successful as the instability in image reconstruction results in the blurring of
any resulting image. To overcome these difficulties, we will investigate novel
mathematical techniques for image reconstruction. Research applications will
vary from cancer detection in biomedical imaging to land mine detection in
remote sensing to imaging objects in the ocean. Research results are also
expected to contribute to scientific knowledge in neutron transport, transport
in atmospheric science, photothermal spectroscopies and microscopies, laser pump
probes, diffuse photon density waves and new tomography technologies, such as
optical, electronic and thermal imaging, and biomedical diagnostics.
