
* 0915077
* Overcoming the Bottlenecks in Polynomial Chaos: Algorithms and Applications to Systems Biology and Fluid Mechanics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2009,09/21/2009
* George Karniadakis,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2013
* USD 200,000.00

The PI proposes to develop new effectrive methods for solving stochastic partial
differential equations (SPDEs). In particular, the PI will address two
outstanding issues in polynomial chaos (PC) methods for modeling uncertainty in
computer simulations of physical and biological systems. The first one is
related to treating effectively many stochastic dimensions while the second one
is related to modeling accurately white noise. Such problems arise in
applications with small relative correlation length or large number of
independent random parameters. The two approaches are complementary to each
other as problems with very small correlation length can be effectively modeled
by white noise processes.The new ideas are the use of ANOVA decomposition and
the introduction of proper weighted Wiener chaos spaces and stochastic
convolution products. ANOVA provides a hierarchical functional decomposition
that exploits the effective dimensionality of the system. This type of
dimension-wise decomposition can effectively break the curse of dimensionality
in certain approximation problems in which the effective dimensionality is much
lower than the nominal dimensionality. In preliminary work, the PI has
demonstrated the effectiveness of the new approach in approximating efficiently
problems with more than 500 dimensions.

The proposed work will have significant and broad impact as it will set rigorous
foundations in uncertainty quantification, data assimilation and sensitivity
analysis for many physical and biological systems. For example, in computational
fluid dynamics, it will establish a robust and efficient framework to endow
simulations with a composite error bar that goes beyond numerical accuracy and
includes uncertainties in operating conditions, the physical parameters, and the
domain.The proposed work is transformative as it will make stochastic
simulations the standard rather than the exception. It will also affect
fundamentally the way new experiments are designed and the type of questions
that can be addressed, while the interaction between simulation and experiment
will become more meaningful and more dynamic. The PI plans to incorporate these
new ideas in engineering and applied mathematics courses at Brown. Sponsored
graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this research and will
interact with all senior personnel that includes several international visitors.
The PI will work closely with undergraduate students who are involved with
outreach activities through two very effective organizations at Brown that
target women in science and engineering and also middle school students. He also
plans outreach activities for inner-city high schools by developing along with
the teachers computer-based interactive math learning strategies. Preliminary
results working with the MET school have been very encouraging, and the PI plans
to expand this activity nationwide.
