
* 0915057
* Treecode-Accelerated Implicit Solvent Models for Biomolecular Simulations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,02/29/2012
* Robert Krasny,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 242,659.00

Current biomolecular simulations are unable to reach the long time scales needed
to study conformation changes such as protein folding. One of the main obstacles
is the high cost of computing the electrostatic forces among the solvent water
molecules surrounding the protein. To address this issue, this project adopts an
implicit solvent model in which the electrostatic potential satisfies the
Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) equation. Numerical solution of the PB equation poses a
challenge due to the geometric complexity of the molecular surface, the
discontinuity in the dielectric function, and the unbounded computational
domain. The investigators will overcome these difficulties by developing a
boundary integral PB solver using a new Cartesian treecode algorithm for
screened Coulomb interactions. The treecode-accelerated PB solver will be tested
on benchmark examples such as Kirkwood's solution for a spherical surface, and
the results will be compared with those obtained using other PB solvers. In
addition to the electrostatic potential, the code will be extended to compute
other important quantities such as the solvation free energy and solvation
forces needed for dynamics.

One obstacle facing current biomolecular simulations is the expense of
computing the self-induced electrostatic forces among the molecules in the
system. Advances in computer hardware alone won't achieve the improvements
necesssary for studying long time molecular dynamics. This project therefore
focuses on improving the mathematical algorithms used in these computer
simulations. In addition to enabling more accurate and efficient biomolecular
simulations, the algorithms developed will be potentially useful in other
applications where electrostatic forces play a role, for example in modeling
charge transport in fuel cells. The project will contribute to training the
scientific workforce by supporting the research of a postdoc who will be
mentored by the PI.
