
* 0915222
* Fast integral equation methods for moving boundary problems in parabolic PDEs
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2009,08/10/2009
* Johannes Tausch,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2012
* USD 210,259.00

Fast algorithms, such as the Fast Multipole Method, wavelets, or FFT-based
convolutions are by now well established methods for solving boundary integral
formulations of elliptic partial differential equations. These methods have been
successfully applied in potential theory, viscous flow, linear elasticity and
wave propagation.This project seeks to broaden the range of fast boundary
integral solvers to problems governed by parabolic differential equations. In
this case the integral operators involve a convolution over the history of
problem, which increase CPU and storage requirements to impractical levels
unless fast methods are used. Specifically, we will investigate Nystrom methods
for the discretization of boundary integral equations and develop fast
algorithms based on Chebyshev interpolation of the heat kernel. We expect to
evaluate thermal layer potentials in nearly optimal time. The numerical methods
can be applied to problems governed by the heat equation or transient Stokes
flow. Because of unconditional stability and better asymptotic scaling these
methods have the potential to replace the conventional finite element- or finite
difference methods as the workhorse algorithm.

The newly developed numerical techniques will be applied to the problem of laser
melting of a metal film on a substrate and to the interaction of fluid
interfaces with micro- and nanostructured surfaces. These problems are of
current interest for technological applications. The simulations of laser-
induced melting of metal films will lead to potential advances in fabrication of
micro- and nanochannels for lab-on-a-chip devices. Such portable devices can be
used for detection of a range of substances from chemical pollutants to
biological weapons. The simulations of interaction of fluid interfaces with
micro- and nanostructured surfaces are important for the development of the so-
called self-cleaning surfaces, which are considered among the most promising
applications of nanotechnology. The proposed project will also promote learning
through research and interdisciplinary scientific collaborations.
