
* 0915064
* Collaborative Research: Multi-manifold data modeling: theory, algorithms and applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,06/11/2011
* Gilad Lerman,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 362,384.00

The object of this proposal is the analysis of existing methods, and the
development of new ones, for the task of multi-manifold learning, where the data
is assumed to be comprised of low-dimensional structures. The main focus will be
in studying the potential of spectral methods for clustering and modeling of
low-dimensional surfaces embedded in high dimensions; in designing new spectral-
based approached to the task of detection of low-dimensional objects in point
clouds; and the analysis of popular manifold learning algorithms, especially in
terms of robustness to outliers. A number of applications will be specifically
addressed, for example, motion segmentation, structure from motion,
classification of face images, segmentation of diffusion tensor images and the
characterization of cosmological models in astrophysics.

Modern high-dimensional datasets often exhibit low-dimensional structures. Such
situations arise in image processing; e.g., in target tracking, where a typical
trajectory defines a curve through successive frames; and also in medical
imaging, e.g., in the examination of vascular networks. The study of the galaxy
distribution, which contains filamentary and sheet-like structures, is another
example. Traditional methods are known to be ineffective in this context and the
last decade has seen a massive amount of research aiming at improving on these
classical tools. A number of approaches for multi-manifold modeling have been
suggested, mostly by computer scientists and engineers. Applied mathematicians
and statisticians have different perspectives to offer and their contribution is
needed, not only in designing new algorithms but also (and perhaps especially)
in providing theoretical foundations, which researchers in the field have been
asking for. The research in this proposal will address both issues, developing
rigorous mathematical theory combined with carefully designed numerical
strategies addressing specific applications, such as motion segmentation,
structure from motion, classification of face images, medical imaging and the
characterization of cosmological models in astrophysics. The PIs will share
their findings through publications and software, all available online to the
scientific and engineering communities.
