
* 0915153
* User-Friendly Solvers and Solver-Friendly Discretizations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,09/18/2009
* Jinchao Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 219,000.00

In this proposal, various algorithms and theories will be developed to partially
realize the following four-stage strategy for developing user-friendly solvers
and solver-friendly discretizations: (1) develop user-friendly optimal solvers
and relevant theories for a small number of basic solver-friendly systems,
namely the discrete Poisson's equation and its variants; (2) extend the list of
solver-friendly partial differential equations (such as the discrete Stokes and
Maxwell equations) by reducing them to the solution of a handful of basic
solver-friendly systems (for which optimal and user-friendly solvers can be
applied); (3) develop solver-friendly discretization techniques for more
complicated PDEs (systems) such that the discretized systems will join the list
of solver-friendly systems (such as the Eulerian-Lagrangian method for the
Navier-Stokes equation, the Johnson-Segalman equations, and the
magnetohydrodynamics equations); and (4) solve the discretized system from a
general discretization by using a solver-friendly discretization (if it is not a
satisfactory discretization to obtain the numerical solution by itself) as an
auxiliary discretization that can be used as a preconditioner or a means for
obtaining a good initial guess for a linear or nonlinear iteration. These
techniques will be developed with the purpose of making them effective for
solving complicated problems such as non-Newtonian models and fuel cell model
equations. Parallel implementations will be one major consideration in the
design of these algorithms. Theoretical issues---such as the most fundamental
open problem concerning the optimal convergence of algebraic multigrid methods
---will be carefully investigated.

Many problems in scientific and engineering computing can be reduced to the
numerical solution of certain partial differential equations. Over the last few
decades, researchers have expended significant effort on developing efficient
iterative methods for solving discretized partial differential equations. Though
these efforts have yielded many mathematically optimal solvers such as the
multigrid method, the unfortunate reality is that multigrid methods have not
been much used in practical applications. This marked gap between theory and
practice is mainly due to the fragility of traditional multigrid methodology and
the complexity of its implementation. This proposal aims to develop theories and
techniques that will narrow this gap, specifically by developing mathematically
optimal solvers that are robust and easy to use in practice. The proposed study
will focus on an integrated application of user-friendly solvers and solver-
friendly discretizations for various basic partial differential equations that
arise in many applications; therefore, the results of this proposal are expected
to be directly applicable in many areas of computational and applied
mathematics. The solver and discretization techniques we produce, including
mathematical algorithms, analyses, and software, will provide powerful tools for
exploring multiscale models in physics, chemistry, and engineering. Through the
accompanying Matrix-Solver Community Project
(http://www.multigrid.org/solvers/), the results of this proposal will lead to
timely and broad impacts. The proposed project will have a strong educational
impact as well, as it focuses on training graduate students in theoretical and
practical aspects of modern computational science and interdisciplinary
applications.
