
* 0915062
* High Relative Accuracy Iterative Algorithms for Large Scale Matrix Eigenvalue Problems with Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2009,05/15/2009
* Qiang Ye,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2013
* USD 178,250.00

Eigenvalue computation is a fundamental problem in numerical linear algebra.
While there are numerous established algorithms for this, they do not guarantee
in general to compute, in a floating point arithmetic, smaller eigenvalues to
high relative accuracy. Indeed, the relative errors of smaller eigenvalues
computed by conventional algorithms are proportional to the condition number of
the matrix. Research over the last two decades has resulted in several classes
of special matrices for which the eigenvalues/eigenvectors can be computed to
high relative accuracy (i.e. independent of the condition number). All existing
high relative accuracy algorithms, however, appear to concern small (dense)
matrices only. Yet, large matrices are often inherently ill-conditioned and it
is typically a few smaller eigenvalues that are of interests. The goals of this
proposal are to study high relative accuracy iterative algorithms for computing
a few eigenvalues/eigenvectors of a large symmetric positive definite matrix.
The investigator will develop algorithms for matrices arising in some important
applications such as discretization of differential operators and dimensionality
reduction in machine learning, where special structure/properties of the
matrices may be exploited to achieve higher accuracy.

Spectral (eigenvalue) analysis is a widely used mathematical tool in science and
engineering. Eigenvalues of differential operators describe the natural
vibrating frequencies of mechanical structures. Dimensionality reduction of
high-dimensional data in machine learning often leads to minimization of certain
quadratic functionals, the solutions of which are eigenvectors. Solving such
eigenvalue problems to high relative accuracy pose a challenge to existing
algorithms. Therefore, the proposed works will not only advance theoretical
foundations and algorithm developments for large scale eigenvalue problems, but
also contribute to the general areas of applied science/engineering and machine
learning by significantly improving the accuracy of the algorithms used in these
applications.
