
* 0915150
* Computational Methods for Multiscale Turbulent Reacting Flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,08/07/2009
* Tarek Echekki,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 217,464.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop computational methods
within a multiscale modeling framework for turbulent reacting flows. The
framework is based on hybrid coarse-grained and fine-grained(resp.) simulations
based on large-eddy simulations (LES) and a stochastic low-dimensional model,
the one-dimensional turbulence (ODT) model. The ODT model is designed to capture
the coupling between turbulent and molecular transport and chemistry/heat
release. The framework has been developed by the PI for combustion to directly
model subgrid scale physics associated with turbulence-chemistry interactions;
but, it can easily have broader applications for multiscale driven flows
involving 3D deterministic solutions with low-dimensional stochastic solutions.
The work proposed here extends the model formulation to address the development
of multiscale computational tools to couple the two solution schemes. The
approaches involve physics-based matching of filtered subgrid scale stresses
between LES and ODT as well as the implementation multiresolution methods based
on the wavelet transform. Data assimilation strategies will be formulated and
implemented for managing the transfer of statistics from the stochastic solution
to the high-order deterministic LES solution. Finally, strategies to accelerate
the integration of chemical kinetics and molecular transport will be
investigated to improve the computational efficiency of the hybrid LES-ODT
formulation. The various formulations will be validated with direct numerical
simulations (DNS).

The proposed effort addresses a novel simulation framework to study combustion
flows. The combustion of fossil and novel fuels make up the lion?s share of
energy consumption in the US and abroad; and the ability to simulate combustion
flows, with expanding computational resources and know-how, can eventually
replace building expensive prototypes of engines, and speed up the design-to-
production process, and help mitigate the generation of pollutants and
greenhouse gases. Combustion simulation is complex, because an account of
complex physics from the molecular scale to the device scale is required; the
investigator and his colleagues will develop multiscale strategies to simulate
combustion flows through hybrid simulations that are designed to addresses
physics at different ranges of scales. The combined outcome is a bootstrapping
process for these simulations that results in computationally efficient
strategies to represent the broad ranges of scales in combustion flows. Much of
the effort requires insight to the physics of combustion flows and energy and
environmental implications; but, other aspects of the effort draw upon advances
in information technology (including access to supercomputing resources,
advances in software) and computational mathematics.
