
* 0915238
* Efficient Solution of Advection Dominated PDE Constrained Optimization Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,09/13/2009
* Matthias Heinkenschloss,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,825.00

The aim of this proposal is to develop, analyze and implement optimization
algorithms that integrate multilevel iterative solvers, adaptive mesh refinement
methods, and so-called `all-at-once' methods for the solution of optimization
problems governed by advection dominated partial differential equations (PDEs).
The presence of strong advection in the governing PDE creates many challenges
for the numerical solution of these optimization problems, beyond the challenges
already encountered in the numerical simulation of single advection dominated
PDEs and beyond the many difficulties in solving PDE constrained optimization
problems with weak or no advection. One reason for the additional challenges
arising in the optimization context is the presence of the so-called adjoint
equation, which is also an advection dominated PDE, but with advection given by
the negative of the advection in the governing equation. This can cause
significant and perhaps unexpected differences in the behavior of discretization
schemes and iterative solvers when they are extended from the application to
single advection dominated PDEs to the solution of PDE constrained optimization
problems. This research will analyze the sources of these differences, their
impact on the quality of computed solution and on the efficiency of solution
algorithms. Another goal is to devise modifications of multilevel iterative
solvers, adaptive mesh refinement methods, and so-called KKT solvers to make
them robust against the presence of advection.

Many important real-life applications such as the shape optimization of
technological devices, the optimal control of systems, and the identification of
parameters in environmental processes lead to optimization problems governed by
systems of advection dominated partial differential equations. This research
addresses mathematical and algorithmic issues that are crucial for the reliable
and efficient solution of these problems. It will lead to a better theoretical
understanding of the solution properties of these optimization problems as well
as to new computational tools for their reliable and efficient solution.
Furthermore, it will provide training opportunities for students in an important
area of computational science.
