
* 0915013
* Mesoscale Computational Modeling and Analysis of Materials Microstructure
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2009,09/15/2009
* Maria Emelianenko,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2013
* USD 267,817.00

Most metallic and ceramic materials used in a variety of applications, including
aircraft, automobiles, and devices such as computers are polycrystalline, i.e.
are made up of many microscopic crystals (grains) held together by boundaries.
Grain boundaries have a property called ?grain boundary energy?, which is
responsible for how strong the grains are connected to each other. Depending on
the energy, polycrystalline structures may have very different properties. Very
little is known about this energy and its dependence on the crystallographic
nature of the boundary. The main objective of this work is to create efficient
mathematical models and numerical algorithms for predicting and controlling
materials microstructure by quantifying the kinetics of the coarsening processes
and understanding the influence of grain boundary energy on microstructural
evolution. The novelty of the proposed approach lies in placing focus on
understanding statistical effects of the topological reconfigurations during the
grain boundary network evolution. This project will allow to develop a new
stochastic framework for mesoscopic analysis of materials based in part on
recently discovered evolution equations and an in-depth study of grain
disappearance rates. This research will link coarsening processes common to
nearly all materials with underlying stochastic processes that characterize
specific microstructures by means of accurate and validated computational
modeling based on random walk theory, modulated Poisson processes and
distributed Boltzmann equations. Significant effort will be dedicated to
optimizing performance of numerical algorithms, such as numerical schemes for
solving fractional integro-differential equations with nonlocal kernels and
methods for parameter estimation in stochastic processes. The models and
algorithms developed and analyzed in this project will offer an accurate and low
cost alternative to large-scale simulations and other numerical techniques
traditionally used in studying interfacial properties of complex materials.

This work will lead to control over grain growth kinetics, a primary issue for
materials science applications, and to a deeper understanding of the materials
parameters and their interaction across different scales. This will have a
direct impact on many practically important areas by advancing the synthesis of
novel ?smart? materials - highly sophisticated materials, possessing very
specific set of properties to target particular applications necessary to meet
increasing demands of the society in the era of tremendous economic and
environmental challenges. For instance, functional materials that can reliably
withstand extreme thermal and pressure environments are indispensable for
solving energy-related problems such as improving power plant efficiency, while
lighter weight high strength components are required for designing new
generation vehicles with reduced fuel consumption. The models developed by the
investigator and collaborators will be used to build a suite of algorithms
capable of simulating and analyzing microstructures that can be predisposed to
certain type of behavior under external stimuli. These methods will allow for
faster and more reliable analysis, control and optimization of materials
properties and will equip engineers with powerful predictive tools that can be
readily transferred to industry for modeling the processing of commodity
materials.
