
* 0915006
* Time-Spectral Method for Unsteady Viscous Flow on Moving and Deformable Grids with the High-order Spectral Difference Method
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2009,08/02/2009
* Antony Jameson,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2012
* USD 474,394.00

This project extends the high-order spectral difference (SD) method for three-
dimensional compressible viscous flows to systems with moving boundaries and
deformable grids, and also to combine it with the time-spectral (TS) method to
treat periodic unsteady flows. Compared to conventional time accurate methods,
the SD-TS method has the potential to significantly reduce the computational
cost of simulating time periodic flows. The extension to moving boundaries is
needed to enable application of the high order SD methodology to perform
accurate simulations of numerous devices in energy and transportation systems,
such as wind turbines, rotorcraft and autonomous flapping wing micro air
vehicles. Recent development of the SD method by the principal investigator and
his colleagues has confirmed it accuracy, robustness and efficiency in dealing
with high Reynolds number turbulent flows. The SD method offers a great
flexibility in choosing optimal spatial discretization by varying the polynomial
order. A baseline SD code has been developed based on quadrilateral/hexahedral
grid elements. An element splitting algorithm has also been developed to
partition each triangular/tetrahedral element into three or four
quadrilateral/hexahedral elements. This enables the use of general grids with
mixed elements. For time-dependent high-Reynolds number problems, implicit
Lower-Upper Symmetric Gauss-Seidel (LU-SGS) time stepping approach has been
developed in conjunction with a p-multigrid method to speed up convergence of
the SD solver. In order to achieve the above goal of treating devices as complex
as a rotating wind turbine, the proposed research must address several major
challenges. The main tasks being undertaken in the ongoing research by the
investigator and his colleagues are 1) Extension of the SD method to moving and
deformable grids by transforming the Navier-Stokes equations on a moving
physical domain to a fixed reference domain by a blended mapping technique; 2)
Parallelization of the three-dimensional solver using MeTis for domain
decomposition and MPI for message passing; 3) Development of non-conforming
hexahedral elements with hanging nodes to allow geometric flexibility and
variable order; 4) Implementation of the Time Spectral method to reduce the
computational cost of simulating periodic time dependent flows.

The numerical simulation techniques being developed in this project are crucial
to advancing technology in a wide range of energy and transportation systems,
with significant potential for reducing environmental impact. Many such systems
require simulations of flows with moving boundaries. An immediate target of the
research is to improve the state of the art in wind turbine design. The
importance of sustainable energy both to reduce U.S. dependence on imported oil
supplies and to reduce environmental damage due to fossil fuels is by now widely
recognized. Wind power is a resource with tremendous untapped potential.
Existing commercial flow simulation codes use low order methods which are too
numerically dissipative to allow accurate tracking of the vortex wake which are
crucial to wind turbine performance. The high order methods which will result
from this project will provide a basis for the systematic future development of
superior wind turbine designs. Potential applications to transportation systems
which could have significant economic and environmental benefits include drag
reduction of road vehicles, both passenger cars and trucks, and improvements in
the efficiency and reduction of the acoustic signature of gas turbines and
rotorcraft, both of which incorporate moving blades.
