
* 0917661
* Workshop on Stochastic Multiscale Methods: Mathematical Analysis and Algorithms; August 2009, Los Angeles, CA
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2009,08/04/2009
* Roger Ghanem,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2011
* USD 24,890.00

Exchanging information across scales is one of the most significant challenges
in multiscale modeling and simulation. By necessity, and naturally within a
multiscale context, information is truncated as it is presented to a coarser
scale, and is enriched as it traverses the opposite path. Information is lost
and corrupted as it is, respectively, upscaled and downscaled. Mitigating these
errors can be set on rigorous ground through a probabilistic description of
information, whence finite-dimensional approximations of measures provides an
analytical path for describing the coarsening and refining of information.
Stochastic analysis, therefore, provides a rational context for the analysis of
multiscale methods. This workshop on "Stochastic Multiscale Methods:
Mathematical Analysis and Algorithms" will serve to define challenges and
opportunities in the development of stochastic multiscale methods for various
problems in science and engineering. Issues of uncertainty quantification, model
validation, and optimization under uncertainty have taken center stage in many
areas of science and engineering. Likewise, multiscale modeling and computing
capabilities are becoming the standard against which model-based predictions are
gauged. It thus behooves the scientific community, at this juncture, to
elucidate the mathematical foundation of stochastic multiscale concepts so as to
ensure a steady evolution of scientific capabilities as engines of economical
growth societal well-being. This workshop will initiate a dialog between
mathematicians, mechanicians, and computational scientists that will lay the
foundation for an accelerated growth in stochastic multiscale methods.

Rapid growth in computational resources has heightened the expectation that
scientific knowledge can indeed be a driver for societal well-being and
betterment. At the same time, our ability to measure the natural and social
world around has significantly increased, aided by technological development in
sensors, the internet, and other modalities of communication. Science is thus
faced, simultaneously, with a complex description of reality at an
unprecendented resolution, and the possibility to describe this reality with
mathematical models of increasing complexity. Multiscale descriptions of
physical problems can be viewed as attempts to take advantage of these new
oppotunities, while tackling the conceptual challenges they inevitably present.
The communities of stochastic analysis and computational science have evolved
essentially along separate paths. The path forward, however, in the direction of
disruptive scientific impact, requires significant exchange and collaboration.
It is the intent of this Workshop ``Stochastic Multiscale Methods: Mathematical
Analysis and Algorithms'' to bring together leading researchers in these two
fields with view to delineate new horizons and forge new synergies that will
accelerate the evolution of multiscale capabilities to become an enabler of
scientific and economic progress.
