
* 0929241
* Numerical Methods for Wave Propagation Problems: Efficient Resolution of Multiple Scales
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/02/2008,05/14/2009
* Thomas Hagstrom,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2009
* USD 50,858.00

The focus of our research will be the detailed study of questions we deem
crucial to the development of reliable, efficient, and general computational
tools for wave propagation problems. These, in turn, can have long-term impacts
on numerous fields in science and engineering. Precisely we will: (i) Further
develop accurate methods for truncating the computational domain near regions
where full approximations are required, extending the range of application of
the successful methods we have previously constructed to inhomogeneous and
anisotropic media as well as to multiscale computations; (ii) Construct and
analyze novel high-resolution approximation schemes enabling accurate
simulations with near-optimal degrees-of-freedom per wavelength, mild time-step
stability restrictions, and easy coupling with grid grid generation software to
efficiently treat problems in complex geometry; (iii) Apply our methods to
difficult problems in aeroacoustics; (iv) Collaborate with other computational
scientists who are building and maintaining high-quality software for simulating
waves.

Wave propagation phenomena are ubiquitous in nature. Although waves may be
produced by physical processes ranging from electric currents to turbulent flows
to massive earthquakes, their basic features allow a unified mathematical
description. From the perspective of simulations on modern computers, it is
reasonable to hope that generally applicable tools can be constructed which will
be useful in answering important questions throughout the basic and applied
sciences. The challenge in the computational analysis of waves is that almost
all problems of interest exhibit widely varying spatial scales. This is a
consequence of the fundamental fact that waves propagate long distances relative
to their characteristic dimension, the wavelength. We thus will work to develop
methods which allow us to avoid the direct computation of the wave field
everywhere along its path, concentrating computational resources only where they
are needed. In addition to our work on basic techniques with broad applications,
we plan focused studies on problems related to the generation of sound by jets
and its propagation into the environment. We believe that the fundamental
studies we will carry out can motivate the development of better sound
suppression technologies for commercial and military aircraft.
