
* 0940863
* International Conference on Advances in Scientific Computing; December 2009; Providence, RI
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2009,09/28/2009
* Chi-Wang Shu,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2010
* USD 19,686.00

This purpose of this grant is to support an International Conference on Advances
in Scientific Computing at Brown University on December 6-8, 2009, to honor the
memory of Professor David Gottlieb and to review recent advances and explore
exciting new directions in scientific computing and related numerical solution
of partial differential equations and mathematical modeling for time dependent
problems and their applications. A notable feature of this conference will be
the emphasis on the crucial role of significant mathematics in the design of
advanced algorithms applicable to real world problems. The conference will
include invited speakers ranging from numerical analysts with a strong interest
in applications, to applied and computational mathematicians to engineers,
physicists and scientists in other fields. The list of invited speakers includes
both very senior leaders in the field and relatively young scientists.
Represented in this list are both women and minority mathematicians.

The proposed conference will be an effective venue for the exchange of ideas
among a diversified list of invited speakers and participants. It will provide
valuable guidance to young participants to identify promising problems and
application areas. It is expected that this conference will push forward the
research in algorithm design and applications utilizing significant mathematics
to improve efficiency and effectiveness. These algorithms have been and will
continue to be widely used in applications which are of national interest,
including homeland security (image processing and pattern recognizing),
environment, aerospace engineering, communications, energy science, and climate
modeling.
