
* 0956072
* CAREER: New Paradigms in Geometric Analysis of Data Sets and their Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,05/18/2010
* Gilad Lerman,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2016
* USD 551,568.00

The PI and his collaborators will develop algorithms for detecting and
recovering underlying sparse geometric structures from massive high-dimensional
data sets. In particular, they plan to explore the following frameworks:
geometric optimization for the purpose of detecting low-dimensional geometric
structures within point clouds; multiscale methods for the effective detection
of local scales and their combination for capturing the most relevant local and
global geometric information; online and adaptive algorithms for organizing data
as mixtures of manifolds while separating outliers. The proposed methodologies
will be justified by theoretical guarantees on performance, and these
methodologies will be applied to a variety of data sets, many of which will be
provided by industrial collaborators. The applications include: automatic
detection of moving objects in video surveillance cameras; motion segmentation
of video images, automatic segmentation of blood vessels in the brain taken via
dynamic CT scans into arteries and veins. Recently there has been a fundamental
shift in the analysis and manipulation of certain types of data sets such as
digital satellite images and magnetic resonance images (MRI). This revolution
relies on the fact that while such images seemingly have a complex and high-
dimensional structure, in fact they are relatively low-dimensional or "sparse".
The basic observation was that this sparsity could be exploited to more rapidly
acquire, transmit, reconstruct, and analyze such images. The PI and his
collaborators are extending such "dimensionality reduction" techniques to more
general instances of data sets with the aim of identifying when seemingly high-
dimensional collections of data are actually much more simple, and to then get a
grip on what the simplified structure is. Such research has several important
applications related to making computer aided decisions about data which has
both security and medical significance. The hope is that the research yields
speedy, efficient, and proven algorithms for separating various and important
features of data which is changing in time. The practical benefits of the
research would include reliable automation of security cameras. Many of the
applications and themes suggested in this proposal are accessible to a broad
community. The PI plans to take advantage of this accessibility in order to
integrate the research effort with the education of younger researchers and
students. In particular, the PI is committed to provide material to mathematics
educators at all levels and involve undergraduate and graduate students in
emerging industrial research. The PI will share his joint findings through
publications and software, all available online to the scientific and
engineering communities as well as the public at large.
