
* 0964344
* IMA PIP Workshop on Numerical Modeling of Complex Fluids and MHD
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2010,05/18/2010
* James Brannick,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2011
* USD 11,200.00

The most common origin and manifestation of anomalous phenomena in complex
fluids are different ``elastic'' effects. These can be ascribed to the
elasticity of deformable particles, elastic repulsion between charged liquid
crystals, polarization of colloids or multi-component phases, elastic effects
due to microstructures formation, or bulk elastic effects due to the presence of
polymer molecules in viscoelastic complex fluids. Mathematically, such elastic
effects can be represented in terms of internal variables. Examples of such
internal variables are: the orientational order parameter in liquid crystals,
the distribution density function in the dumb-bell model for polymeric
materials, the magnetic field in magnetohydrodynamic fluids, and the volume
fraction in mixtures of different materials. The different rheological and
hydrodynamic properties of these materials can in turn be attributed to the
special coupling between the transport of these internal variables and the
induced elastic stresses which typically manifest on all scales, and to a large
extent determine the specific properties of the system, such as the stability
and regularity of particle configurations and the likelihood of specific pattern
formations in the system. The understanding of such complex mechanisms which
couple different physical scales is crucial in designing accurate mathematical
and numerical models and algorithms in order to simulate such systems. This
workshop is based on the premise that gaining significant new results and
thereby obtaining deeper insight and understanding of materials described by
complex fluids (e.g., polymers, emulsions, liquid crystals, magnetorheological
fluids, blood suspensions) requires a combined approach consisting of
experiment, modeling, analysis, and simulation. The primary objective of the
workshop is thus to gather students, junior faculty, and experts to discuss new
integrated modeling techniques that properly address the fundamental unresolved
issues common to studies of complex fluids: consistency of models with physics,
rigorous analysis of the models, numerical and scientific computing issues, and
the experimental verification and validation of the predictive capabilities of
the mathematical and numerical models.

Modeling and simulating the rich pool of designer and smart materials described
by complex fluids requires marshaling interdisciplinary research forces to
develop and analyze mathematical models and computational tools for such
problems. Recently, numerous methodologies and frameworks have been developed in
an aim to capture the various time and length scales involved in studies of such
complex materials. This workshop will gather key contributors to the development
of these new multiscale modeling and simulations techniques, with the aim of
introducing these ideas to students and young researchers and also promoting
interdisciplinary research on complex fluids applications amongst participants
in the future. The workshop will highlight topics from interrelated research
areas for both deterministic and stochastic computational approaches,
concentrating on: an Energetic Variational approach for multiscale modeling and
simulation; computationally and experimentally guided model validation and
further development of robust adaptive numerical models and solution methods.
