
* 1008983
* Collaborative Research: Randomized Algorithms in Linear Algebra and Numerical Evaluations on Massive Datasets
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2010,05/29/2013
* Petros Drineas,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 220,413.00

Data matrices have structural properties that present challenges and
opportunities for both the Numerical Linear Algebra (NLA) community and the
Theory of Algorithms (ToA) community. Matrix factorizations, such as the
eigendecomposition, the rank-revealing QR factorization, and the Singular Value
Decomposition, have been widely used for information retrieval. Historically,
matrix factorizations have been of central interest in NLA since one can use
them to express a problem in such a way that it can be solved more easily. ToA,
on the other hand, has recently addressed the computation of such decompositions
from a sampling perspective. The two approaches are complementary. However, thus
far, the two communities have not worked closely together to integrate them.
More often than not, each community is only cursorily aware of developments in
the other community. Defining significant research directions that both
communities can work on, and applying the resulting linear algebraic algorithms
to data analysis problems (among others) will lead to important breakthroughs.
The main objective for this proposal is to bridge the existing gap and bring
together NLA and ToA researchers to promote cross-fertilization of ideas that
could have immediate and long-term impact on data analysis. Towards that end,
the PIs will work on set of prototypical research problems that can
significantly benefit from ideas and research in both NLA and ToA. These
problems range from approximating the singular values and vectors of a matrix by
element-wise sampling to random-projection-based algorithms for least-squares
problems and the design of randomized algorithms for the widely used non-
negative matrix factorization.

This proposal seeks to explore the complementary perspectives that the Numerical
Linear Algebra and the Theory of Algorithms (ToA) communities bring to linear
algebra and matrix computations. This is a timely quest, motivated by
technological developments over the last two decades that permit the automatic
generation of large datasets. Such datasets are often modeled as matrices. The
proposed work will serve as a demonstration project on the fruitfulness of
collaboration between the NLA and the ToA communities on problems that are of
common interest. It is expected that the proposed research will demonstrate
commonality in the two approaches, as well as highlight the advantages of the
dual perspective. Through outreach activities, the PIs hope to motivate even
more researchers to undertake similar investigations on related topics. The
proposed algorithms will be numerically evaluated on a suite of matrices from
application domains that the PIs have been working on over the past few years,
in order to understand better their properties and to demonstrate their
potential in dealing with the modern, massive datasets. More specifically, the
PIs will test the proposed strategies on population genetics data in order to
infer ancestry of individuals, as well as gene expression data in order to
investigate hypotheses that correlate genes and diseases. As such, we expect
that the developed algorithms will impact the areas of linear algebra,
randomized algorithms, information retrieval and data mining, as well as
bioinformatics. Finally, in order to disseminate the proposed research, the PIs
intend to organize workshops (following the example of the Workshops on
Algorithms for Modern Massive Datasets in 2006, 2008, and 2010; the PIs were co-
organizers of these workshops) and working group meetings, and will disseminate
their research via blogs and articles intended for broader audiences.
