
* 1011791
* IMA Participating Institution Graduate Summer School 2010: Computational Wave Propagation, Michigan State University
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2010,09/20/2010
* Jianliang Qian,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2011
* USD 27,435.00

The investigator and his collaborators are organizing the 2010 IMA participating
institutes graduate summer school. Additional support from the NSF will enable
the investigators to bring in students from non-IMA affiliated institutions and
invite domestic and international speakers to give lectures. The 2010 summer
school on computational wave propagation covers three different topics: advanced
numerical methods for full wave propagation, contemporary asymptotic methods for
wave equations, and applications of wave equations. The part of the advanced
numerical methods for full wave propagation will be led by Jean-Claude Nedelec
of Polytechnique, France. The part of the contemporary asymptotic methods for
wave equations will be led by Robert Burridge. The part of applications of wave
equations will consist of roughly twelve lectures by active researchers in wave
propagation. This is a unique and timely synthesis of disciplines that will
position future researchers for the next step in computational wave propagation.
In turn, this will have long-term impact in applied mathematics, engineering and
industrial applications.

The IMA graduate summer school has a 19-year record of excellent programs that
have jump-started the careers of many young mathematicians. Average attendance
for these events in recent years has been 58 participants, including organizers
and speakers. The 2010 graduate summer school brings students together with
outstanding researchers in an intimate and intensive setting which will lead
students to the frontiers of mathematical research. Students have a chance to
get to know world-class mathematicians on a less formal basis than their
interactions with the faculty at their home institutions. Feedback from
participants of past programs has been unequivocally positive. The IMA summer
schools are an important option for graduate students in mathematics as they
reach for advanced degrees, and they are an attractive feature of affiliate
institutions' graduate programs. The IMA and its affiliates are particularly
committed to helping to advance the careers of mathematics students from under-
represented groups. In addition, the focus of the 2010 graduate summer school is
on computational wave propagation which has many important applications in
nanotechnology, material sciences, and radar technology.
