
* 1013845
* Discrete and continuous nonlocal material models and their coupling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/11/2010
* Max Gunzburger,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 330,000.00

The rational design of materials, the development of accurate and efficient
material simulation, design, and control algorithms, and the determination of
the response of materials to environments and loads occurring in practice all
require an understanding of mechanics at disparate spatial and temporal scales.
For this reason, there has been very considerable interest in the development of
multiscale material models. A common approach for this purpose is to couple
atomistic and continuum models, the first used to accurately resolve defects at
small scales, the second to efficiently treat regions lacking defects. For
example, many have tried to couple nonlocal molecular dynamics (MD) with local
classical continuum elasticity (CE) models with limited success because, for all
but the smallest samples, there remains a gap between the scales for which MD is
tractable and CE is valid and also because one has to overcome problems arising
from the coupling a nonlocal model (MD) to a local one (CE). The project
addresses these difficulties by replacing MD with a newly developed variant (QC-
QR) of the quasicontinuum (QC) method and CE by the nonlocal peridynamics (PD)
continuum model. The QC-QR method approximates the well-known QC method by
replacing the sums that determine the force on each active particle in the QC
method by shorter sums defined using a ?quadrature? rule. The PD method does not
involve spatial derivatives so that it can accurately account for defects at
relatively small scales. The gains in efficiency effected by the QC-QR method
relative to MD and QC and the gains in the range of validity effected by PD
relative to CE, added to the fact that both QC-QR and PD are nonlocal models,
means that a coupled QC-QR/PD model has the potential of overcoming the
difficulties encountered for coupled MD/CE models that were alluded to above. In
fact, QC-QR and PD are themselves multiscale material models, so that one
significant aspect of the project is to explore the limits of their use as
multiscale mono-models for materials. The project also considers the multiscale
composite QC-QR/PD model whose efficacy is determined through computational and
analytical studies. Likewise, the use of the QC-QR/PD coupled model as a bridge
between MD and CE is considered. The rational design of new materials and their
use in applications require an understanding of mechanics at disparate spatial
and temporal scales ranging from that of atoms to that of the size of aircraft
and bridges. For this reason, there has been very considerable interest in the
development of multiscale material models that are valid over all that range of
scales. Previous attempts at coupling models that are valid over limited scales
so as to produce a composite model that is valid at all scales have not met with
complete success because of several reasons, including the fact that a gap
exists between the range of validity of some models and the range of
tractability of others. Our goal is to produce a model for the mechanics of
materials that is valid and tractable over a wider range of scales than can be
handled by models in current use. We have participated in the development of new
models, one that extends the range of validity of models that can operate at the
large-end of the scales and one that improves the efficiency of models that
operate at the atomistic scale. We make further studies of these models to
determine more precisely their range of validity and tractability. We then
study, through mathematical and computational means, how best to couple the two
models and to quantify the resulting improvements over existing approaches.
Finally, we test the new composite model by applying it to the solution of a
series of test problems.
