
* 1014666
* Automated Structure Generation, Error Correction, and Semi-Definite Programming Techniques for Structured Quadratic Inverse Eigenvale Problems: Theory, Algorithms and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
* 09/01/2010,07/01/2010
* Moody Chu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 194,999.00

Mathematical modeling has become an indispensable task in almost every
discipline of sciences. However, since most of the information gathering devices
or methods have only finite bandwidth, one cannot avoid the fact that the models
employed often are not exact. Techniques of inverse problems that validate,
determine, or estimate the parameters of the system according to its observed or
expected behavior, therefore, are critically important. One of the most
frequently used models in important applications including applied mechanics,
electrical oscillation, vibro-acoustics, fluid mechanics, signal processing, and
finite element discretization of PDEs is the notion of quadratic pencils. The
inverse problem of "constrained quadratic model reconstruction from
eigeninformation" is essential for the understanding and management of complex
systems, yet the fundamental understanding of either its theory or computation
is still in a quite primitive state. This proposal intends to develop theoretic
understanding and to implement the concept into new numerical algorithms that
are effective in aspects of robustness, speed and accuracy. The ultimate goal of
this project is to establish a mechanism (followed by a software package) that
can automatically, systematically and universally reduce the inexactness and
uncertainty within the model while maintaining feasibility conditions required
by the system. This research will take on three specific challenges for solving
quadratic inverse eigenvalue problems with innovative but promising approaches
among which are the automated structure generation, consistency correction, and
semi-definite programming techniques. This project is expected to find important
applications ranging from new development of numerical algorithms to theoretic
solution of difficult problems. The resulting technology would significantly
advance knowledge in the emerging field of model updating and related problems
which, in turn, would have substantial impact on broad areas in scientific and
engineering fields.



In mathematical modeling, techniques of inverse problems that validate,
determine, or estimate the parameters of the system according to its observed or
expected behavior are critically important. This research concentrates on the
inverse model reconstruction problems with their pertinence to physical and
engineering applications. These problems have been strongly motivated by
scientific and industrial applications, including structural mechanics such as
vibration control and stability analysis of bridges, buildings and highways,
vibro-acoustics such as predictive coding of sound, biomedical signal and image
processing, time series forecasting, information technology, and others. Thus
this project will impact a wide variety of industries utilizing these
applications, including aerospace, automobile, manufacturing and biomedical
engineering. The greatest challenge facing these industries is to manufacture
increasingly improved products with limited engineering and computing resources.
A great deal of money and effort has been spent in these industries to
satisfactorily perform the model updating task. However, the lack of proper
theory and computational tools often force these industries to solve their
problems in an ad hoc fashion. An improved analytical model that can be used
with confidence for future designs is an essential tool in achieving this
objective. The proposed research has not only strong mathematical foundation but
also significant mathematical modeling and experimental aspects using industrial
data which should be instantly welcome by the industries. Students working on
this project will receive a valuable inter-disciplinary training blending
mathematics and scientific computing with various areas of engineering and
applied sciences. Such expertise is rare to find, but there is an increasing
demand both in academia and industries.
