
* 1014817
* Novel mixed and DG methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,08/04/2010
* Jay Gopalakrishnan,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2012
* USD 188,005.00

Ever increasing demands on computational solution techniques necessitate
development of new and improved methods. Two classes of methods, increasingly
being used in simulation of physical and engineering systems, are finite element
methods of the mixed type and the discontinuous Galerkin (DG) type. Building
sound mathematical foundations for these methods increases their reliability,
reveals avenues to improve them, and helps discover radically new methods. In
this spirit, five lines of research are proposed on the following topics: (i)
mixed methods (ii) discontinuous Petrov-Galerkin (DPG) schemes(iii) hybridizable
discontinuous Galerkin (HDG) methods (iv) simulation of photonic membranes, and
(v) complex axisymmetric simulations. The first deals with new stress elements
and their implications in mixed methods for elasticity with weakly imposed
stress symmetry. The second pursues a new DPG paradigm in the design of schemes
where optimal test spaces are automatically computed. The third, concerns DG
methods that mimic mixed methods, yet having the added advantage of flexible
stabilization, and continues a line of research previously supported by the
foundation. Both source problems and eigenproblems are considered. The remaining
two lines of research, considers applications in need of new mathematical
developments, e.g., (iv) needs good nonlinear eigensolvers and (v) needs sound
treatment of singularities.

Methods for computer simulation are an indispensable tool in modern scientific
research. The proposed research brings fresh mathematical ingredients that spawn
novel simulation methods. These mathematical techniques have the advantage of
being broadly applicable. Accordingly, several disparate application areas can
be targeted, including solid mechanics, transport phenomena, fluid flow, wave
propagation, triggered lightning, and nanophotonic membranes. To detail a few
examples, application of the new methods to fluid flow, through industrial and
academic collaborations, can potentially benefit the aircraft industry. Reliable
simulation methods can inexpensively guide experimentation of next generation
nanophotonic devices. Finally, human resource development is integrated into the
activities through training and participation of graduate students in the
research.
