
* 1015002
* A New Finite Element Formulation of the Level Set Method for Free Boundary Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,06/10/2011
* Dmitri Kuzmin,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 157,039.00

Many problems in mathematical biology and medical research are characterized by
the presence of moving interfaces that may have a complex shape and undergo
topological changes. The goal of this project is the development of an adaptive
variational level set method for numerical simulation of such problems. A major
challenge is the need to maintain the signed distance property of the convected
level set function and guarantee mass conservation for incompressible flows. In
existing level set methods, these constraints are commonly enforced at a
postprocessing step when an irrecoverable damage has already been done. In the
proposed finite element formulation, numerical solutions are constrained using
Lagrange multipliers in the variational formulation for the Galerkin finite
element method. This eliminates the need for postprocessing and the associated
numerical errors. Algebraic flux correction is performed to satisfy the discrete
maximum principle and secure nonlinear stability of the constrained problem. The
result is a high-resolution finite element scheme that preserves all important
properties of the exact solution. A further gain of accuracy is achieved with a
new mesh adaptation strategy that combines local mesh refinement/coarsening with
Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) displacement of nodes.

This interdisciplinary research will help scientists and medical doctors to gain
a better understanding of fluid flows that take place in human body. Computer
simulations are feasible for almost every part of the cardiovascular system, and
multiple experiments can be performed without causing any hazard to the patient.
However, the usefulness of information obtained in this way depends on the
accuracy of the employed numerical methods. It is easy to develop a code that
produces beautiful colorful pictures but it is difficult to guarantee that the
results are quantitatively correct, especially for the class of free boundary
problems considered in this project. It is not unusual that numerical solutions
exhibit spurious oscillations, or a spontaneous loss of mass is observed. To
make matters worse, other departures from physical reality may remain unnoticed
and lead to wrong decisions regarding the appropriate medical treatment. The
proposed methodology is designed to rule out such situations. The revised level
set method is backed by mathematical theory and has a number of unique features
which make it possible to capture the deformation and motion of evolving
interfaces with high precision. This research paves the way to reliable
simulation of drug delivery, tumor growth, and other biological processes.
