
* 1015114
* Sage: Unifying Mathematical Software for Scientists, Engineers, and Mathematicians
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CI REUSE, Combinatorics
* 09/15/2010,09/13/2010
* William Stein,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 08/31/2014
* USD 140,000.00

Sage is comprehensive unified open source software for mathematical and
scientific computing that builds on high-quality mainstream methodologies and
tools. This proposal would further the development of Sage by funding a series
of three Sage Days workshops per year. The primary thrust of these workshops
would be to improve the usability and value of Sage for scientists, engineers,
and mathematicians, and especially as a tool to support research and education
by undergraduate and graduate students. Morever, many graduate students would
receive funding via their involvement in the workshops.

Sage has the potential to have a transformative impact on the computational
sciences, by helping to set a high standard for reproducible computational
research and peer reviewed publication of code. Sage excels at supporting
cutting edge research in a broad range of areas of computational mathematics,
ranging from applied numerical computation to the most abstract realms of number
theory. All data and software that comes out of this project will be made freely
available over the Internet. This will result in tools that may transform how
researchers in mathematics share and manipulate their data and collaborate.
