
* 1015370
* Fast Multigrid Solvers for Transport with Forward-Peaked Scattering
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,08/16/2010
* Scott MacLachlan,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 279,537.00

The primary goal of this proposal is to develop fast, efficient, and robust
multigrid-based solvers for the solution of the linear Boltzmann-transport
equation in the regime of highly forward-peaked scattering. Recently, the
project team have developed an angular multigrid algorithm for a model problem
that captures the essential features of the Boltzmann-transport equation for
scattering in a two-dimensional "Flatland" model. The research goals of this
project are, thus, to extend this approach to an efficient and effective method
for true three-dimensional scattering, in realistic media, with accurate
discretizations. Among the challenges of extending the already developed
technique to three dimensions are improving the discretization to allow
discontinuous coefficients, and local grid refinement needed in regions of
interest. Additionally, the project team will investigate theoretical analysis
of the convergence of these algorithms, in both two and three spatial
dimensions, providing critical insight into the design of these algorithms for
realistic scattering kernels.

Accurate and efficient models of forward-peaked scattering are of significant
interest in both biomedical and nuclear engineering applications. This regime
describes the scattering of electron beams, used in radiation therapy for the
treatment of certain cancerous tumors, as well as the transport of charged
particles in reactor physics and astrophysics. While there is a long history of
interest in efficient and accurate algorithms for modeling charged-particle
transport, the problem still poses formidable challenges. The approach
considered here offers a new direction for research in this area. The proposed
work leads directly to simulation tools for biomedical and nuclear engineers and
scientists. The active roles of the PI and co-PI in the computational science
and mathematical biology communities ensure timely and widespread dissemination
of the resulting algorithms. Furthermore, the project directly involves a
doctoral student, who is actively mentored by the PI and co-PI, contributing to
the training of an early career scientist in an important field of research.
