
* 1015346
* Semidefinite Programming Relaxation: Approximation Algorithms, Performance Analysis and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/08/2010
* Zhi-Quan Luo,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 120,000.00

The PI's research to be carried out through this award consists of a systematic
study of a symmetric matrix lifting technique to solve nonconvex polynomial
optimization problems. This includes a complete complexity-theoretic analysis as
well as the design of polynomial time approximation algorithms. Central to this
study is to identify what classes of polynomial optimization problems are
computationally intractable, and how well they can be approximately solved with
a complexity that is polynomial in size and solution accuracy. In each case, the
research focus will be on the development of a fundamental theory for an in-
depth understanding of the problems under study, and the design, implementation,
and analysis of robust and efficient numerical methods for solving these
problems. The proposed research aims to develop polynomial time approximation
algorithms which can deliver guaranteed high quality approximate solutions for
some classes of polynomial optimization problems. These approximation algorithms
are based on a symmetric matrix lifting technique and semidefinite programming
relaxation, followed by special procedure to obtain a provably high quality
feasible solution. The proposed approach leads to nonlinear semidefinite
programs whose size is significantly smaller than those obtained from the Sum of
Squares relaxation approach, and is therefore expected to be much more efficient
computationally. Computational testing will be conducted to verify the
efficiency and accuracy of the proposed approximation approach. The research to
be performed by the PI for this award is strongly motivated by applications of
polynomial optimization in wireless communication and ad hoc wireless sensor
networks. His research is expected to not only advance the field of nonconvex
polynomial optimization, but also significantly impact design of computational
methods for interference management in multi-user communication, compressive
sensing and sparse principal component analysis.
