
* 1016514
* Arbitrarily Wide Angle Wave Equations: New Constructs for Subsurface Imaging, Unbounded Domain Analysis and Multiscale Modeling of Solids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/02/2010
* Murthy Guddati,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 243,968.00

One-way wave equations are mathematical constructs that allow the propagation of
waves in a specified direction, while suppressing the propagation in the
opposite direction, i.e. they have a 180-degree range of propagation angles as
opposed to the 360-degree range of full wave equations. Due to this special
property, they are being used in various application areas including wave-based
imaging algorithms (seismic imaging and nondestructive testing), ocean acoustics
(modeling of long-range propagation), wave propagation modeling in unbounded
domains, and multi-scale modeling of solids (phonon-absorbing boundary
conditions for coupling molecular dynamics with continuum models). While the
existing one-way wave equations are well developed for simple acoustic media,
they are not as robust and efficient for more complicated, elastic, media. To
cater to this need, the PI and his coworkers have recently developed a new
series of one-way wave equations called the Arbitrarily Wide-angle Wave
Equations (AWWEs). Unlike the existing one-way wave equations which are derived
only for acoustics and special cases of elasticity, AWWEs can be derived for
complicated media where the full wave equation has second-order derivatives in
space (this includes wave propagation in general anisotropic, viscous and porous
elastic media). Furthermore, AWWEs have simple form and are easy to implement.
They are highly efficient and have the flexibility to treat various types of
propagating and evanescent waves. The current limitation is that a
straightforward design of AWWE leads to instabilities for complicated media
(this is similar to many existing one-way wave equations). Stability of an AWWE
is application-dependent and the proposed effort is aimed at devising stable
AWWEs that can be used for various application areas including, (a) imaging in
heterogeneous and anisotropic elastic media, (b) analysis of wave propagation in
unbounded elastic domains that are heterogeneous and/or anisotropic, and (c)
phonon-absorbing boundary conditions for molecular dynamics. Stabilization
procedures will be developed by building on existing wellposedness and stability
theory for linear hyperbolic systems in the contexts of absorbing boundary
conditions, perfectly matched layers, and ocean acoustics. The resulting
stabilized AWWE would be implemented and tested in various settings to ensure
their robustness. The proposed work is aimed at developing new mathematical
constructs that transmit waves in a specified direction while suppressing them
in the other direction. Due to the ubiquitous nature of wave phenomenon in
physics, successful completion of the proposed project would facilitate the
solution of several important problems related to: (a) seismic inversion -
locating hidden oil reservoirs; (b) seismology - modeling of wave scattering and
focusing in complex geological basins; (c) soil-structure interaction -
simulation of complex response of structures embedded in unbounded soil during
earthquakes; (d) nanomechanics - understanding the failure of materials at
nanometer level; (e) nondestructive evaluation - characterizing hidden cracks
for strength assessment; (f) military applications - detection and
characterization of buried mines. The proposed work also has applications in
many other areas such as modeling optical circuits, synthetic aperture sonar and
medical imaging. Finally, the project includes a graduate education component
(thus contributing to the human resources development for computational
mathematics), and the development of instructional modules for wave propagation
and multiscale modeling (thus contributing to broader education in mechanics).
