
* 1016332
* Fast Interior Penalty Methods
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Information Technology Researc, Special Projects - CCF
* 09/01/2010,08/26/2010
* Susanne Brenner,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 300,951.00

This project will develop fast numerical methods for fourth and higher order
partial differential equations using the interior penalty approach. The interior
penalty approach has advantages over the classical approaches that use
conforming, nonconforming or mixed finite elements in terms of the computational
complexity, the existence of natuaral hierarchies of elements, the preservation
of the symetric positive definiteness of the continuous problem, and the ease of
deriving convergent schemes for complicated problems. Another significant
advantage of interior penalty methods for higher order problems is due to the
fact that discontinuous finite elements for higher order problems are also
suitable for lower order problems. Therefore multigrid algorithms for interior
penalty methods can be developed recursively through the hierarchy of elliptic
problems. Namely, multigrid algorithms for second order problems can be embedded
naturally in multigrid algorithms for fourth order problems, which can then be
embedded naturally in multigrid algorithms for sixth order problems, and so on.
The performance of these multigrid methods for higher order problems is
comparable to the performance of multigrid methods for second order problems.
This project will initiate a comprehensive study of interior penalty methods for
higher order problems together with multigrid, domain decomposition and adaptive
algorithms that will provide fast solvers for the resulting discrete problems.
The results of this project will make it feasible to solve problems of order six
and higher on general domains. Applications of these methods to strain gradient
elasticity, plate buckling, the Monge-Ampere equations and the Cahn-Hilliard
equations will also be investigated.

The fast algorithms developed in this project will make it practical for
scientists and engineers to model complex phenomena by higher order partial
differential equations. These algorithms will enhance the performance of
numerical simulations in diverse areas such as structural mechanics, fluid
mechanics, image processing, nanoscience, geometric optics, meteorology, optimal
transport, differential geometry, and crystal growth, among many others.
