
* 1016531
* Multiscale Simulations of Heterogeneous Particulate Flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,05/03/2012
* Yuliya Gorb,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 297,586.00

The proposed research is on development and simulation of a multiscale model for
heterogeneous particulate flows, in which the motion of a very large number of
small solid particles is coupled with a Newtonian incompressible fluid. The
problem derives from particle transport, sedimentation, fluidization and
separation processes that are common in many applications. Currently, there are
two major approaches to simulate such flows: one of them is based on averaged
equations, the other one - on direct numerical simulations. The first approach
requires homogeneity in the flow which is often violated in applications, while
the second one is currently limited to a relatively small number (compared to
applications) of particles. However, practical applications involve millions and
billions of particles whose small size leads the problem of interest to span two
length scales: fine scale - the scale of particles, and coarse scale - the scale
of the application. In developing the proposed approach the variational
multiscale framework is employed, in which the problem is split into two
problems corresponding to the coarse and fine scales. It is assumed that in each
coarse grid the particle distribution can be of three different regimes
depending on their concentrations: dilute, moderate and dense. The main goal of
the proposed study is to design a multiscale method that can handle
heterogeneous flows in all three regimes in a unified way. The key idea of the
proposed approach is, after separating the two scales, to use properly chosen
subgrid models adaptively to represent micro-scale flow and particle dynamics on
a coarse grid. In the dilute limit, a modified viscosity is used to represent
averaged effects. In the dense limit, the discrete network approximation method
to approximate the subgrid effects is utilized. Network models allow avoiding
detailed fine-scale simulations in the dense regimes and provide substantial CPU
savings. In the intermediate regime, fine-scale features within a target coarse-
grid block are resolved. The issues to be focused on are (1) coarse coupling,
(2) boundary conditions for local problems, (3) approximation of subgrid
effects, (4) effective solution strategies.

The proposed project provides tools to simulate heterogeneous particulate flows
of small rigid particles in an incompressible fluid which have been of great
interest for the last decade and are commonly encountered in many applications
and fundamental fluid mechanics. The complexity of this problem due to the
presence of two different length scales is enormous and only very recently the
development of numerical techniques for direct numerical simulations and
computing power allowed for some attempts to numerically resolving flows
containing a relatively large number of particles. However, existing direct
numerical simulations methods have been developed for flows where the maximal
number of particles to be handled does not exceed a couple dozens of thousands
while for practical applications much larger amount is of primary importance.
This dictates a need in developing a state-of-the-art predictive multiscale
model for heterogeneous particulate flows which allows one to obtain a detailed
and accurate representation of the flow, and which is the main focus of the
proposed research.
