
* 1016177
* Multilevel methods in PDE constrained optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,07/01/2010
* Andrei Draganescu,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 149,986.00

The objective of this project is to develop efficient multilevel algorithms for
large-scale optimization problems constrained by partial differential equations
(PDEs) with additional inequality constraints (ICs) on the controls and states.
The computational revolution of the last two decades has fostered not only high-
resolution numerical computations based on PDE models, but also a shift from
model based simulation to model based design. The latter translates into the
question of solving optimization problems in order to identify initial and/or
boundary values, material properties, sources, and other parameters for which
the PDE models behave in a desired way. However, in general, by increasing
resolution not only do optimization problems get larger, but they also become
more difficult to solve, thus rendering an ever widening gap between the
resolution of PDEs and that of associated parameter identification problems that
can be solved using state of the art resources; in order to take full advantage
of these resources, highly efficient algorithms are critical. While such
efficient algorithms have been developed over the past few years, they are
mostly restricted to problems without ICs. The addition of ICs on the controls
and/or states normally increases the difficulty of the problem due to the
presence of Lagrange multipliers that have lower regularity than the solution.
Recent years have witnessed a sensible progress in the optimization algorithms
that target such problems, however, it is expected that significant efficiency
can further be gained by improvements in the linear algebra technology needed
during the optimization process. In this project the PI specifically aims to
develop optimal order multilevel preconditioners for the linear systems arising
in the interior point method and semismooth Newton method solution processes of
optimization problems constrained by linear and semilinear elliptic or parabolic
PDEs with ICs on the controls and/or states. For the more difficult problem of
state ICs, both Lavrentiev and Moreau-Yosida regularizations will be considered.
The long term goal is to develop efficient multilevel algorithms for large-scale
control problems for fluid flows (Stokes, and Navier-Stokes systems).

The results of this project are expected to enable end users of the software -
engineers, applied scientists - to solve high-resolution, relevant optimization
problems at a cost that is comparable (a small multiple of) to that of
performing a single simulation. Long-term targeted applications include data
assimilation for weather prediction and air contamination modeling. Fast data
assimilation for high resolution models would enable, for example, gaining in a
timely manner a better quantitative understanding of the current state of the
atmosphere around a hurricane, thus potentially improving the current predictive
capabilities. From an educational perspective, the successful project will help
the PI's efforts in promoting this field of research at University of Maryland
Baltimore County (UMBC), and it will allow graduate and undergraduate UMBC
students to gain experience in a research area of strategic interest, which is
likely to increase their opportunities of finding a good position in a research
university or laboratory.
