
* 1016111
* Multi-scale geometry of Lagrangian and vortex-surface fields in turbulence
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,06/14/2012
* Dale Pullin,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 250,000.00

The investigator and his colleagues apply a curvelet-based, multi-scale
geometric (CBMSG) methodology to the identification, characterization and
classification of scale-dependent geometry within three-dimensional, evolving
Lagrangian-scalar and vortex- surface scalar fields in several differing
turbulent flows. The CBMSG methodology first decomposes the given field into
scale- dependent component fields. Structures from each field are then extracted
by iso-surfacing and the geometry of each structure is characterized by a finite
set of geometrical parameters obtained as functions of moments of the joint
probability distributions of the surface shape-index and curvedness. This allows
pictorial depiction of the set of structures at each scale as a cloud of points
in a visualization space. The density of points within this space provides
information on the statistical geometry of scale-dependent structures embedded
within the original field. An important component of the research is the
development of methodologies for numerically simulating the time-wise evolution
of Lagrangian scalar fields as they are convected, deformed and stretched by
turbulent velocity fields. This is achieved using a novel particle backward-
tracking method that constructs directly the time-backward or reverse Lagrangian
map. Specifically, the research includes study of the geometry of high-
resolution, Lagrangian-scalar-field evolution for homogeneous turbulence, the
statistical geometry of both Eulerian and Lagrangian fields for turbulent
channel flows and the development of a methodology for tracking vortex-surface
fields for inviscid and viscous fluid flow.

The shapes or geometry of objects in nature often plays a crucial role in their
behavior. The form of a bird or insect wing, the detailed shape of a biological
cell or of a complex molecule or the organization of a tree into a large trunk,
smaller branches and leaves are all related to their special function. This
geometry can be changing and not static; for example the ``eddies'' comprising
water or other fluid motion have long been recognized to have repeatable shapes
as can seen in cloud formation, in breaking sea waves and in the billowing and
folding shapes of a rocket exhaust or an oil leak from the sea floor. Typically,
this complex natural geometry cannot be easily perceived in terms of a single
simple shape but must be understood as an amalgam of interconnected but
different forms. Trees and clouds are good examples. The aim of this research is
to develop quantitative, statistical methods for characterizing the complex
three-dimensional geometry of the eddies that comprise turbulent fluid flow. The
methods and techniques used come from modern computational applied mathematics.
The immediate practical application is that the results will inform the
development of advanced computational methods for the numerical prediction of
turbulent fluid flows in a wide range of industrial and environmental settings,
including pollutant and climate modeling. While the present focus is on the
geometry of eddies that comprise fluid-dynamic turbulence, the methods developed
have more general applicability, in principle to any of the above illustrative
examples. This research is expected to lead to impact in other areas of science
and engineering where the visualization and reduction of complex ``organic''
geometry embedded within huge data bases remains a challenging problem.
