
* 1016556
* Numerical treatment of singularities and the Generalized Finite Element Method: theory, algorithms, and applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,08/05/2010
* Victor Nistor,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 180,000.00

Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) are an essential
ingredient in many areas of Sciences and Engineering. Often in the applications
of PDEs, one has to deal with additional difficulties caused by the
singularities in the geometry, the coefficients, or the boundary conditions. The
main goals of this proposal are to obtain more efficient numerical methods for
equations with singular solutions and to develop user friendly implementations.
The PI and his collaborators will design improved meshes that provide optimal
rates of convergence for the Finite Element Method in three dimensions for
elliptic equations on polyhedral domains with non-smooth interfaces. These
equations form one of the basic ingredients in many other applications. The
results will be extended to quasi-linear elliptic equations and to evolution
equations. For some of these equations, spaces with higher smoothness or other
additional properties are sometimes needed, and the Generalized Finite Element
Method will be used for these purposes.



The proposal will contribute to the formation of graduate and undergraduate
students by advising and mentoring them and by integrating them in research
projects. The PI also plans to continue to run an Interdisciplinary Seminar
featuring outside speakers, including non-mathematicians. The proposed research
will lead to the design and testing of new and improved numerical methods for
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs) of interest in Sciences and Engineering.
The resulting numerical methods will be presented and implemented in a way that
makes them accessible to non-mathematicians. It will also contribute to applying
mathematical results in practice by interaction with researchers from other
fields, including the private sector. It will also contribute to the creation of
specialists able to use advanced theoretical tools to handle practical problems.
He will also introduce numerical methods and the use of computers in more
traditional undergraduate courses. The PI also plans to popularize mathematical
questions that arise from practice among mathematicians. The theoretical results
and the resulting numerical methods will have applications in Mathematical
Physics, Quantum Chemistry, Biology, Finance (Risk Management and pricing of
Financial Derivatives, or Options), and other areas.
