
* 1016232
* Collaborative Research: A posteriori error analysis and adaptivity for discontinuous interface problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2010,07/20/2011
* Haiying Wang,MI,Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 09/30/2013
* USD 0.00

There are many practical physical situations that can be modeled by partial
differential equations in which some of the coefficients in the problem, e.g.
those describing material properties, are discontinuous across an interface.
Such problems arise in a very broad range of scientific and engineering
disciplines, including computational biology, ground water flow and reservoir
simulation, environmental remediation studies, crystal growth, wave propagation,
sedimentation phenomena, and the preparation of nuclear fuel rods. Such problems
cause notorious difficulties for classic numerical methods as a direct result of
the lack of smoothness. At the same time, numerical methods for efficiently
solving interface problems using a fixed Cartesian grid have attracted
considerable attention because they offer a number of computational advantages
and a number of approaches have been pursued. Unfortunately, regular-shape
discretizations are generally problematic because the interface ?cuts? through
the cells without respecting the regular geometry of the discretization, which
has a strongly negative impact on the accuracy of the resulting approximations.
Consequently, it is critically important to provide computational error
estimates that quantify the accuracy of a computed quantity of interest in terms
of various sources of discretization and modeling error.

This project will develop variational finite element frameworks for several
discrete interface methods that identify both a discretization and a modeling
component to the model and use the variational framework to derive accurate a
posteriori error estimates for specified quantities of interest. Both stationary
and evolutionary problems in two and three space dimensions will be considered.
The development of efficient adaptive discretization methods for both stationary
and evolution problems will be addressed. The methodology and analytic tools to
be developed in this proposal will provide a powerful tool for the systematic
treatment of problems in which interfaces have complex geometry and the material
properties vary considerably on a scale smaller than the overall scale of the
discretization. The project will yield a systematic approach to deriving
computable and accurate error estimates for quantities of interest and further,
provide detailed information about the relative contributions to the error
arising from discretization and modeling.
