
* 1016525
* Subgrid Discontinuous Galerkin Approximations of Brinkman Equation with Highly Heterogeneous Coefficients
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,08/13/2012
* Raytcho Lazarov,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 339,199.00

There is an abundance of challenging problems in physics and engineering, such
as fluid flow in industrial foams and vuggy reservoirs, which are characterized
by high porosity and complex material structure. Traditionally, these flows are
modeled by Darcy's law relating the macroscopic pressure gradient to the
macroscopic fluid velocity. For highly permeable media a more suitable model is
given by Brinkman's equations, considered in this project. The internal
structure involves multiple spatial scales and permeabilities varying over many
orders of magnitude (high contrast). Thus, the development of numerical methods
for Brinkman's equations that are robust with respect to the contrast and
accurately capture the fine scales is a difficult theoretical problem with
important applications to engineering and geosciences. There are numerous
methods for efficiently computing multi-scale porous media flows governed by
Darcy's law. These include in particular multi-scale finite element methods,
subgrid approximation, multi-grid, and domain decomposition methods. Developing
an efficient multi-scale approximation for Brinkman is a challenging task, which
cannot be addressed using methods available in the Darcy case. The first
objective of this project is a development and study of numerical subgrid method
for Brinkman's system. The second goal is to represent accurately the fine
features of the solution, which cannot be captured by the numerical subgrid
approach alone. An extension of the algorithm by alternating Schwarz iterations
in order to resolve these features will be developed, theoretically justified
and practically tested. The third main objective is to utilize a multi-scale
finite element space and an enrichment of the coarse space by adding basis
functions resulting from the approximate solution of certain small local
generalized eigenvalue problems. This will allow to devise an iterative method
that converges independently of the contrast.

Phenomena in engineering such as heat and mass transfer, fluid flows, and
materials, are routinely modeled by partial differential equations (PDEs). The
solutions of the PDEs are subsequently used to design and develop new materials
or new technologies with wide range of applications. These applications require
complex models with multiple space scales, which in turn make the solution task
challenging and computationally very intensive. The proposed work is motivated
by the needs for design and manufacturing of new materials and/or more accurate
description of oil reservoirs or aquifers. However, developing efficient and
robust solution techniques for computing flows in media with complex internal
structures will significantly broaden the areas of application for which the
numerical simulation is feasible. Since numerical simulations are key to better
understand, control, and optimize the modeled processes the proposed research
will eventually benefit other areas in science and engineering.
