
* 1016579
* Modeling, Algorithms and Computation of Electromagnetic Wave Interacting with Dispersive Interface
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,08/05/2010
* Shan Zhao,AL,University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of the proposed project is to develop novel mathematical and simulation
tools for studying electromagnetic wave interacting with arbitrarily curved
dispersive interface. Great challenges exist in developing efficient and
reliable numerical methods for such interactions. Physically, jumps in wave
solution and its derivatives across the dispersive interface are time dependent.
Numerically, the existing algorithms suffer a serious accuracy reduction due to
their incapability to handle such time variant jumps. Computationally, this
interface error will be significantly amplified when coupling with the
staircasing approximation in treating curved interface. Due to these challenges,
an extremely expensive mesh resolution of about 100 grid points per wavelength
was commonly practiced in the metamaterial simulations. In this project, the
investigator will rigorously analyze the time dependence and cross coupling of
electromagnetic field components at the dispersive interface. Novel formulations
will be derived for commonly used dispersive material and metamaterial models to
convert time dependent jump conditions into time independent ones and to
minimize the cross coupling. Building on these mathematical modeling, a second
order accurate interface algorithm will be developed to deal with arbitrarily
curved dispersive interface, by using only a simple Cartesian grid. This higher
order of accuracy will promise a higher numerical resolution, so that the
computational burden of the existing simulations can be significantly relieved.

Dispersive media are ubiquitous in nature, such as in biological tissues,
rocks, soils, and plasma. The numerical simulation of dispersive media is
crucial to a wide range of electromagnetic and optical applications, such as
microwave imaging for early detection of breast cancer, double negative
metamaterial based subwavelength imaging system, and cloaking devices. The
proposed mathematical modeling, algorithm development, and numerical
computations will address key scientific challenges in an interdisciplinary
filed lying at the interface of computational mathematics, physics, and electric
engineering. The planned research activities will bring new advances to
computational mathematics and lead to reliable simulation tools for the
characterization, analysis, and design of various practical engineering devices
and systems. These tools in turn may offer a better means for analyzing or
calibrating some basic physical laws, such as the one governing the resolution
limit of the sub-diffraction imaging system. In addition, this project will
provide an interdisciplinary research training environment which could inspire
and promote more students to purse careers in science and engineering.
