
* 1016577
* Multiscale Algorithms for Wave Propagation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2010,07/06/2010
* Bjorn Engquist,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 274,098.00

Most scientific processes and their related mathematical models have important
features in a wide range of time and length scales. Some typical examples
related to the computation of waves are propagation and scattering of high
frequency waves and interaction of the wave field with complex media.
Discretizing these problems directly at the finest scale and solving the
resulting systems with standard numerical algorithms inevitably leads to an
enormous computational problem with unacceptable long computation times and
large memory requirements. Building on our previous experience in multiscale
algorithms, we plan to design, implement, and analyze novel algorithms for
problems in high frequency wave propagation and related fields. Such problems
are challenging since many well-known techniques, such as multigrid and standard
fast multipole methods have limited efficiency. We will focus on the following
three topics: (1) high frequency acoustic and electromagnetic scattering, (2)
Gaussian beam methods for high frequency wave and Schrodinger equations, and (3)
homogenization of complex media with multiple reiterated scales.

The overarching theme of the research presented in this proposal is to exploit
the geometric structures and asymptotic features of a variety of multiscale
problems. The proposed research will have direct impact in several application
fields. These algorithms will help us to solve large scale complicated
scattering problems on the scales of thousands of wavelengths as in antenna
design for wireless communication. We will also better understand wave
propagation in composite materials with applications in exploration seismology.
On the education side, the development of modern numerical algorithms and
softwares requires researchers to understand different aspects of computational
mathematics. We plan to use this grant to support two graduate students. This
will not only help training a new generation of researchers who master
algorithmic design, mathematical analysis, and software development, but also
promote the awareness and interests in computational mathematics among
undergraduates and underrepresented groups. We will work with researchers from
industrial and government laboratories to disseminate ideas and deliver
operational softwares for challenging applications.
