
* 1016313
* Immersd Finite Element Methods for Interface Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,08/05/2010
* Tao Lin,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 210,000.00

Most of the published research results about immersed finite element (IFE)
methods deal with 2nd order elliptic interface problems. This project plans to
extend the research on developing and analyzing IFE methods for interface
problems to more sophisticated partial differential equations such as the Stokes
system and the linear elasticity system which are of great importance in many
applications of engineering and sciences. The proposed research consists of
three key modules which complement each other. The first part is to develop new
IFE functions and integrate them into modern finite element techniques for
solving Stokes and linear elasticity interface problems. The intent is to find
suitable IFE functions locally in interface elements that can handle interface
jump conditions required by the interface problems and other conditions such as
the inf-sup stability condition required by the finite element formulations to
be used. The proposed research will result in efficient and robust IFE methods
with an emphasis on DG formulations that simplify local h-, p-, and hp-
refinements on Cartesian meshes. The second module is the theoretical analysis
of IFEs, starting from their interpolation approximation capabilities and
deriving error bounds for IFE solutions. The challenges are that the traditional
analysis techniques have a limited use here. For example, using equivalent
quotient norm in the scaling argument leads to an estimate for IFE interpolation
useless for further deriving estimate of IFE solution unless it can be shown
that the constants in the error bounds are independent of the interface. Also,
2D and 3D IFE methods are essentially non-confirming methods whose error
estimations are often more complicated. The third module is about the
applications of IFE methods. In addition to improving the IFE solver for the
particle-in-cell simulator, this project will investigate the applications of
IFE methods to be developed to multi-fluid Stokes flow problems and the multi-
material shape/topology optimization problems involving the linear elasticity.

The IFE methods to be developed in this project can provide new and efficient
simulation tools that can use structured/Cartesian meshes to solve challenging
interface problems involving multi-scale and multi-physics with nontrivial
interfaces in many areas of engineering and science, including flow problems,
electromagnetic problems, shape/topology optimization problems, to name just a
few. This research project will proceed in harmony with the development of IFE
software packages to verify and support the theory, and address complex and
realistic problems from a variety of disciplines. This strategy will enable
theoretical innovation to become practice much more quickly than traditionally
possible. The proposed research projects will have a great potential to impact
on numerical simulations in the design/research of ion-propulsion engines for
interplanetary deep space travel, optimal packaging of electronic devices,
efficient and better image reconstruction in computer tomography, non-
destructive/non-invasive detection of suspicious materials in security check,
design of optimal shapes for lighter and stronger structures, and many other
application areas of great federal interests.
