
* 1016183
* New statistical approaches to inverse problems in biomedicine
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2010,07/01/2010
* Erkki Somersalo,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 309,971.00

The aim of the project is to develop new computational tools for solving inverse
problems arising in biomedical applications. The computational framework is
based on the Bayesian statistical paradigm, in which the inverse problem is
reformulated as a statistical inference problem, and information complementing
the scarce and noisy data is imported in the form of prior probability
distribution. The methodological emphasis of this project is the development of
structural, hierarchical and dynamic prior models. Structural prior models make
it possible to combine different imaging modalities, an approach often referred
to as data assimilation. The closely related hierarchical models, on the other
hand, allow uncertainties in the prior model itself, letting the data guide the
prior. In particular, the approach facilitates the implementation of prior
information that is qualitative in nature, important examples being sparsity or
locality of the solution. Dynamic prior models are essential in time dependent
problems, and they often involve structural elements. Another central question
addressed in this project is the development of efficient computational
strategies to explore the posterior probability distributions. In particular,
sequential methods based on the use of fast reduced forward models will be
explored. The visualization of uncertainties drawn from a Monte Carlo sample in
imaging applications will also be addressed. The resulting algorithms will be
applied to biomedical inverse problems, including Electrical Impedance
Tomography (EIT), MagnetoEncephaloGraphy (MEG), Positron Emission Tomography
(PET) and ElectroNeuroGraphy (ENG), using data provided by an already
established network of collaborators.

The current trend in biomedical research is to develop new imaging modalities,
clinical procedures and technologies that are minimally invasive. Instead of
using ionizing radiation that may constitute a health risk, methods that use
weak electric currents or the electromagnetic fields of the body itself are
preferable. Electric current/voltage measurements can be used to identify
potential malignant tumors in breast tissue; localization of the onset loci of
epileptic seizures, an essential procedure before brain surgery to gain control
of refractive epilepsy, can be done by measuring the weak magnetic fields due to
the brain activity. Similarly, in designing technologies that help patients with
spinal cord trauma to regain control of their muscles, or patients with an
amputated limb to control a prosthetic arm, new methods of recording non-
invasively the nerve signals are developed. A common feature of these methods is
that the signals that they rely on are weak, cluttered by noise, and hard to
identify. In addition, the computational models are incomplete, since several
details describing the setting are unknown. The investigator, together with his
colleagues, develops computational methods to overcome the aforementioned
difficulties. The methodology relies on probabilistic modeling of the signal and
uncertainties within the model. The incomplete data is augmented by
complementary information, and a particular emphasis is on the question, how to
translate qualitative information about the unknowns into a quantitative form so
that it can be entered in the computational model.
