
* 1016504
* Simulation of Liquid Crystal Elastomers
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2010,07/06/2010
* Wei Zhu,AL,University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 97,380.00

Liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs) are rubbers that are comprised of weakly cross-
linked liquid crystal polymers with orientationally ordered side-chain and main-
chain mesogenic rods. The remarkable property of LCEs is the coupling between
orientation order and mechanical deformation, which makes these rubbers very
sensitive to external stimuli, such as illumination and other applied fields,
leading to large and fast shape deformations. A great deal of the experimental
and theoretical results on LCEs has been obtained during the last decade.
However, a full characterization of LCEs still remains elusive, especially for
the dynamic responses of LCEs. Recently, the investigator and his collaborators
proposed a non-local continuum model to understand the dynamics of nematic LCEs.
The simulation of the model demonstrated that the proposed model can
successfully capture shape changing phenomena and some other features of LCEs
that were observed from real experiments. The model thus provides a solid basis
for further exploration of the dynamics of LCEs. However, due to the intrinsic
complexity of the physical processes underlying the dramatic responses of LCEs,
the numerical treatment of the model is very challenging. In this project, the
investigator focuses on developing efficient and reliable numerical methods for
solving the derived equations originating from the proposed model on nematic
LCEs. The success of this project will provide an important tool to enhance the
understanding of LCEs. Further, the deep understanding of the dynamic responses
of LCEs is crucial to their technological applications including sensors,
actuators, deformable adaptive optical elements, micro-fluidic pumps, etc.

Liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs) are soft complex materials. The salient feature
of LCEs is that relatively small external effects, such as changes in
temperature or onset of illumination, can result in large and fast shape
deformations. Due to this remarkable property, LCEs have the potential for real
technological applications including sensors, actuators, deformable adaptive
optical elements, micro-fluidic pumps, etc. To fully exploit these materials,
the investigator and his collaborators have already proposed a mathematical
model that can successfully capture many dynamic features of LCEs, such as shape
changing phenomena. However, due to the intrinsic complexity of the physical
processes underlying the dramatic responses of LCEs, both theoretical study and
simulation of the proposed model are very challenging. In this project, the
investigator seeks to develop efficient and reliable numerical methods for the
simulation. The success of the research will provide a powerful tool to improve
the understanding of LCEs, and the deep understanding is essential to the real
technological applications of these materials. Moreover, the methods developed
in the research will be useful for the modeling of other related complex soft
matter systems, and will therefore have a lasting value in the computational
materials science community.
