
* 1016266
* Confidence and Misplaced Confidence in Image Reconstruction
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,06/05/2012
* Dianne O'Leary,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 495,489.00

The underlying problem considered here is the solution of a discretization of an
integral equation of the first kind. Even with complete information, the problem
is ill-posed, in the sense that small changes in the data can make arbitrarily
large changes in the solution. Unfortunately, complete information is not
available in applications such as medical imaging (CAT, MRI), astronomical
imaging, spectroscopy, or non-destructive testing for cracks in a structure, and
the problem becomes a discretized version of the ill-posed problem. Solution
algorithms regularize the problem, replacing the ill-posed problem by one that
is well-posed in order to compute a solution. The basic idea behind all
regularization methods is to impose additional constraints on the model in order
to make the problem well-posed. There are two very different kinds of
constraints, which are typically not well differentiated: data constraints that
are guaranteed to hold with 100% certainty, and bias constraints, arising from
what the observer expects to see. If the observer is wrong about the bias
constraints, then the solution algorithm might produce a solution that is is
quite believable but very misleading. This work focuses on three major open
questions in the solution to ill-posed problems: development of diagnostics to
validate candidate solutions and identify bias; development of improved
algorithms that produce validated solutions through discovery of new filtering
methods, reliable choice of parameters, better understanding of Krylov methods,
and unification of algorithms for data least squares, least squares, and total
least squares problems; and computation of confidence bounds for the solutions,
making use of data constraints (e.g., nonnegativity).

The broader impact of the work arises from its potential to produce more
reliable images for medical applications (CAT, MRI, etc.), astronomy,
spectroscopy, locating oil reservoirs, testing structures for hidden cracks, and
other applications. The techniques involve effective use of extra information
known about the image (for example, that each pixel value is nonnegative) in
order to constrain the solution image. The focus is on improved methods and on
more precise knowledge of the solution through the construction of statistical
confidence intervals. The work also has great value in education. A graduate
course in advanced numerical linear algebra will be offered that will include a
section on discrete ill-posed problems. This work will be presented at
Maryland's SPIRAL summer program for undergraduate students from Historically
Black Colleges and Universities, since it provides a visually-appealing and
easily-explained introduction to ill-posed problems.
