
* 1016047
* Efficient Methods for Random Field Approximation with Application to Nonlinear Schrodinger Equation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,08/05/2010
* Qian-Yong Chen,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 116,704.00

This project studies the formation and evolution of the soliton waves in the 1D
and 2D nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLSE) with a random potential (also
called the Gross-Pitaevskii equation), which governs the evolution of the mean-
field wave function in Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC). The main focus is to
investigate the impact of three parameters: the strength and the correlation
length of the disorder, and the norm of the solution (i.e., the number of atoms
in the condensate). But first, the random field approximation will be
investigated within a more general context in the sense that the methodology can
be applied in any applications involving uncertainties, not limited to the
random potential approximation of the NLSE. In practical problems, the variables
with uncertainty are often described as a second-order stochastic process (or
random field/function), i.e., its second-order moment is finite. The marginal
distribution and covariance function are typically the available information.
One prominent way of discretizing a second order random field is through the
Karhunen-Loeve (KL) series expansion. The approximation with truncated KL
expansion is optimal in terms of mean square error, and the errors for the first
two moments are fixed for any specific truncated KL expansion. But there are
still many issues needed to be addressed. In particular, the proposed research
will focus on the following topics. 1.) More efficient computation of the KL
expansion by introducing two adaptive meshes, when the analytical formulas are
unavailable (true for most cases). 2.) Minimize the error of the marginal
distribution by determining the distribution of the random variables in the KL
expansion through the minimization of higher order moments. 3. Compare the
efficiency of the KL expansion and the 'direct sampling' technique paired with
correlation control technique, when the correlation length is short.

Either due to the randomness in nature or the insufficiency of knowledge,
uncertainty is nearly observed in all the disciplines to some degree. Petroleum
reservoir a few miles under the earth's surface, traffic flow on state highways,
measurement of gas flow in turbine, and the stock and futures market are several
such examples. To gain a better understanding of the intrinsic dynamics, such
uncertainty should be modeled and analyzed. The proposed research will enable
faster and more efficient calculations of the involved uncertainties, provide
unprecedented predictive capabilities. It will bring profound impact across all
the scientific and engineering disciplines that involve uncertainty.
