
* 1016595
* Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,05/03/2012
* Alfred Schatz,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2013
* USD 244,407.00

It is a well established fact that in solving many of the complex problems that
arise in industry and science, it is cost-effective to first model the problem
mathematically and then run simulations under various design conditions. This is
to determine whether a design criteria is achieved. If the design does not meet
specifications it is usually easier to change the mathematical model and test it
again rather than build a new machine. An example of this is that an entire
commercial airplane has been designed using this procedure. Very often the
solution of the problem is the solution of an elliptic parabolic and hyperbolic
partial differential equations, and thus it is important to devise accurate
methods of solution that are efficient as possible. This proposal seeks to
examine various fundamental aspects of the finite element method. This is a
method for solving partial differential equations, which has shown itself to be
very flexible. The proposed research can be separated into three parts. In it we
shall restrict ourselves to the study of elliptic equations.

(1) L-infinity estimates on polygonal domains allowing highly refined grids.
This type of estimate of the accuracy of the finite element method would be very
useful in analyzing many problems. Consider poissons equation on a plain
polygomal domain. This problem is often used as a typical problem where the
solution may be singular at points. For a convex polygon the derivatives are
bounded and we have proved that the error in the derivates as the best
proximation property in W1/infinity. Estimates of this kind in L/infinity are
more difficult to obtain and we have succeeded in obtaining almost optimal
results on nonconvex domains. These are under the conditions that the mesh is
only locally quasi uniform. Results of this type are very useful in analyzing
self-adaptive finite element codes.

(2) A posteriori error estimates. This study will address the general question
of a posteriori of error estimators, which predict errors with precision on a
single element. To get a firm theory is often necessary to isolate model
problems, which contain basic difficulty found in more involved problems. As an
example, the study will investigate the general problem in the context of
problems on nonconvex polygomal domains. As in number 1, there are corner
singularities, which tax estimators. Special attention will be paid to
situations in which known estimators do not work.

(3) Discrete finite element potential theory. This part of the proposal deals
with trying to find analogs of potential theory for finite elements that could
be useful in solving nonlinear problems. A great deal of effort has recently
gone into solving second order nonlinear elliptic problems. The numerical
schemes that are known depend to a great extent on the knowledge of discrete
versions of maximum principles and Harnack inequalities. Some of these do not
seem to hold strictly for finite elements. We will search for versions of these
theorems, which are valid to finite elements and useful to obtain approximate
solutions of non linear equations.

The intellectual merit of the proposed project is that it addresses fundamental
and basic questions in computational science. The broader impact of the proposed
activity will be better understanding of existing algorithms, leading to
improved methods.
