
* 1016284
* Closing the Gap Between Matrix and Tensor Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Information Technology Researc, Special Projects - CCF, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2010,08/04/2010
* Charles Van Loan,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2013
* USD 250,506.00

A strong case can be made that tensor computation is the ``next big thing'' in
numerical analysis. High-dimensional modeling is becoming commonplace and it
requires the manipulation and analysis of huge multidimensional arrays. The
investigator and his colleagues will enrich the interplay between matrix
computations and tensor computations by pursuing four basic directions of
research. They will (1) develop tensor approximation techniques based on
matrices that have low Kronecker product rank, (2) implement a pair of basic
tensor algebra subprograms, one that showcases a new contraction-level
generalization of Strassen multiplication and one that demonstrates how to
compute effectively contractions between tensors that have symmetry, (3) analyze
the data sparse representation of huge vectors through tensor networks, and (4)
develop a unifying framework for SVD-like tensor decompositions through an
embedding idea that involves symmetric tensors.

A table of data is 2-dimensional and many matrix computation techniques exist
for extracting information from the numbers that appear in the rows and columns.
A tensor can be thought of as a table whose entries are other tables. For
example, a table having 10 rows and 8 columns has 80 ``cells''. If each of those
cells is itself a 5-by-4 table, then the entire data set can be thought of as a
10-by-8-by-5-by-4 tensor. Data sets of this variety are increasingly prominent
in engineering and the sciences because it is the natural way to structure the
information associated with a model that depends upon many factors. The research
plan is to help build an infrastructure for the scientific community that makes
tensor-based computation as natural and easy as matrix-based computation. The
successful problem-solving and problem-analysis tools provided by the matrix
computation field will be broadened and generalized. The outreach agenda
includes the production of educational materials that will help ensure the
development of a tensor-savvy scientific community. These materials include an
online, ten-lecture short course on tensor computation, participation in a
Visiting Lecturer program that targets 4-year colleges, and the addition of a
tensor computation chapter in the upcoming fourth edition of the highly-cited
textbook on matrix computations by Golub and Van Loan.
