
* 1016383
* RUI: Multi-scale modeling of interfacial flows of magnetic fluids with macro-chain aggregates
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,07/31/2012
* Philip Yecko,NJ,Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 226,779.00

Magnetic fluids (or ferrofluids) are suspensions of magnetic nanoparticles whose
properties and flows are affected by applied magnetic fields, making them useful
in industrial and biomedical applications. Potential future applications, such
as targeted drug delivery and micro fluidic pumping, involve both active
interfaces and motion on small scales, upon which the magnetic particle
distribution may become nonuniform. In particular, under moderate fields,
nanoparticles aggregate into macroscopic chains which, in turn, affect the fluid
flow. These chains have been previously observed by the investigators using high
resolution X-ray phase-contrast images obtained at Argonne national lab. Further
progress in modeling and simulation of ferrofluids on small scales demands new
approaches. To speed the pace of development and design of ferrofluidic devices
and to facilitate the exploration of new ferrofluid applications, a robust and
exible simulation method is required. This project will develop, validate and
apply such a tool, in the form of a multi-scale code for the numerical
simulation of interfacial flows of magnetic fluids. These simulation codes will
integrate a mesoscale model of field-induced macroscopic magnetic-particle
chains and a realistic nonlinear magnetization for the bulk ferrofluid with a
state-of-the-art interfacial Navier-Stokes code. The Navier-Stokes computation
will include a high-order curvature algorithm that accurately computes surface
tension at interfaces. Viscous stress due to field induced macro-chains will be
derived from a dissipative particle dynamics type model. The proposal includes
carefully planned projects that will involve and support students from Montclair
State's diverse population in leading-edge research.

The investigators will develop a computer simulation of magnetic liquid, also
known as ferrofluid, a unique "smart" material that is easily manipulated using
ordinary magnets. While widely used as a liquid seal in computer disk drives,
this easily controlled fluid has far greater potential, including applications
in biomedicine (drug delivery, eye surgery and as MRI contrast agents) and in
small scale devices which manipulate tiny fluid volumes, as used in
biotechnology and pharmaceuticals tests. Progress has been stalled by two
obstacles. First, experiments are limited because the fluid is very opaque,
appearing as a shiny black liquid. Second, the nano-scale particles which give
the fluid its magnetic character also lead to internal structures, such as
particle chains, which make its mathematical description complex. This project
overcomes the first challenge by using state-of-the-art computer simulations
instead of experiments, while it overcomes the second challenge by building
simple mechanical models of internal structure based on high resolution x-ray
experiments, performed at Argonne national lab. The investigators will involve
students in key roles in the development of this computer simulation tool that
can be used to explore, design and test these and other new applications of
magnetic fluids.
