
* 1016182
* Numerical Approximations of Non-Newtonian Fluid Flows with Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/15/2010
* Hyesuk Lee,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2014
* USD 209,922.00

This research is focused on numerical approximation of non-Newtonian fluid flows
in physical applications. Such fluid flows are abundant in our everyday lives,
from the flow of blood in our bodies to the production of polymeric material
such as plastics. There are two prototypal problems considered in the project:
(i) optimal control for defective boundary conditions, and (ii) non-Newtonian
flow within an elastic medium. Blood flow is one of most important examples
related to such situations as a non-Newtonian flow interacts with an elastic
vessel wall, where only flow rate or mean pressure is specified on each inflow
and outflow boundary. The model problems in this research involve either coupled
domains representing multi-physics behavior or coupled state-adjoint systems.
This increases the numerical complexity as both stress and velocity must be
resolved in the domains, and the strong interaction between the governing
equations requires solution algorithms that achieve optimal convergence rates
while splitting the operators. Additionally, because of the large number of
unknowns to be approximated, there is a need to develop efficient solvers for
these problems. The proposed research addresses issues on decoupling schemes,
and their stability and convergence. The primary contribution of the research is
the development of robust numerical schemes for non-Newtonian flows in coupled
systems, and analytical and numerical study of optimal control for non-Newtonian
flows.

There have been extensive studies on multidisciplinary problems involving
Newtonian flows, but to date mathematical and numerical investigations of non-
Newtonian flows are still far behind. Because of the many important biological
and engineering processes involving non-Newtonian fluid flow, there is a great
demand for mathematical support in these applications. The proposed research
broadens the mathematical basis for the numerical simulation of non-Newtonian
fluid flow problems in physical settings. Also the research benefits biomedical
and polymer industries by providing improved algorithms for the numerical
simulation of important processes.
