
* 1016188
* Models and Adaptive Methods for Compressible Multi-Material Reactive Flow
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG
* 09/15/2010,09/18/2010
* Donald Schwendeman,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 296,326.00

Applications in a variety of scientific fields require accurate computation of
physical phenomena that are driven by mechanisms operating at very fine scales.
Such problems often involve mixtures involving several distinct phases and/or
constituents. A successful approach requires two ingredients: multi-phase and/or
multi-physics mathematical models that are valid at the larger scale of
observation but contain within them all the necessary information from the finer
scales, and a computational strategy that is robust and generates accurate
numerical solutions. One such problem is the initiation and propagation of
detonation waves in high-energy solid explosives, a problem that is of major
interest to those engaged in the stewardship of the nation's nuclear arsenal and
is the main focus of the proposed research.

The proposed work is a contribution to the modeling and computation of high-
speed, multi-material flow. The project is focused on detonations in confined,
high-energy granular explosives, and the aim is to accurately predict the
response of the explosive/confiner system to an igniting stimulus. The problem
encompasses many scales; the molecular at which energy-liberating reactions
occur, the meso at which physical processes determine the sites of ignition and
the modes of combustion, and the macro at which the explosive does work to push
or deform. It is proposed that the entire assembly be modeled as a hybrid multi-
phase multi-fluid mixture. Problems at both the meso and the macro scales will
be examined computationally; the former to uncover and quantify processes
leading to discrete sites of ignition and the latter to explain possible
mechanisms of detonation failure. The mathematical models will be nonlinear
systems of hyperbolic partial differential equations with source terms, and a
central goal of the research will be the development of numerical methods that
provide an accurate description of material interfaces over long times.
