
* 1016173
* Numerical Methods and Algorithms for Fully Nonlinear Second Order Evolution Equations with Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,06/21/2012
* Xiaobing Feng,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 225,000.00

Fully nonlinear second order partial differential equations (PDEs) are referred
to a class of nonlinear second order PDEs which are nonlinear in (at least one)
second order partial derivatives of unknown functions. Such a class of PDEs
arise from many scientific and engineering fields including astrophysics,
differential geometry, geostrophic fluid dynamics, image processing, kinetic
theory, materials science, mass transportation, meteorology, and optimal
control. They constitute the most difficult class of PDEs to analyze
analytically and to approximate numerically. Building on the PI's recent success
on developing convergent and efficient numerical methods and algorithms for
fully nonlinear second order (time-independent) elliptic PDEs, the proposed
research project intends to carry out a comprehensive and systematic study of
numerical methods and algorithms for fully nonlinear second order (time-
dependent) evolution PDEs. The objectives of the proposed research include (i)
to develop the vanishing moment method and the moment solution theory for fully
nonlinear second order evolution PDEs, (ii) to develop fully discrete Galerkin
type numerical methods (e.g. finite element methods, mixed finite element
methods, spectral and discontinuous Galerkin methods) for fully nonlinear second
order evolution PDEs based on the vanishing moment methodology, (iii) to apply
and/or to adapt the developed numerical methods to a number of emerging
application problems which are governed by fully nonlinear second order PDEs,
(iv) to develop computer codes for implementing the proposed numerical methods.
As numerical approximations of fully nonlinear second order evolution PDEs is an
untouched sub-area within the numerical PDEs and those PDEs arise from many
important applications in astrophysics, differential geometry, geostrophic fluid
dynamics, image processing, kinetic theory, materials science, mass
transportation, meteorology, and optimal control, the completion of the proposed
research project is expected to have a profound impact on solving this class of
PDEs and on providing the much needed capability and enabling tools for solving
a range of important application problems which are governed by fully nonlinear
second order PDEs. As a by-product, the moment solution theory is expected to
give some insights to our understanding of the viscosity solution theory, and
might be very likely to provide a logical and natural generalization and
extension for the viscosity solution theory which is not natural and neither
practical from the computational point of view. The educational component of
this project is to engage and train graduate students in developing necessary
applied and computational mathematics knowledge and skills so that they can
pursue a successful career in science and engineering in the future.
