
* 1016060
* Meshfree particle methods for analysis of elastic plates and shells
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2010,09/20/2010
* Hae-Soo Oh,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2013
* USD 118,165.00

A large number of structural components in engineering can be classified as
plates. Typical examples of civil engineering structures are floor and
foundation slabs, lock-gates, thin retaining walls, bridge decks, and slab
bridges. Plates are also indispensable in ship building, automobile, and
aerospace industries. The stress resultants of a thin plate can be calculated
through the 3-dimensional elasticity equations. However, under certain
hypotheses, the 3-dimensional elasticity equations for a plate are reduced to
the 2-dimensional equations. The Kirchhoff plate model is well suited for thin
plates. However, the governing equation for the displacement of this plate model
is the fourth order differential equation. The conventional finite element
method is difficult to apply because of the complexity of constructing smooth
finite elements. Furthermore, moderately thick plates have other difficulties
such as boundary layer problems and shear locking problems. Meshless methods (in
which smooth flexible approximation functions are used and complicated mesh
generation is not necessary) have several advantages over the conventional
finite element method. However, these methods have several major limitations
including the inefficiency in handling essential boundary conditions, large
matrix condition numbers, and complexity in constructing partitions of unity.
Most recently, the PI invented one of the most flexible closed form partition of
unity, called the Generalized Product Partition of Unity. The PI proposes to
introduce Meshfree particle methods by using the Generalized Product Partition
of Unity, together with new local approximation functions that can handle
geometric boundary conditions as well as force boundary conditions arising in
various plate models. Furthermore, the PI proposes to apply Meshfree particle
methods to obtain highly accurate stress analysis of plates and shells for
design and maintenance of related engineering structures. The Intellectual
Merit: The proposed research will greatly improve the stress analysis of plates,
shells, and laminated composite plates so that design and maintenance of
automobiles, airplanes, ships, and all other engineering structures related to
plates and shells may be more effective and safer. Moreover, without any
difficulty, the proposed method is able to surgically make the approximation
space enriched with any type of singular function. The proposed method is
flexible and effective in dealing with singularities and it can be used for
accurate prediction of crack propagation. The Broader Impacts: Results from the
proposed research can be used to design fuel efficient automobiles, safer
airplanes, ships and new materials more resistant to failure. The proposed
research can also be applied to improve maintenance of aging airliners, bridges,
ships, buildings, and numerous other applications where structural integrity
should be closely monitored. Ultimately, the proposed research will have direct
impacts on the public safety and the environment by increasing efficiency and
safety of common modes of transportation and structures used everyday.
