
* 1016094
* Adaptive FEM for elliptic and parabolic problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,08/05/2010
* Alan Demlow,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 152,361.00

The goal of this project is the development and analysis of adaptive finite
element methods (AFEM) for various elliptic and parabolic partial differential
equations. The project has three main parts. The first involves theoretical
investigation of convergence properties of AFEM for controlling non-standard
norms and related applications. It is only in the past few years that quasi-
optimality results for adaptive methods for controlling global energy norms have
appeared. The investigator has developed techniques for similarly analyzing AFEM
designed to control other norms. He will apply these techniques to prove
optimality of an AFEM for controlling local energy norms and use them to analyze
convergence of parallel adaptive algorithms of Bank-Holst type. In the second
set of projects the investigator will develop AFEM for efficiently controlling
local and global maximum errors in several classes of parabolic problems where
such error control is desirable. These efforts will result in sharp new a
posteriori error estimates and adaptive finite element methods for controlling
local pointwise errors in linear parabolic problems and maximum-norm a
posteriori error analyses of semilinear parabolic problems for which such
estimates are of practical interest. The third project involves development of
AFEM for solving elliptic and parabolic PDE on surfaces. The investigator will
develop a surface AFEM for stationary problems which will be useful for problems
in which surface and bulk effects are coupled. He will also study linear
parabolic surface PDE in order to provide foundational knowledge about AFEM on
evolving surfaces.

Partial differential equations are widely used in science and engineering in
order to model various physical phenomena. In order to gain usable information
from these mathematical models, it is necessary to approximate their solutions
using numerical (computer) algorithms. Adaptive finite element methods are
numerical algorithms that use available information in order to automatically
and efficiently improve the quality of the approximation to the solution. The
investigator's research concerns the mathematical theory of such adaptive
algorithms. This project has three main goals. The first is to investigate basic
theoretical questions concerning convergence of these algorithms, that is, to
prove that they work correctly. The second part of the project involves
controlling maximum errors in certain adaptive calculations, that is, ensuring
that the computation is correct everywhere and not just "on the average" as is
standard. Finally, many important physical models involve partial differential
equations on surfaces. Examples include oil dispersion on a rotating brake drum
and the effects of surface tension in fluid flows with multiple phases, such as
oil and water. The investigator will also develop adaptive algorithms for
solving such equations.
