
* 1016406
* Collaborative Research: Efficient surface-based numerical methods for 3D interfacial flow with surface tension
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2010,08/03/2012
* Michael Siegel,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 282,832.00

The investigators develop and apply efficient boundary integral methods for the
motion of interfaces in 3D flow. The methods address a significant difficulty in
the numerical computation of fluid interfaces with surface tension or elastic
forces in 3D flow. Such forces introduce high order (i.e., high derivative)
terms into the evolution equations, which lead to severe stability constraints
or `stiffness' for explicit time-integration methods. Furthermore, the high
order terms appear in nonlinear and nonlocal operators, making the efficient
application of stable implicit methods difficult. The investigators' method
relies on using the first and second fundamental coefficients of the surface as
dynamical variables, and employs a special parameterization of the interface
combined with an analysis of the governing equations at small scales. This
enables the efficient application of implicit time-integration methods for 3D
flow. The investigators implement the method in canonical interface problems for
inviscid fluids, including the Kelvin-Helmholtz, Rayleigh-Taylor, and water wave
problems, and study the dynamics of inextensible elastic sheets in inviscid flow
and vesicles in 3D viscous flow. Most importantly, they develop a version of the
numerical method which uses domain decomposition or overlapping coordinate
patches to describe the interface. This has the added benefit of providing a
framework for the implementation of spectrally accurate and spatially adaptive
methods.

Moving boundary problems occur in many diverse areas in, for example, fluid
dynamics, materials science, and biology. Specific examples include traveling
ocean waves, growing cancer tumors, beating hearts and moving cells and
organisms. The investigators develop accurate and efficient `boundary integral'
numerical methods for the simulation of moving boundaries in applications.
Boundary integral methods are among the most accurate numerical methods for the
simulation of moving interfaces, but are often inefficient when the interface is
acted on by surface tension or elastic forces. The development of fast and
accurate boundary integral methods for 3D interfacial flow with surface tension
or elastic forces will be of great benefit in understanding existing
applications and developing technology further.
