
* 1016073
* Mathematical and Computational Studies of Interfaces and Defects
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2010,08/05/2010
* Qiang Du,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 264,183.00

This project will focus on the development and analysis of numerical methods to
probe the complex energy landscapes related to various interface and defect
problems, such as microstructures in materials undergoing phase transitions,
quantized vortices in geometrically frustrated configurations, and so on. The
associated stochastic dynamics and hydrodynamics, as well as their numerical
approximations will also be investigated. He will also study robust and adaptive
algorithms that are useful in the statistical analysis of the underlying
structures and important features. These research issues, on one hand, are
driven by practical applications through collaborations with other scientists,
and on the other hand, also motivate new studies of mathematical subjects
ranging from geometry and topology to numerical and stochastic analysis. The
research to be carried out is of interdisciplinary nature, encompassing subjects
like computational mathematics, physics, information, materials and biological
sciences. There are many mathematical and numerical challenges involved in the
research such as the understanding of the collective behaviors of families and
paths of solutions of nonlinear PDEs and stochastic dynamics, and the
exploration of the hidden structures and statistics in the simulated results.

The research on the algorithmic development and numerical simulations can help
enhancing the capability as well as the predictive power of scientific
computations, which has potentially significant scientific, social and economic
impact and is one of the top research priorities internationally. Meanwhile,
interfaces and defects are also ubiquitous in nature which play fundamental
roles in many aspects of physical and biological systems. A better mathematical
and computational understanding of interfaces and defects, especially in a
stochastic setting, will enrich the scientific knowledge base, which in turn may
aid the efforts by physicists, materials scientists and engineers in discovering
new materials with desirable properties and in developing new scientific devices
and commercial instruments. This project will also provide valuable
interdisciplinary research opportunities for the future generation of workforce
and researchers. With an emphasis on the TEAMS (Training in Experiments,
Analysis, Modeling and Simulations) spirit, young students can be better
prepared to conduct interdisciplinary research in their career.
