
* 1016190
* Numerical methods for heterogeneity and nonlocality
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,08/04/2010
* Burak Aksoylu,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 180,000.00

The PI proposes two main research thrusts. The first is to develop scalable
solvers, in particular, iterative substructuring methods, for integral equation
based nonlocal (NL) problems such as peridynamics (PD). As a component in the
first thrust, heterogeneity is incorporated to study composite materials which
is of utmost importance to numerous applications in material science and
structural mechanics. Within the first thrust, robustness of the solvers with
respect to heterogeneity and multiscale finite element discretizations are the
subsequent directions to pursue. The second research thrust concentrates on
preconditioning for partial differential equation (PDE) based (local) problems
with rough coefficients. The robustness aspect strongly connects the first
research thrust to the second. Since the impact of nonlocality on solvers has
never been studied before, the first research thrust is unique, transformative,
and has great potential to create a solver subfield: nonlocal domain
decomposition methods (DDM). Solver research has the potential to reveal
multiscale implications associated to NL modeling. The PI proved fundamental
results indicating that the weak formulation of PD gives rise to conditioning
bounds that are independent of the mesh size, meaning that the length scale is
carried by the horizon instead of the mesh size. The study of composite
materials requires solvers that are robust with respect to heterogeneity as well
as discretizations supporting multiscale features and nonlinearities. For
robustness, the PI will capitalize on his existing preconditioning technology
for (local) PDE based problems. The second research thrust calls for a
qualitative understanding of the PDE operators and their dependence on the
coefficients because such understanding is essential for designing
preconditioners. This process draws heavily upon effective utilization of
theoretical tools such as methods in operator theory. The resulting control of
the behaviour of the operators should allow the detection of the main features
that provide a basis for the construction of robust preconditioners. After
discretization, singular perturbation analysis (SPA) is used to detect and
exploit algebraic features such as low-rank perturbations and decoupling of
solution parts to construct computationally more feasible preconditioners. With
the insights provided by operator theory and SPA, one acquires control of the
effectiveness and computational feasibility simultaneously.

Scalable and robust solver technologies will create a great impact on modeling
and simulation capabilities in material science and structural mechanics, the
two vital fields that would maintain the nation's leadership in the aerospace
industry. There is imminent need for effective numerical methods in these fields
as composite materials have become industry standard. For instance, Airbus and
Boeing heavily use light weight composite materials in modern aircrafts. NL
models, especially PD, have become increasingly useful for multiscale material
modeling as well. The effectiveness of PD has been established in sophisticated
nanoscience applications such as fracture and failure of composites, nanofiber
networks, and polycrystal fracture. In addition, the prediction of crack paths
has been successfully modeled by PD. Furthermore, NL modeling has been used in
abundant applications which include fracture of solids, stress fields at
dislocation cores and cracks tips, microscale heat transfer, and fluid flow in
microscale channels. There are other fields important to national interest where
NL models are critically needed for the effective modeling and simulation of
complex phenomena. Examples include evolution equations for species population
densities, image processing, porous media flow, and turbulence.
