
* 1016038
* Numerical Computation of Geodesics in the Framework of Metamorphosis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2010,07/07/2010
* Laurent Younes,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2013
* USD 275,000.00

The proposed research focuses on metamorphosis for shape analysis, which relies
on a shape transformation model within which shape variation is coupled with
other transformations of the data, permitting topological changes, or partial
advection of attributes attached to the deformed objects. This results in a
versatile framework in which many different models can be devised, based on any
mathematical structure that can both be advected by diffeomorphisms and embedded
in a Hilbert or Riemannian space. This construction equips the space of
deformable objects of interest with a new Riemannian metric, allowing for the
comparison of these objects, and for the use of tools associated to data
analysis in Riemannian manifolds, like the representation of data sets in
exponential charts. The research will involve models of metamorphosis in which
the deformable structures are represented by images, densities, or measures, in
two or three dimensions. One of the main issues in this context is the
computation of geodesics, either as a variational problem (shortest path between
two points in the manifold) or as an initial value problem (solving the Euler-
Lagrange equation for the evolution of geodesics). The numerical analysis of
both problems is challenging, especially when one adds the requirement for the
two solutions to be numerically consistent, in the sense that discrete solutions
of the first problem coincide with discrete solutions of the second one, which
is important for applications. This research will address these issues, by
developing variational integrators for the initial value problems, and shooting
methods for the boundary value problems, in contexts that will involve solutions
that combine smooth and singular components. The PI and collaborators will also
deploy and extend of a comprehensive software that provides a collection of
algorithms associated to diffeomorphic matching.



The goal of shape analysis is to understand and represent variations of shapes
in data sets of deformable objects (like collections of landmarks, images,
curves or surfaces). This issue is important, in particular, for the
characterization of anatomical variations in medical images, and of their
relation with pathologies. One of the main areas of applications in this context
is known as Computational Anatomy, and methods from mathematical shape analysis
have already been used for  several successful applications. Examples of
developments in this domain include collaborations of the PI with researchers at
the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, or at the Institute for
Computational Medicine at  Johns Hopkins University, on the analysis of brain
disease and of cardiac failure.  The theory and tools that will be developed in
this research will enable the analysis of situations that cannot be  handled by
previous methods, which work under the assumption that anatomical variation can
be essentially described by smooth changes of shape. The proposed approach,
called metamorphosis, will be able to address cases for which these assumptions
are not satisfied, and make possible, for example, the analysis of images that
include dramatic changes between subjects. This includes the analysis of
datasets measuring the evolution of tumors, or describing brain recovery after a
major stroke. The research will contribute to the emergence of new solutions in
such contexts, and make the related software available to the scientific
community.
