
* 1016283
* A Posteriori Analysis of Multirate Numerical Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,08/26/2010
* Victor Ginting,WY,University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 188,159.00

This research project is concerned with a posteriori analysis of a class of
multirate numerical methods whose natural application appears in multiscale
differential systems. A common trait in the multirate numerical methods is the
decomposition of the original governing equations into collection of subsystems
with different scales. Each subsystem can use a different discretization
parameter pertaining to its characteristic scale. This is in contrast to using a
single discretization parameter dictated by the dominating scale in the original
governing equations if standard fully coupling numerical procedure is to be
used. The multirate numerical methods, however, introduces a set of errors which
directly affect the accuracy and stability of the approximate solutions in both
obvious and subtle ways that are difficult to quantify accurately. These issues
are addressed by conducting a posteriori analysis of the multirate numerical
methods based on variational adjoint techniques. These techniques are desired
because of their suitability for error prediction in the specified quantities of
interest expressed in terms of functional of the approximate solutions. Being
able to focus directly on application-based quantities of interest has strong
consequences for computational efficiency in error estimation and adaptive error
control. The goal is to formulate accurate estimation techniques that have the
capability to distinguish and quantify the error components, such as the
multirate discretization, incomplete iteration in the nonlinear solution, and
numerical errors in the solution of each subsystem This can then be used to gain
better insights of the effects of the errors on issues such as accuracy,
stability, and adaptivity of the methods.

Multirate numerical methods are widely used in many applications. The main
indicator of the successful completion of this project will be a better
understanding of these methods and a capability to quantify their errors. This
will have a broad impact on areas of engineering and science such as power
system technology, nuclear engineering, petroleum production, and biology.
Applications of multirate numerical methods arising in several of these areas
are used as benchmark problems for developing the error estimation techniques.
The project design allows for addressing fundamental issues in employing
multirate numerical methods, such as accuracy and stability, adaptivity, and
efficiency. This in turn will significantly contribute to developing efficient
and accurate multirate numerical methods. Activities within this project are
expected to strengthen ongoing collaborations, especially with investigators in
the Rocky Mountain region. The project involves training of a graduate student
in the area of a posteriori analysis and their application to multirate
numerical methods.
