
* 1016460
* Collaborative Research: A Study of the Transition of Knot Space from Confinement to Relaxation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/13/2010
* Yuanan Diao,NC,University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 73,847.00

Circular molecules confined to a small volume are often modeled by random
polygons confined in a sphere and extracted (that is relaxed) circular molecules
are modeled by relaxed random polygons without confinement. The PIs propose to
explore the geometric changes that occur during the transition of the polygonal
knotspace from confinement to relaxation and to establish correlations between
these geometric changes and the topological complexity of the polygons. The
results of this research project will provide benchmark data on the
relationships between certain knot complexity measures and some geometric
measures, where all quantities are measured as averages over families of random
polygons before and after they are relaxed. The results can guide the evaluation
of experimental data such as the data available in the case of the bacteriophage
P4 virus. To reach the goal of the proposed research, several critical
objectives must be achieved: a) The development of a fast, reliable, and
unbiased algorithm to generate large sets of long equilateral random polygons
within a confining volume; b) The development of relaxation schemes for
equilateral random polygons and their corresponding algorithms; c)
Quantification of the effect of topology on geometric changes of random polygons
when transitioning from confinement to relaxation and d) Identification of
inferences about topological properties of the random polygons using the average
geometric properties of the polygons before and after relaxation. The proposed
research will provide a systematic study between the relationships between
various geometric measures and topological properties of knots in the average
sense when the knots under consideration undergo a transition change from volume
confinement to relaxation. The proposed research will reveal potentially
important and interesting relationships among these quantities and the role of
confinement in these relationships. It is well known that macromolecular self-
assembly processes are key players in the complex network of interactions that
take place in every organism. One of these self-assembly processes is the
packing of the genetic material in the capsids of viruses. Little is know about
the details of the packing processes, because in a confined small volume DNA is
usually condensed and folds in ways that are difficult to quantify
experimentally. DNA molecules that are forcefully removed from bacteriophage P4
capsids often form complicated knots that are a result of the packing process.
Thus, the extracted DNA carries important information about how the DNA is
packed inside the capsids. The question of how to decipher such information is a
main motivation of the proposed research. Circular molecules confined to a small
volume are often modeled by random polygons confined in a sphere. On the other
hand, extracted circular molecules are usually modeled by relaxed random
polygons without confinement. The proposed research will explore the geometric
changes that occur during the transition of the polygonal knot space from
confinement to relaxation and to establish correlations between these geometric
changes and the topological complexity of the polygons. The results will provide
some essential benchmark data on the relationships between certain knot
complexity measures and some geometric measures, which are important in order
for us to fully understand the mechanism of DNA packing in a tight space. The
PIs their students (ranging from exceptionally talented high-school students, to
undergraduates, graduates, and Ph. D. students) will develop mathematical tools
and computational models that will be made freely available to the scientific
community and/or interested educators. The results of the work can be used in
areas such as biology and physics to check the validity of models of highly
condensed DNA or tightly packed polymers.
