
* 1016712
* Fast Evaluation and Fast Transforms of Band-Limited Functions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2010,08/03/2010
* Hong Xiao,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2014
* USD 274,955.00

Whenever physical signals are measured or generated, the results tend to be
band-limited (i.e. to have compactly supported Fourier transforms), or, in more
generic terminology, signals tend to only contain information from a limited
number of frequencies. Indeed, measurements of electromagnetic and acoustic data
are band-limited due to the oscillatory character of the processes that have
generated the quantities being measured. When the signals being measured come
from heat propagation or diffusion processes, they are (practically speaking)
band-limited, since the underlying physical processes operate as low-pass
filters, i.e. high frequency components are attenuated or completely removed.
The importance of band-limited functions has been recognized for hundreds of
years; classical Fourier analysis can be viewed as an apparatus for dealing with
such functions. When band-limited functions are defined on the whole line (or on
the circle), classical tools are very satisfactory. However, in most practical
cases, we are confronted with band-limited functions defined on finite intervals
or regions (or, more generally, on compact regions in Rn). It was determined
more than 40 years ago that a special class of functions, the Prolate Spheroidal
Wave Functions, are the optimal tool for dealing with band-limited functions.
But their realistic use has been limited by the need to develop efficient and
accurate algorithms for their evaluation. The product of this research project
will be efficient and accurate algorithms for evaluating and transforming PSWFs.

Classical Fourier analysis is an indispensable tool in many scientific and
engineering disciplines: mathematics, physics, signal processing, image
processing, acoustic scattering, electromagnetics, etc, and works well for
handling band-limited functions (those that have limited frequency content) that
are defined on the whole line (or on the circle). Technologies based on the
research proposed in this project, however, will remedy the inadequacy of the
classical Fourier analysis in dealing with practical situations which frequently
call for modeling with band-limited functions that are defined on the interval.
At the same time, the proposed method maintains some of the benefits of Fourier
analysis: fast evaluation, fast transformation, and high accuracy. The proposed
research will be applied to practical problems not amenable to existing
techniques including problems in wireless communications, radar and sonar signal
design, and image texture analysis. In addition, the investigator plans to
implement education and outreach programs for mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students, and for public dissemination of research results and
software. Specific goals include: (1) developing inter-related courses on
mathematical programming, on numerical methods in integration and interpolation,
and on fast algorithms and band-limited functions, ranging from freshman to
graduate level; (2) mentoring undergraduate students in related research
projects; (3) bringing current research to scientific and engineering
communities, via organizing workshops and by contributing publicly available
production grade software libraries.
