
* 1045151
* Oil spill transport modeling in shelf, estuary, and intracoastal regions
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,08/26/2010
* Ethan Kubatko,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2012
* USD 137,663.00

The main goal of this research is to further develop, apply, and analyze a
computational tool that can be used to examine the transport tendencies along
the U.S. East Coast including Florida, Georgia, and both Carolinas as they
relate to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. The central piece of this
computational tool will be the Advanced Circulation (ADCIRC) hydrodynamic model.
ADCIRC is a finite element model for solving time?dependent, free surface
circulation and transport problems in two? and three?dimensions. Existing finite
element meshes of the region will be further developed to provide an
unprecedented level of resolution and physical detail, including detailed
coverage of coastal rivers and lagoons, tidal creeks, the Atlantic Intracoastal
Waterway, and tidally flooded marshes. The ability to accurately simulate the
tidal dynamics of this region, as well as hurricane storm surge, will be coupled
with recent and ongoing development of the transport capabilities of the ADCIRC
model using discontinuous Galerkin methods. The integration and further
development of these three key components, i.e., the high-resolution finite
element meshes, the ability to accurately simulate tidal and storm surge
dynamics, and robust, mass-conserving transport algorithms, will provide a
powerful computational tool that will be used to simulate the transport
tendencies of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill along the U.S. East Coast.

The Deepwater Horizon oil spill began on April 20, 2010 as a result of an oil
well blowout that caused an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon offshore drilling
platform located forty miles southeast off the Louisiana coast. A major and
immediate concern related to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill is the possibility
of the oil slick reaching the Loop Current ? a warm ocean current that enters
the Gulf of Mexico flowing northward through the Yucatan Strait and that exits
flowing east through the Florida Straits continuing northward along the east
coast of Florida as the Gulf Stream. Oil entering the Loop Current would
eventually be transported far afield to the Atlantic Ocean where the presence of
large-scale eddies that separate from the western edge of the Gulf Stream have
the potential to carry oil toward the U.S. East Coast. There is additional
concern regarding the transport of oil that may occur during the upcoming
Atlantic Hurricane Season, which has been forecasted by NOAA to be an ?active to
extremely active? hurricane season. The transport of oil towards the U.S. East
Coast ? by means of reaching the Loop Current or from the onset of a hurricane ?
would obviously have a major detrimental impact on the coastal environment,
severely damaging their beaches and coastal wetlands, which serve as critical
habitats to the fish and wildlife. The primary objective of this proposal is to
provide a computational tool that will be used to help analyze and assess
possible damage from the Deepwater Horizon oil spill along the U.S. East Coast
including Florida, Georgia, and both Carolinas. Specifically, the fate and
transport of oil spill remnants (e.g., tar balls) entrained in Gulf Stream
eddies and feeding the U.S. East Coast will be modeled along the shelf and into
the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway and estuarine systems. Using available data
sources, simulations will be performed to ultimately identify areas especially
susceptible to receiving transported oil and likely areas of deposition. The
model and results will also be transferable to other regions of the Gulf of
Mexico.
