
* 1056821
* CAREER: Developing Mathematical Tools for Modeling Complex Materials Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,08/28/2015
* Maria Emelianenko,VA,George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 452,009.00

To increase materials strength and prevent failure, one needs to be able to gain
control over material microstructure. The PI's research is focused on
mathematical approaches to this problem. This research is designed to help make
improvements to several stages of the materials process chain, from construction
of phase diagrams to determination of growth rates and texture optimization. Her
work features the interplay of modeling, simulation and analysis tools involving
partial differential equations and stochastic processes. A combination of
techniques from optimization, statistics and numerical analysis help this
project substantially contribute to some of the field's long-standing
challenges. The PI's plans include the creation of a mesoscopic theory of
microstructure evolution which is focused on traditionally neglected
disappearance events. Novel high-accuracy tools for multicomponent phase diagram
calculation are achieved by fully utilizing modern sampling and constrained
optimization techniques. Through a network of already established and newly
formed collaborations with engineers in the US and abroad, the PI plans a
comprehensive analysis of the impact of micro- and mesoscopic parameters on
macroscopic materials properties. The Modeling Days conference organized by the
PI and run together with the K-12 Mathematics Day workshop, brings students and
senior researchers working in the field closer together and provides a unique
career forum and networking opportunity for students from K-12 to postgraduate
level, and helps to recruit and retain a talented workforce.

Microstructure degradation of components exposed to high temperature and high
pressure has been linked to failure of components such as used in petrochemical
plants, oil and gas transmission pipelines, offshore structures, ships,
pharmaceutical plants, food processing equipment, and gas turbine engine
components. The PI's research provides cost-effective solutions for predicting
and preventing failure of materials due to environmental factors. This work has
a direct impact on many practically important areas by advancing the synthesis
of novel "smart" materials. These are highly sophisticated materials which
possess very specific sets of properties targeted to particular applications.
Close collaboration between mathematical and engineering communities on the
global scale fostered by this project is crucial for accelerating the design and
deployment of such materials. The project provides an unparalleled opportunity
for involving students from high school to graduate level in a wide array of
vertically-integrated research and educational activities focused on
mathematical modeling and analysis of real-life systems. Such activities include
short-term and long-term research projects, internships with industry, workshops
and meetings with top scientists in the field. Special effort in the project is
dedicated to the recruitment of women and minorities into STEM-related fields
and outreach activities aimed at showcasing mathematics as a powerful tool for
discovery.
