
* 1057064
* CAREER: Numerical Multilinear Algebra and Its Applications - From Matrices to Tensors
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Algorithmic Foundations
* 03/01/2011,01/13/2011
* Lek-Heng Lim,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/28/2017
* USD 550,000.00

The PI will extend extensive studies in numerical linear algebra to the
numerical multilinear algebra setting, which complements and enriches the
underlying linear framework. The PI's prior work has laid foundations for this
new subject via (1) mapping the boundary between the possible and impossible,
the computable and non-computable; and (2) extending several matrix notions to
tensors (e.g. eigenvalues, singular values, Schatten, Ky Fan norms, Perron-
Frobeniuis theorem). This project takes the next step -- developing the
requisite algorithms for problems that sit within these boundaries. While almost
all 'algorithms' currently in use for tensor problems lack correctness and
convergence guarantees, the ones developed for this project strive to be
algorithms in the true sense of the word, i.e. meeting the basic requirement of
convergence to a true solution and not just a stationary or fixed point. This is
in general not possible but the PI will (i) identify large classes of
interesting cases for which efficient, provably convergent algorithms exist; and
(ii) exploit multilinearity and tap the existing rich collection of linear
techniques. These design principles and goals will be applied to algorithmic
development of all following problems: (a) Low rank tensor approximations; (b)
eigenvalues and singular values for tensors; (c) systems of multilinear
equations in the exact and least-squares sense. The PI will also demonstrate the
utility of numerical multilinear algebra by proposing several new tools in
telecommunications, bioinformatics, and neuroimaging.

Almost all engineering, scientific, and statistical computing problems may
ultimately be reduced to a handful of standard problems in linear algebra.
Therefore one may argue that computational linear algebra is the workhorse of
computations in science and engineering. This project is about expanding this
fundamental arsenal of tools by going from "linear" to "multilinear". To achieve
this, one must first realize that while there are natural extensions of the
aforementioned handful of linear problems, there are also subtle difficulties
and even impossibilities associated with these multilinear analogues. The crux
of the project is to carve out a substantial tractable subclass of problems that
are nevertheless still useful in applications. The project would also examine
three concrete applications to brain imaging, cellular phone communication, and
analytical chemistry.
