
* 1066045
* Dynamical Processes in Many-Body Systems: Analysis and Simulations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,05/17/2011
* Emil Prodan,NY,Yeshiva University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 331,314.00

The quantum physics of many interacting electrons lies at the foundation of
chemistry and condensed matter physics. A direct treatment of the many-electron
problem is impossible due to its shear complexity: dealing with N interacting
electrons requires solving partial differential equations in 3N dimensions.
Equilibrium and non-equilibrium Density Functional Theories (DFT) are rigorous
and formally exact theories which map the interacting N-electron problem into a
non-interacting N-electron problem. The non-interacting electrons move in an
effective potential that has a universal functional dependence on the total
electron density. As a result, the problem is reduced to a problem in dimension
3, amenable for computation. In this proposal the PIs propose to study a number
of dynamical problems in many-body quantum mechanics within an interdisciplinary
environment of mathematicians and physicists. In particular, the PIs propose to
develop further the mathematical foundations of density-functional theory, for
equilibrium as well as the time-dependent case. The mathematical structure of
the theory and its solutions will be further investigated and the insight from
this analysis will be used to develop efficient numerical simulations.
Particular emphasis will be given to the treatment of the spin-orbit
interaction, within the full relativistic formulations and in non-relativistic
formulations that include relativistic corrections. The PIs also plan to
establish the foundations of the Dissipative Time-Dependent Density Functional
Theory, and to apply the theory to the problem of charge and spin transport in
materials.

The present technological progress is in great part based on design and
discovery of new materials. Nowadays, the design of advanced materials involves
laboratory work and computer simulations. Enhancing the accuracy and efficiency
of computer simulations will reduce the costs, broaden the array of interesting
and potentially useful materials, and speed up the process of testing and
characterization. This is the target of the proposed research. The plan is to
combine rigorous mathematical analysis, the insights from physics, chemistry and
computer simulations in order to push the boundaries of theoretical simulations
of advanced materials such as nano-structured materials, topological insulators
and molecular electronic devices. The proposed research could have significant
technological impact in applications such as nano-science and other areas of
interest such as solar cell devices and energy conversion and storage. The PIs
propose to integrate research and education by involving undergraduate and
graduate students, and post-doctoral associates, in an interdisciplinary
environment. Special attention will be paid to the recruitment of women and
students from other underrepresented groups through the utilization of a diverse
number of programs at the participating institutions.
