
* 1112656
* Definite Integration: Algorithms and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,07/21/2015
* Victor Moll,LA,Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2016
* USD 320,001.00

The project is an effort to investigate the mathematical theory and algorithms
associated with the symbolic evaluation of definite integrals. The first class
of functions that will be considered is the family of hypergeometric functions.
This class is characterized by satisfying a differential equation of second
order with exactly three singular points. The PI will attempt to develop an
automatic procedure based on the Barnes representation for these functions. The
natural next step is the family of Heun functions that have four singular
points. The project also considers many topics that have risen from previous
investigations by the PI. These include arithmetical properties of sequences
coming from the iteration of integrals, questions of logconcavity of sequences
appearing in the integration of rational functions and general questions on the
p-adic properties of naturally occurring sequences. A general theory for these
valuations will be developed. A third component of the project is the
implementation and justification of a heuristic method developed by the PI and
his coworkers to evaluate integrals coming from Feynman diagrams.

Many problems in physics and engineering require the exact evaluation of
definite integrals in terms of the parameters appearing in them. These integrals
come up in the study of particle physics and classical mechanics. While it is
not always possible to find such an expression, an efficient and robust symbolic
software package should give the result in closed-form, or decide whether such
expression is achievable. The goal of this project is to develop algorithms that
will expand the capabilities of existing software packages that are widely used
in industry and universities. A second goal is to develop mathematical theories
for theoretical questions that appear in the development of the previously
mentioned algorithms.
