
* 1112897
* Continuous Regularization for Nonlinear Ill-Posed Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/14/2011
* Alexandra Smirnova,GA,Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2015
* USD 250,000.00

In the modern theory of irregular (ill-posed, unstable) problems, numerous
regularized computational methods are known. These methods are being constantly
improved and supplemented with new algorithms. Applied inverse problems are the
main sources of this development. One of the primary approaches to the
construction and investigation of stable methods for solving ill-posed operator
equations is iterative regularization. Numerous convergence theorems describe
the efficiency of iteratively regularized algorithms for different classes of
unstable problems, and give existence results. However it is quite hard to
navigate among discrete schemes and the corresponding convergence theorems.
Proofs of these theorems are usually based on the contraction mapping principle
and are sometimes rather complicated. In this project, PI conducts research on
continuous regularization, which is based on the analysis of asymptotic behavior
of nonlinear dynamical systems in Banach and Hilbert spaces. When a convergence
theorem is proven for a continuous method, one can investigate various discrete
schemes generated by this continuous process. Thus, construction of a discrete
numerical scheme is split into two parts: development of a continuous process
and numerical integration of the corresponding nonlinear operator-differential
equation. Consequently, when it comes to a convergence theorem for a discrete
scheme, one can differentiate between the sufficient conditions for the
convergence of a continuous process, which stem from the nature of the ill-posed
problem, and the conditions that originate from a specific method of numerical
integration.

The research will have a broad impact on a large number of scientific
disciplines (biomedical imaging, gravitational sounding, chaos theory,
spectroscopy, computerized tomography, and other areas of science and
engineering) since the corresponding applied inverse problems can be
investigated in the framework of this proposal both, theoretically and
numerically. These problems are "ill-posed" in the sense that their solutions
are unstable with respect to noise in the observed image data. For this reason,
classical methods of computational mathematics cannot be applied. To overcome
this instability and to simultaneously incorporate a priori information, one
uses special techniques known as regularization methods. PI's research interests
lie in the development and analysis of these regularization methods.
