
* 1114889
* Hybrid Methods for the Time Domain Integral Equations of Computational Electromagnetics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2011,08/12/2011
* Daniel Weile,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 289,938.00

The project "Hybrid methods for the time domain integral equations of
electromagnetics" advances a multidisciplinary program consisting of basic
numerical analysis of time domain integral equations (TDIEs) and a two-fold
program of hybridization. The basic numerical analysis is devoted to issues of
sparsification, quadrature error, error estimates and fast solvers for a new and
exciting class of TDIE methods based on convolution quadrature (CQ-TDIE). The
first prong of the hybridization work concerns combining CQ-TDIE with the volume
finite element method. Not only would this hybridization allow for the easy
simulation of inhomogeneous and complex media, but it also raises the
tantalizing prospect of a perfect time domain integral based boundary condition.
The second, and more speculative, hybridization approach combines CQ-TDIE with
older Galerkin-based techniques with the aim of controlling dispersion and
dissipation. It is anticipated that the resulting hybrid methods have the
stability and spatial accuracy of CQ, but with the greater efficiency and
reduced dispersion associated with Galerkin approaches. In particular, the
technique would be ideally suited for the analysis of certain classes of modern
technology involving long propagation distances through homogeneous regions (as
occur in electromagnetic interference analysis) or mechanically moving parts (as
necessary in many nanotechnology problems).



Numerical simulation of physical processes reduces business prototyping costs,
enables the safe prediction of the outcome of dangerous experiments, and can
even make scientific discoveries by illuminating internal processes difficult to
examine in the laboratory. In an era dominated by personal communication
technology, the simulation of electromagnetic phenomena becomes especially
crucial. "Hybrid methods for the time domain integral equations of
electromagnetics" creates two new methods for the simulation of the interaction
between electromagnetic fields and matter. While computerized approaches to
electromagnetic analysis already exist, the methods to be created by the
investigators allow for more accurate and efficient simulation of problems
involving biological tissue, long propagation distances (such as occur in
communications simulations), and mechanically moving parts (as needed in
nanotechnology simulations). In addition to these benefits, the new method
represents an important mathematical advance: it is based on a technique thought
unstable for over three decades, which has only recently been made practical.
The investigators therefore expect that the advances made in the analysis of
electromagnetic problems under the auspices of this work will be easily
translated to other scientific areas including acoustics, solid mechanics, and
fluid mechanics.
