
* 1114816
* An Integrated Framework for High-Order Aeroacoustics of Complex Configurations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/13/2011
* Antony Jameson,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 425,354.00

Direct numerical simulation of noise production and propagation remains
prohibitively expensive for engineering problems due to resolution requirements.
Consequently, hybrid approaches are adopted, which consist of predicting near-
field flow quantities via a suitable computational fluid dynamics simulation,
and far-field sound radiation by aero-acoustic integral methods, or acoustic
analogy formulations. It is critical that the complex flow physics associated
with sound generation in the near field is accurately captured by the
computational fluid dynamics simulation. Therefore, it is necessary to use a
high-order numerical scheme with very low dispersion/dissipation errors. Also,
the most significant airframe noise sources are landing gear and high-lift
components, such as slats and flaps. The geometric complexity of these
components calls for use of numerical methods that can perform well on
unstructured grids. The high-order Vincent-Castonguay-Jameson-Huynh (VCJH)
schemes recently developed by the principal investigator and colleagues at
Stanford University with National Science Foundation funding satisfy both of the
aforementioned requirements. In the present work, a state-of-the-art
computational framework will be developed for performing aero-acoustics
simulations by integrating advanced sub-grid scale (SGS) models for large-eddy
simulations (LES) of turbulent flow, and a new Ffowcs Williams-Hawkings (FWH)
acoustic analogy formulation for sound propagation, with a graphical processing
unit (GPU) enabled high-order VCJH flow solver for unstructured grids. The
resulting software will enable the principal investigator and colleagues to
undertake high-fidelity large scale aero-acoustics simulations over complex
configurations at an affordable cost. The ability to perform such simulations
will greatly facilitate design of new aircraft with reduced noise signatures.

The future growth of commercial air transportation (currently predicted to
triple by the year 2030) may be severely limited by its adverse environmental
impacts (both emissions and noise). Noise regulations have become, and will
continue to become, increasingly stringent, and noise reduction is now a major
consideration in the design of transport aircraft. Although computer simulations
currently play a major role in airplane design, their ability to predict noise,
and in particular airframe noise (which is the largest component of noise during
landing) remains very limited. The principal investigator and his colleagues aim
to combine new mathematical and computational techniques to advance the state-
of-the-art in noise prediction, and thereby enable design of new, quieter
aircraft, with the ultimate target of restricting their noise footprint to
within airport perimeters. A successful outcome is significant to the United
States economy because commercial aircraft continue to be the largest single
export sector.
