
* 1115280
* Hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin methods for higher order partial differential equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2011,08/29/2011
* Fatih Celiker,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 135,514.00

In order to understand, predict, and eventually control a complex natural or
manufactured physical system, one often models it using partial differential
equations. Nevertheless, in practically all models arising from complex modern
applications, obtaining an exact solution in the form of basic mathematical
functions is not a possibility. Thus, a practitioner must resort to what is
called a numerical method for computing an approximate solution to the partial
differential equations defining the model. Numerical simulations thus play a key
role in modern science and technology. They also allow significant reduction in
manufacturing costs by designing and testing various models merely on computers
before actually building a physical model. Successful computation of approximate
solutions to practical problems of interest in part depends on advances in
computer technology. However, more importantly, it hinges upon the design,
analysis, and implementation of efficient, reliable, accurate, and robust
numerical methods.

One of the most widely used family of numerical methods is the finite element
method, which has become an indispensable tool for simulation of a wide variety
of phenomena arising in science and engineering such as the design of aircrafts,
automobiles, bridges, oil platforms, and more recently of nano-materials, to
name a few. Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods constitute a special subfamily
of finite element methods which are known for their stability, robustness,
versatility, and high-order accuracy. In this project, the PI will develop and
analyze hybridizable DG (HDG) methods for problems arising in structural
mechanics. Particular emphasis will be on devising such methods for problems
dealing with thin domains such as beams, plates, and shells, since they pose
challenges which have attracted much interest in the scientific computing
community. The hybridization procedure allows the elimination of many of the
globally coupled degrees of freedom rendering the linear system significantly
smaller than that of its classical DG counterparts. The resulting HDG methods
enjoy desirable properties of DG methods such as stability, high-order
convergence, and robustness, and in certain cases they exhibit even better
properties. Mathematical analysis of such phenomena is also a part of the
proposed project. This project consists of several parts: HDG methods for Naghdi
arches; biharmonic problems; Reissner-Mindlin plates; and fourth-order time-
dependent problems. Notwithstanding each of these steps is worthy of interest in
its own right, one of the ultimate goals of the PI is to devise efficient
numerical methods for shell models, and each one of the above steps constitute a
stepping stone towards this goal.
