
* 1115297
* Sparse Direct Methods on High-Performance Heterogeneous Architectures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CI REUSE
* 08/15/2011,05/04/2015
* Timothy Davis,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2015
* USD 310,000.00

Sparse direct methods form the backbone of many applications in computational
science, but the methods are not keeping pace with advances in heterogeneous
computing architectures. High end systems can be built to contain multiple
general-purpose CPU cores, coupled with one or more Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs) each with hundreds of simple yet fast computational cores. This project
develops high-performance parallel sparse direct methods that can exploit GPU-
based architectures to achieve orders of magnitude gains in computational
performance. The focus is single and multiple GPU algorithms for multifrontal
sparse QR factorization. QR factorization has wide applicability, is numerically
very stable and is useful in many application areas. The nonuniform and
hierarchical structure of sparse QR factorization along with the unique features
of the GPU requires the development of novel algorithms. These include managing
the simultaneous mix of regular computations inside the frontal matrix, and
irregular computations in the assembly process between nodes in the
computational tree and between concurrent subtrees.

An efficient sparse QR factorization is an essential kernel in many problems in
computational science. It can be used to find solutions to sparse linear
systems, sparse linear least squares problems, eigenvalue problems, rank and
null-space determination, and many other mathematical problems in numerical
linear algebra. Application areas that can exploit the result of this research
include structural engineering, computational fluid dynamics, electromagnetics,
semiconductor devices, thermodynamics, materials, acoustics, computer
graphics/vision, robotics/kinematics, optimization, circuit simulation, economic
and financial modeling, chemical process simulation, text/document networks, and
many other areas. QR factorization is representative of many other sparse direct
methods, with both irregular coarse-grain parallelism and regular fine-grain
parallelism, and methodologies developed are very relevant for these other
methods. The work has broad impact on computational linear algebra,
optimization, and related application areas. The PI's research extends beyond
these specific applications of numerical linear algebra, demonstrating how
problems with a mixture of irregular and regular computation can be performed on
the challenging yet promising landscape of GPU computing, and opens the door to
many other kinds of applications. The investigator and his colleagues plan on
producing and distributing high-quality software as a result of this work, for
which they have a 20-year track record.
