
* 1115392
* Kernel Methods for Numerical Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,07/01/2013
* Fred Hickernell,IL,Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2014
* USD 320,000.00

The PI's research provides a deeper understanding of kernel methods for
multivariate function approximation problems. There are five main research
thrusts. The first is to derive dimension-independent error bounds for kernel
methods based on noisy and noiseless data. The second is to investigate which
designs (arrangements of data sites) achieve these error bounds. The third is to
use Green's functions to develop a better understanding of the inherent native
spaces associated with the kernels used. The fourth is to use the kernel
eigenfunction expansions to construct numerically stable evaluation algorithms
for kernel approximation. The final thrust is to develop fast evaluation
algorithms for kernel approximation, again using the eigenfunction expansions.
The theoretical development provides practitioners in academia and industry
insight and support for the development of numerical simulation algorithms in
such application areas as materials engineering, complex fluid flow simulations,
and nuclear reactor simulation. The investigators partner with software
developers such as Matlab, NAG and JMP statistical software to have their
algorithms included in future releases of these software packages. This research
is being disseminated among the mathematics, statistical, and engineering
communities to build bridges between them. In particular, the investigators are
presenting tutorial courses on kernel methods to national and international
audiences. The research findings are taught in several graduate courses that
routinely draw students from applied mathematics, engineering and business. One
key priority is to engage students in computational mathematics research as
early as possible in the form of an REU experience and thereby develop a
pipeline of young computational mathematicians for academia or industry. The
investigators stress the inclusion of students from underrepresented minorities
and from universities in the Chicago area that do not provide computational
research opportunities to their students.

Computation is an indispensable tool for solving a variety of scientific,
engineering, and societal problems. However, accurate and timely answers require
computational algorithms that are well understood and properly applied. This
research focuses on the fundamental problem of inferring the function that
relates multiple inputs to an output, e.g., the way in which values of tens of
engineering design parameters determine the temperature inside a nuclear
reactor. Kernel methods are flexible and accurate in certain settings, but their
applicability for large numbers of inputs, as in the example just given, is not
understood. The PI's research addresses this issue. Success means that the
number of time-intensive computer simulations needed to understand complex
processes can be reduced, and be replaced by a surrogate constructed via kernel
methods. This research shows how to plan the computer simulations for maximum
accuracy. Moreover, the methods for constructing this surrogate more quickly are
developed. Because of the fundamental nature of this research, the findings are
expected to influence general purpose numerical computation packages used by
many engineers and scientists involved in the fields of energy, manufacturing,
and nanotechnology. By including not only PhD students, but also MS and BS
students, this research project is preparing the next generation of
computational scientists, who are needed to support our continued technological
and economic growth.
