
* 1115288
* Local properties of the finite element solutions to PDE constrained optimal control problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/15/2011
* Dmitriy Leykekhman,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 126,383.00

The research objective of this project is to develop a strong theoretical
foundation on local properties of finite element solutions for advection-
dominated optimal control problems. The advection-diffusion partial differential
equations (PDEs) are known to be difficult to approximate because their
solutions often exhibit discontinuities, layers, and shocks. The structure of
the solutions to optimal control problems is even more complicated because of
the coupling in the optimality system of the governing advection-dominated PDE
with an advection-dominated adjoint PDE. It is known that convergence behavior
of finite element methods applied to single advection-dominated PDEs can be very
different from the convergence behavior of finite element methods applied to
advection-dominated optimal control problems. Understanding the global and local
convergence behavior is crucial for reliable and efficient solution of
advection-dominated optimal control problems, especially in the presence of
control and state constraints, and objective functions that depend on pointwise
state information. This project intends to deepen our understanding for various
problems and to help develop reliable numerical methods.

Mathematics proved to be extremely useful in modeling many real life problems
coming from environment, technology, climate, and etc. However, many
mathematical models require special parameters that can not be measured
directly. Examples can be shapes in modeling technological devises, physical
coefficients in environmental processes, controls in navigation and etc. and
need to be estimated. Mathematically, estimation of such paramters often leads
to optimization problems with constraints in the form of system partial
differential equations (PDEs). Usually, such system of PDEs is well understood
and there are many available numerical techniques to solve it. However, it does
not immediately apply that the method that works well for the underlying system
of PDEs will work for the constrained optimization problem. In our previous
work, we showed such differences in the case of a simple model problem. In this
proposal we intend to investigate more complicated model problems that cover a
broader range of applications.
