
* 1115520
* Eigenvalues problems, Krylov subspace methods, and subspace recycling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2011,08/10/2011
* Daniel Szyld,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 280,000.00

The project concerns the development, analysis, refinement and testing of
efficient numerical algorithms for the solution of algebraic eigenvalue problems
and of systems of linear equations arising from a variety of applications. The
PI's research is concentrated on the following two classes of problems: 1.
Interior eigenvalues of generalized non-Hermitian eigenvalue problems. These
arise in many scientific and engineering applications, such as stability
analysis of steady flows of incompressible fluid and evaluation of passivity in
control systems and circuit networks. 2. Sequences of linear systems of
equations. These arise, e.g., in iterative methods for nonlinear problems, such
as inexact Newton's method for Riccati equations, inexact eigenvalue algorithms,
and interior-point methods for convex optimization. A goal of the project is the
development of rapidly convergent and robust Krylov subspace methods to
efficiently solve both classes of problems. For the first class of problems,
this entails the study of convergence properties, subspace expansion and
extraction, and preconditioning techniques that take advantage of the structure
of the problems. For the second problem class, the aim is to reduce the
iteration counts and computational effort needed for the solution of each linear
system by using a properly recycled subspace obtained from the iterative
solution of a preceding linear system in the sequence. The study of both problem
classes also entails extensive computational experimentation on benchmark
problems.



The problems to be studied in this project include the efficient computation of
a group of eigenvalues and the solution of sequences of linear systems.
Eigenvalue calculations include analysis of vibration frequencies in structures
including buildings, to make sure, for example, that they are far from the
earthquake band. Fast algorithms for generalized eigenvalue problems also
contribute to the design and analysis of electronic integrated circuit and
micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), and the detection of potential presence
of turbulent fluid flows. Efficient solution of a sequence of linear systems
facilitates modeling of fatigue and fracture via finite element analysis, and
the stability analysis of linear systems through the solution of Riccati
equations. The two problems mentioned are fundamental in the field of numerical
linear algebra as well as many relevant areas such as fluid and solid mechanics,
system and control theory, and numerical optimization. Although numerical
algorithms have been developed and studied for some of these problems, efficient
solution of large-scale applications remains a major computational challenge.
Development and refinement of these computational methods have potential broader
impact in engineering and science.
