
* 1115915
* Topics in Geometric and Multiscale Numerical Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2011,07/08/2011
* Thomas Yu,PA,Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 230,825.00

There is an emerging interest in various disciplines of science and engineering
to develop parsimonious multiscale representations of data that `lives' on a
Riemannian manifold or Lie group. Such application areas are growing by leaps
and bounds and cognate application problems are arising all the time. Diffusion
tensor imaging and collaborative motion modelling are simple examples of new
sensor types and deployments that give rise to massive volumes of data taking
values in nonlinear manifolds. We believe that many more such methods are going
to be seen in the future. The first proposed project allows a kind of multiscale
representation of nonlinear data that does for such data what wavelets were able
to do for images and signals. The resulted multiscale representations are the
key to data compression, feature extraction, noise removal, fast search, and
many other important problems that arise in exploiting such data. There is also
an increasing need to extend the current subdivision methods to handle also
functions, vector fields, 1-forms, etc. on 2-D and 3-D manifolds of arbitrary
topology. The second proposed project addresses part of these needs. The holy
grail is to design numerical algorithms that, in an appropriate sense, respect
the geometric or topological characteristics of the underlying problem. The
third proposed project is motivated by the vast interests in nanotechnologies.
It is speculated that computational nanoscience may gradually take the forefront
of scientific computing in the same way that computational fluid dynamics was at
the forefront of scientific computing for several decades. In this project we
study a central method in electronic structure computation known as the Kohn-
Sham functional minimization problem. A specific geometric structure is proposed
to be studied. The ultimate goal is to take full advantage of the smooth
manifold structure underlying the problem to come up with linear scaling methods
that are more efficient, more robust and possess provable, well-understood
convergence properties.

Our immediate goal of analysis and synthesis of many new types of data,
especially those taking values in nonlinear manifolds, as well as functions,
vector fields, and differential forms on free-form manifolds, fits right into
the broad and fundamental goal of finding efficient ways to organize and
manipulate enormous and complex volumes of high-dimensional geometric data. The
need of such methods is ubiquitous in science and engineering, so the potential
impact of the project is even wider. We also believe that our focused effort
here will eventually find their way into large scale scientific and engineering
simulation problems, as the fields of computer-aided geometric design and
computer-aided engineering are currently converging to each other. In a
different direction, we combine rigorous geometric and numerical ideas to attack
a central problem in electronic structure calculations. The broader impact of
this project is evident from the the world-wide interests in material sciences
and nanotechnologies. These projects also provide interdisciplinary research and
training opportunities for graduate students, and stimulates collaboration among
computational mathematicians, engineers and scientists. The publicly available
software implementation of our research results further facilitates such
training and collaborations.
