
* 1115671
* New Techniques on Reconstruction and Limiting for Numerical PDE
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/20/2011
* Yingjie Liu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2014
* USD 170,955.00

The development of limiting techniques starts from high resolution capturing
schemes for solving nonlinear conservation laws whose weak solutions contain
discontinuities. These schemes do not trace discontinuities in a weak solution
individually and automatically smear them into transition layers within a few
mesh cells. They can achieve high order of accuracy if the solution is smooth
and there is a nonlinear limiting mechanism to prevent spurious oscillations in
the vicinities of discontinuities. The limiting techniques have since been
developed for many other methods and applications, e.g., the Runge-Kutta
discontinuous Galerkin methods with limiting, the moment limiter etc.
Hierarchical reconstruction decomposes the job of limiting a high degree
polynomial defined in a cell into a series of smaller jobs, each of which only
involves the non-oscillatory reconstruction of a linear polynomial from cell
averages. Therefore it only uses information from adjacent cells and can be
naturally formulated on unstructured meshes in multi dimensions. It does not use
local characteristic decomposition and thus is less dependent on the underlying
equation to be solved. The principle investigator proposes several new
improvements related to the hierarchical reconstruction in higher orders. The
analytical study of the role of the remainder term in it could provide deeper
understanding of the limiting mechanism. In particular, a compact, multi-step
method is proposed to reconstruct a piecewise polynomial function of high degree
from cell averages and sparsely located polynomial approximations. This property
is novel. Its development and theoretical understanding is a new area to be
explored.

More and more complex problems from science, engineering, business and daily
life are handled by computers. However, only a finite amount of information can
be stored and all numbers are truncated in a computer with a finite number of
digits before and after being processed. Therefore a computer simulation is an
approximation and is usually "noisy" as in the real world. In particular, non-
smooth data tends to induce artifacts in computational solutions, making them
less useful or completely useless. Non-smooth data is common in real
applications. For example, the air pressure and density have jumps across a
shockwave induced by a supersonic aircraft; the human body contains various
jumps in density; in nanoscience, fuel cells, composite materials, material
defect detection etc, non-smooth data originates from interfaces between
different materials, irregular boundaries and cracks; in simulations in
environmental science, ocean and atmosphere, non-smooth data comes from
heterogeneous underground structures, irregular seafloor, seashore and ground
surface, dynamic interfaces separating solid, liquid and gas etc. The project
involves the development and analysis of a general method which eliminates as
much computational artifacts as possible from the underlying solution without
actually knowing it. The proposed limiting techniques are less problem dependent
and can be useful in solving gas dynamics equations, magnetohydrodynamics
equations and many other equations related to these applications. The new
compact, multi-step reconstruction method could significantly reduce the memory
cost of the discontinuous Galerkin methods enabling them to solve more
complicated applications. It can also be formulated as a compact interpolation
method and can be broadly used in computer graphics, image processing and many
other scientific and engineering computations.
