
* 1115408
* Approximation of Infinite Dimensional Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,06/15/2014
* Erik Van Vleck,KS,University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2015
* USD 226,332.00

In many areas of science and engineering differential equations are employed as
models of complex phenomena. The focus in this proposal is on the approximation
of solutions of infinite dimensional dynamical systems. In particular, the
investigator and his colleagues are interested in understanding the dynamics of
the finite dimensional approximations and how they relate to the dynamics of the
original dynamical system. The specific issues to be investigated are related to
stability of solutions of spatially discrete reaction-diffusion equations, the
dynamics of so-called anti-diffusion lattice differential equations, dynamics
and computation of traveling waves for neutral mixed type functional
differential equations and rigorous computation of periodic orbits for retarded
delay equations, robust stability for time dependent linear Hamiltonian systems,
numerical techniques for efficient computation of Lyapunov exponent like
quantities based upon nonlinear flows, and approximation techniques for
stability spectra of delay equations and partial differential equations.
Techniques to investigate these systems combine numerical analysis and dynamical
systems ideas to gain a better understanding of approximation dynamics.

Often in complex systems the differential equations used in modeling are
infinite dimensional, but necessarily these models are approximated by finite
dimensional systems in order to perform numerical simulations. In order to
understand the behavior of these models, the investigator and his colleagues are
interested in similarities and differences in the behavior of the original
infinite dimensional system and finite dimensional approximations, for example
those obtained through discretization. Understanding the impact of
discretization leads to greater confidence when making inferences from
simulation results. In addition, stability analysis is useful in understanding
the robustness of complex biological phenomena that occur in the environment and
in identifying instabilities, for example, in models of weather prediction.
Discrete models of both biological and physical processes are becoming more
important as the need for detailed, microscopic models increases and should
benefit from improved analysis and computational capabilities.
