
* 1115961
* Theory, Algorithm and Appliction for H(curl) and H(div) Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/15/2011
* Long Chen,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2014
* USD 179,987.00

This proposal is on the study of advanced numerical methods for partial
differential equations that involve curl and div differential operators such as
Maxwell's equations and linear elasticity. The theme of research is on the
development, application, and analysis of multilevel adaptive finite element
methods. The proposal consists of three parts. The first part focus on the
theoretical investigation of Adaptive Finite Element Methods (AFEM) applied to
H(curl) and H(div) problems. The PI propose to establish a complete convergence
theory of AFEM for H(curl) and H(div) problems including definite and indefinite
Maxwell's equations and mixed methods for linear elasticity, and to develop a
framework to analyze local multigrid methods on adaptive grids with minimal
regularity assumption. The second part is on the algorithmic development for
H(curl) and H(div) problems. The PI plans to combine Newton's iteration and two-
grid methods to develop a fast two-grid method for computing H(curl) and H(div)
eigenvalue problems. Another algorithmic development is on a coupling method of
finite volume method and finite element method for linear elasticity problems.
The third part concentrates on the simulation of cloaking device. The theories
and algorithms studied in the first two parts will be applied to simulate
approximate cloaking models of electromagnetic waves. The PI propose to use
AFEM, multigrid, and high order edge elements to develop a software package
which could provide more insight on the design of electromagnetic materials.

The multilevel adaptive methods developed and studied in this work are expected
to have a broader impact on the numerical solutions of a large class of
practical problems. Special target applications are Maxwell's equations and
simulation of cloaking device.s Maxwell's equations describing the evolution of
electromagnetic fields in material media have a wide range of practical
applications such as design of antenna, microwave, circuits, electromagnetic
scattering, and wireless technologies. The transformation optics allows for the
design of electromagnetic materials that steer light around a hidden region,
returning it to its original path on the far side. As a result, the contents of
the hidden region, such as a helicopter, tank or ship, disappears from view. The
cloaks show promise and could one day serve as protective shields or improve
wireless communications by making signal-blocking obstacles "disappear." Our
numerical simulation can provide insight on the design of such new materials. In
addition, a fully integrated involvement in undergraduate and graduate
computational mathematics education is an integral part of the project. By
including code into the software package iFEM, the PI will be able to improve a
project-oriented course on adaptive finite element methods for better education
and training of the next generation of computational mathematicians.
