
* 1115317
* Computational Methods for Parameter-Dependent Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2011,07/11/2011
* Howard Elman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2014
* USD 210,000.00

Modern numerical simulation using models based on partial differential equations
is characterized by high dimensionality together with parameter dependence. High
dimensionality is required to achieve accuracy in discrete approximations,
especially for three-dimensional or multi-component models. Parameter dependence
stems from a variety of sources. Parameters may correspond to time or to
specific terms such as Reynolds numbers in fluids, for which the properties of
solutions are wanted at a variety of parameter choices. Alternatively, they may
be used to specify components of a model such as material properties, geometry,
or boundary conditions, for which it is desired to perform multiple simulations.
These same sets of parameters may instead be uncertain and treated as random
variables, for which simulations are used to identify statistical properties of
solutions. All these scenarios require the computation of many discrete
solutions, which may be prohibitively expensive when the discrete models are
large in scale. Our aim in this project is to explore, develop and refine
computational algorithms to reduce these costs. Our emphasis will be on
effective use of reduced basis methods, which project high-dimensional models
into subspaces of significantly smaller dimension with the aim of quickly and
efficiently constructing accurate approximate solutions over a wide range of
parameters.

The potential impact of this approach lies in its use in wide varieties of
engineering and scientific simulations. These include models of groundwater
flows and other environmental phenomena, where uncertain properties such as
boundary conditions or permeabilities of media in which fluids are found are
treated as parameters; aerodynamic simulations, where material properties of
structures or qualities of combustible material are parameters that must be
analyzed for their effects on efficiency and safety; and in models of biological
processes, for example blood flows or chemical reactions in cells, which depend
on parameters such as fluid viscosity or reaction rates. The development of
efficient algorithmic strategies based on reduction of problem size will
significantly enhance the prospects of performing such simulations quickly,
enabling engineers and scientists to use the results of simulations in the field
and for real-time decision making.
