
* 1115632
* Wick-type Stochastic Modeling: Algorithms and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,06/09/2011
* Xiaoliang Wan,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2015
* USD 100,211.00

The goal of this project is to understand mathematically the effect of Wick
product, as a generalization of Ito integral, in infinite dimensional space and
to develop new algorithms to quantify the uncertainty in complex dynamical
systems. Many stochastic models for physical and biological applications include
"noise" terms to account for the uncertainty in the parameters or interactions
of the system. To eliminate the singularity induced by the randomness,
regularization or renormalization approaches are often required for stochastic
modeling. Originating from the Euclidean quantum field theory as a
renormalization technique, the Wick product has a direct and deep mathematical
connection with many modern theories of stochastic analysis, such as the white
noise analysis and Malliavin calculus. Furthermore, the Wick product has many
favorable numerical properties, which give it the potential to deal effectively
with problems of high random dimension. Hence, the Wick product formulation
provides a rigorous mathematical foundation for analysis but also a promising
candidate for developing efficient numerical algorithms for uncertainty
quantification. More specifically, this project includes two important issues
related to Wick-type stochastic modeling: (1) Stochastic elliptic modeling based
on the Wick product; (2) Random perturbations of dynamical systems. For the
first problem, the PI will develop new stochastic finite element methods based
on a new modeling strategy given by the Wick product; for the second problem,
the PI will develop scalable parallel minimum action methods for random
perturbations of high dimensional dynamical systems. The developed algorithms
can be used in a wide range of physical, biological and engineering
applications. The understanding of the Wick product may shed new light on
modeling of porous media, and the related algorithms can be applied to
engineering applications such as petroleum engineering, underground water, etc.
The effect of random perturbations of dynamical systems can be rare but
profound. Typical problems include chemical reactions, bistable genetic toggle
switch, nucleation events during phase transitions, regime changes in climate,
instability in fluid mechanics, etc. Scalable parallel minimum action methods
can help people understand better high dimensional configuration space, which is
crucial to study the aforementioned phenomena through large-scale simulations.
The PI will disseminate the codes as open source codes via existing external
open source websites as soon as the algorithms are developed and tested.
