
* 1115546
* Collaborative Research: An Efficient Computational Approach for Wave and Surge Attenuation in Wetlands and Applications in Flood Risk Reduction
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG
* 10/01/2011,09/21/2011
* Don Liu,LA,Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2015
* USD 159,245.00

This proposal develops an accurate and efficient method for modeling the
interaction of fluid with numerous flexible plant stems (modeled as bendable
cylinders) at a wide range of Reynolds numbers. Research activities include
deriving new mathematics of kernel functions for bottom-clamped and bendable
cylinders, verifying and validating model output, investigating the relation
between the drag force and the bending angle and the link between the lateral
clearance in a cylinder cluster and the effectiveness of wave and surge
attenuation, and upscaling the model to infer macroscale parameters for large-
scale simulations to test hypotheses of wetland resilience and flood risk
reduction. Three educational programs: Summer Outreach, Minority Internship, and
Graduate Student Exchange, provide opportunities for communities and minorities
to participate in research and inter-university collaborations.

Continued climate change and sea level rise pose a major threat to coastal
habitats and communities worldwide. The impact of sea level rise has caused
increased coastal erosion and flooding. For example, owing to subsidence, sea
level rise and human interventions, the Mississippi River Delta and the
Louisiana coast lose one acre of wetland every 24 minutes, which accounts for
80% of the total annual loss of coastal wetlands in the continental United
States. The chronic wetland loss in south Louisiana has considerably weakened
the natural defense against catastrophic floods, such as Hurricanes Katrina and
Rita (2005). Over 1,500 people lost their lives and several major coastal
populations were crippled for months after the hurricanes passed. Mitigating
flood damage and reducing the threat of storm surges are imperative. It has been
recognized that vegetation in wetlands can effectively reduce the flow speed.
Results from the proposed research will not only provide insight to wave and
surge attenuation in coastal wet-lands for coastal engineers and managers, but
also serve as useful references for mechanical, civil, environmental, and ocean
engineering concerning interactions of fluid with structures and plant canopies.
The developed simulation tools will benefit society in better protecting the
coastal ecosystem from impacts of storms and sea level rise and reducing the
risk of flooding. Knowledge gained from the research will be assimilated in
multi-channel education to train two graduate students, to involve minorities in
mathematical science, and to stimulate the interest of communities in
computational mathematics. This project will educate the public about the
gravity of coastal flooding and erosion in Louisiana.
