
* 1115668
* Preconditioning, analysis, and applications of numerical algebraic geometry methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2011,09/08/2011
* Daniel Bates,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 306,969.00

Numerical algebraic geometry involves the use of numerical methods to extract
data from ideals about the corresponding varieties or schemes. This area has
grown rapidly over the last 20 years and has found applications in many areas of
science and engineering. This grant is funding four projects in the area of
numerical algebraic geometry. First, the PI and his students will investigate
several forms of preconditioning for homotopy continuation, including algorithms
for finding (near-)optimal multihomogeneous and linear product start systems, as
well as the use of dual bases to reduce the number of paths tracked to "bad"
endpoints. Second, the PI and several collaborators will work on three
application areas: exceptional mechanisms (via fiber products), software in
Macaulay2 for algebraic geometry-related applications, and software for repeated
parameter homotopies. Third, the PI will work on analyzing the complexity of
numerical algebraic geometry algorithms. Finally, the PI and several
collaborators will continue to work on methods to extract information about real
algebraic sets both from standard continuation methods and from Khovanskii-Rolle
continuation.

Polynomial systems of equations arise in many places throughout mathematics,
science, and engineering. An entire mathematical field - algebraic geometry -
grew out of the need to find solutions to these sorts of equations. Until the
1960s, though, there was no known general technique for solving such systems of
equations. The methods developed in that era require too much memory to be
effective except for relatively small problems. More recently developed methods
- the numerical methods of Sommese, Verschelde, Wampler, Li, and others, now
collectively known as numerical algebraic geometry - allow for the solution of
much larger polynomial systems, opening the application of algebraic geometry
methods to a wider class of problems. However, there is still much to understand
about these numerical methods. The goals of this project include addressing four
open problems in this direction. This work includes the development of
techniques to streamline some of these computations, the implementation of
valuable algorithms in popular and useful software packages, a careful analysis
of the computational costs associated with the computational methods in this
field, and the continued effort to extract useful real-world data from the data
provided as output from these methods.
