
* 1115709
* Temporal Multi-Scale Simulation Tools Kinetic Plasma Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/19/2011
* Andrew Christlieb,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 200,000.00

In this work the PI and his student consider the development of novel methods
for problems in kinetic transport. The goal is to develop methods that are
capable of bridging multiple time scales. For instance, many problems in plasma
physics, such as modeling edge plasma problems in fusion systems, can exhibit
behavior which is consistent with both diffusion dominated transport as well as
collisionless flow in the same problem at the same time. Generally speaking,
this class of problems can be summarized as hyperbolic systems with stiff
relaxation terms. Typically the stiff relaxation term can be nondimensionalized,
leading to a scaling constant out in front of the relaxation term of the form
1/d. In the problems of interest, as d approaches zero, the system transitions
from hyperbolic to parabolic. One approach to such problems is to use domain
decomposition methods coupled with appropriate models for the various physical
behaviors. However, a major difficulty with this approach is defining the
boundary conditions for the two way coupling between the domains. The approach
taken in this work is to develop numerical methods for the kinetic systems which
can recover the correct limiting behavior in the limit of the system becoming
collision dominated. The particular class of methods we focus on here are
referred to as Asymptotic Preserving (AP) methods. The goal in designing an AP
method is to develop time stepping strategies that maintain their order of
accuracy for any d. In particular, as d approaches zero, the AP method should
recover a consistent discretization for the limiting behavior. However,
developing AP methods which are high order have proven difficult to construct.
Further, for a range of important test problems, the CFL for the AP method is
restricted to time steps less than the square of the spatial discretization. In
this work, the PI and his student investigate a new method based on a pseudo
upwinding method inside of the AP framework, which gives rise to a method which
has a convergence rate independent of d with an apparent CFL of the time step
proportional to the spatial discretization. Further, the PI proposes a novel
method for lifting low order AP methods to high order based on integral deferred
correction, a defect correction methodology developed by the PI and his
collaborators. The approach is generalizable to a wide class of kinetic
equations with stiff relaxation terms.

A large number of important problems in science are characterized by multiple
length scales. This includes studying the aerodynamics of spacecraft launch and
reentry, the characterization of micro/nano mechanical systems and the study of
charge particle transport, such as disassociated electrons and ions, in plasma
lighting, micro chip design, and clean energy systems of the future, such as
fusion, to name a few. In these examples, on the smallest scales, the individual
atoms which make up the gas can be thought of as billiard balls bouncing around,
each billiard ball having its own speed and direction. The gas molecules collide
with each other, as well as the boundaries of obstacles in the flow, exchanging
energy and momentum with each other as well as the environment. On this scale
the system is well characterized by models know as kinetic equations, which
describe the behavior of the gas from a probabilistic perspective. Kinetic
equations account for time scales of individual atoms colliding with each other.
On the largest length scales, the gas exhibits collective behavior such as wind,
which we think of as having a single speed. As the density of a gas changes from
low density to high density, the system behavior changes from individual
particles to a collective average behavior. This transition happens in many
systems, one interesting example is the reentry of a spacecraft, where at high
altitude the atmosphere is a very low density gas and at ground level the
atmosphere is 20 orders of magnitude higher in density. At low densities, these
systems exhibit effects only described by kinetic models. At high densities, the
systems exhibit collective behavior described my much simpler models. The
critical kinetic time scale, described by inter-particle collisions, scales as
one over the density. The importance of this work is to develop a new class of
simulation tools that can handle the very stiff time scales associated with
systems that undergo this very sharp transition in densities that can
efficiently simulate both the rarified and dense gas regimes, as well as the
transition in density. This framework will allow for the simulation of problems
previously outside the scope of standard kinetic solvers, allowing the solvers
to recover the correct limiting behavior with orders of magnitude increase in
efficiency over existing methods.
