
* 1115627
* Multispectral Tomosynthesis Imaging: Mathematical Models, Algorithms and Software
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/15/2011,09/15/2011
* James Nagy,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 270,000.00

This project focuses on the development of computational methods for
tomosynthesis breast image reconstruction, a technique used to reconstruct
3-dimensional images using slightly modified versions of conventional x-ray
systems. The mathematical models addressed in this project are difficult ill-
posed inverse problems; computed solutions are very sensitive to errors in the
data, and implementation for large scale 3-dimensional images is nontrivial. All
previous breast tomosynthesis image reconstruction algorithms use a simplified,
but incorrect assumption that the source x-ray beam is comprised of photons with
a constant energy; that is, the x-ray beam is assumed to be monoenergetic. The
simplified monoenergetic assumption results in a linear mathematical model. This
project uses the physically correct, and hence more accurate, assumption that
the x-ray beam is polyenergetic. The resulting mathematical model is nonlinear,
providing great challenges to the development and analysis of mathematical
models, as well as for the development of computational methods. However, as
this project reveals, the nonlinear model allows for reconstructing images with
substantially fewer artifacts than the linear model. Moreover, the nonlinear
model can incorporate parameterizations to allow for explicit decomposition of
the breast into distinct materials, such as, glandular tissue, adipose tissue,
calcifications, and iodinated contrast agents, thereby providing improved
diagnostic information.

In the US, over 200,000 women are diagnosed with breast cancer every year, but
there is a 97% five-year survival rate if the cancer is localized, and if it is
discovered before it spreads to other parts of the body. Therefore, improved
imaging techniques that help to detect and diagnose breast cancer early can have
a profound impact on the healthcare of women. The research in this project
focuses on tomosynthesis imaging, which just received FDA approval for clinical
use in 2011, because it has the potential to provide substantially better
screening capabilities than mammography. The new mathematical and computational
approaches developed in this work are designed to unlock the potentially
transformative benefits of tomosynthesis for breast cancer screening, providing
significantly better diagnostic information to physicians. In addition to its
application to breast cancer screening, tomosynthesis, in its whole-body
implementation can be used for many other applications where standard x-ray and
CT are used, such as chest imaging for detection of lung nodules, as well as
non-medical imaging applications such as nuclear waste inspections and explosive
detection. Thus, advances in computational methods for this application can have
a very broad impact in the imaging field. Collaborations between researchers in
Mathematics and Computer Science and researchers in the Department of Radiology
and Imaging Sciences and Winship Cancer Institute at Emory University
facilitates transitioning new software to clinical use.
