
* 1115931
* Fast Integral Equation Methods for High-Dimensional Diffusion Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2011,08/08/2011
* Johannes Tausch,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 129,990.00

The unifying theme of this project is the development and analysis of numerical
methods for high-dimensional diffusion problems. In particular, the research
will be focused in two areas, namely solving boundary value problems to the heat
equation in three dimensions using thermal layer potentials. The second issue is
the computation of the discrete Gauss transform for data sets in many
dimensions. Both topics involve computations with integral operators that have a
Gauss kernel. Since these operators are non-local, naive algorithms scale
quadratically in the number of data points. Realistic problems can involve
enormous data sets and are therefore tractable only if fast methods, that
exploit certain analytic properties of the kernel, are applied. This project
will employ high-order Nystrom techniques that are combined with Chebyshev and
exponential expansions for the rapid evaluation of integral operators.

The ability to solve the heat equation efficiently is fundamental in many
applications of science, technology and medicine. For instance, heat conduction
plays an important role in the modeling of geothermal systems, melting, welding,
and in thermography as a means to detect breast cancer. Often, the task is to
identify an unknown heat source from known surface temperatures and fluxes. The
solution of such inverse problems involves solving the forward problem many
times, therefore speed is essential for numerical methods. The discrete Gauss
transform is used to find relations in large data sets. This can be patterns,
correlations, or accumulations in images, texts, or internet traffic. Concrete
applications are, for instance, machine recognition of faces, voices and
handwriting. By engaging a graduate as well as undergraduate students in
research, the proposed activities will also contribute to excellence and growth
in the education of the future workforce.
