
* 1115278
* Collaborative Research: Numerical approaches for incompressible viscous flows with high order accuracy up to the boundary
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2011,08/18/2011
* Rodolfo Rosales,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 119,998.00

The research in this project focuses on the development, analysis, and
implementation of efficient strategies to solve incompressible viscous flow
problems with high order accuracy up to the boundary, with specific emphasis on
the accurate calculation of stresses at the boundaries. To that end, Pressure
Poisson Equation (PPE) reformulations of the time-dependent Navier-Stokes
equations are considered. These reformulations are equivalent to the original
equation, however, they yield explicit boundary conditions for the fluid
pressure. As a consequence, numerical discretizations of PPE reformulations do
not suffer from certain problems that traditional projection techniques incur,
such as numerical boundary layers and inaccuracies in stresses at boundaries.
The goal of this project is the exploitation of this fundamental advantage to
develop effective, and high order accurate, implementations for incompressible
viscous fluid flows in general domains, using various techniques such as finite
elements, finite differences, and meshfree particle methods. Moreover, the
numerical approximation of the actual Pressure Poisson Equations is a rich
source of questions of interest to the numerical linear algebra community, and
this project involves interactions with collaborators from that area.

In many applications in science and engineering, the accurate and efficient
computation of forces and stresses at boundaries between fluids and solids is of
crucial importance. Examples in which boundary forces (in the form of lift and
drag) are key quantities of interest are the design of airplane wings, motor
vehicles, and wind turbines, as well as the simulation of sedimentation in
stratified fluids and bio-locomotion. The investigators are researching new
methodologies and implementations of approaches that allow for a highly accurate
computation of these boundary forces. This project relates developments in
computational fluid dynamics with both theoretical aspects regarding the
mathematical structure of the equations of incompressible flows, as well as
fundamental questions that arise in the effective solution of large systems of
equations. The involvement and training of graduate students is an important
component of this project.
