
* 1115682
* Collaborative Research: Development of High-Resolution Finite-Volume Methods for Systems of Nonlinear Time-Dependent PDEs
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/13/2011
* Alina Chertock,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2015
* USD 118,379.00

The project is aimed at developing highly accurate, efficient and robust
numerical methods for systems of nonlinear time-dependent PDEs, with particular
reference to multidimensional hyperbolic systems of conservation/balance laws
and related problems. The principal part of the proposed research will be
focused on the development of new finite-volume methods that will provide an
improved resolution of linear contact waves and incorporate new techniques for
solving problems involving complicated nonlinear wave phenomena and blowing
up/spiky solutions. The proposed methods will be applied to a variety of
nonlinear problems, among which are systems of gas dynamics, nonlinear
elasticity and acoustics systems, modern traffic flow models, several chemotaxis
and bioconvection models, and others. These problems will be studied in the most
challenging cases of high space dimensions, complex geometries and moving
interfaces. For each problem, a high-resolution finite-volume scheme will be
systematically derived in a way that the main properties satisfied by the
underlying system of PDEs will be also satisfied on the discrete level. One of
the key features of the new schemes will be their nonlinear stability, which
will be ensured by ability of the scheme to preserve positivity of such physical
quantities as density. To achieve this goal, several high-order positivity
preserving techniques will be explored.

Besides providing the examples that corroborate the analytical approach, the
foregoing applications are of a substantial independent value for a broad class
of problems arising in today's science including geophysics, meteorology,
astrophysics, semiconductors, traffic flows, image processing, financial and
biological modeling and many other areas. Development of modern high-resolution
finite-volume methods as well as of supplementary techniques is essential for
solving many practically important problems, some of which are currently out of
reach because the existing numerical methods are either inefficient/inaccurate
or not applicable at all.
