
* 1115865
* Mathematical Models and Adaptive Algorithms for Tumor Growth
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/15/2011,09/08/2011
* Serge Prudhomme,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 319,987.00

The objectives of the proposed project are to develop physically sound and
mathematically rig- orous diffuse-interface models for tumor growth, to analyze
the well-posedness of problems based on these models, to design efficient time-
stepping schemes and finite-element discretization algorithms, to build the
computer software implementing these algorithms, and to develop solution
verification methods based on a posteriori error estimation. The focus of the
research work will be on the devel- opment and analysis of mathematical models
that describe at the continuum scale avascular growth of tumors, i.e. in the
absence of nearby blood vessels, and aim at predicting the evolution of large
tu- morous regions while ignoring the behavior of individual cells. Continuum
models of tumor growth can be derived from first principles through the
continuum theory of mixtures. Mixture theory pro- vides an elegant and general
framework for modeling multicomponent media such, as living tissue, composed of
several species of interacting constituents. A remarkable property of
phenomenological models based on mixture theory is that, when considering the
concentration gradients of various constituents into the Helmholtz free energy
functionals, one obtains diffuse-interface models that introduce smooth
transitional boundaries between the various constituents. The resulting equa-
tions are systems of the Cahn-Hilliard type, namely complex systems of nonlinear
time-dependent fourth-order partial-differential equations. Such diffuse-
interface tumor-growth models have been proposed only recently in the literature
and the mathematical analysis and development of efficient discretizations for
such systems are only in the initial stage. The main objectives in this research
project are thus to address several important open issues related to the
development of spatio- temporal diffuse-interface phase field models for
computer predictions of tumor growth, including: (1) development of formulations
that satisfy thermodynamical properties of the system; (2) devel- opment of a
rigorous mathematical framework for the analysis of tumor-growth models based on
gradient ow theory; (3) development of new stable and high-order accurate time-
stepping schemes by using semi-implicit splitting approaches; and (4)
development of efficient goal-oriented error estimation algorithms for the
control of spatial and temporal discretization errors for the highly nonlinear
time-dependent coupled problem embodied by the proposed tumor-growth models.

Cancer is a disease of the genome, characterized by uncontrolled cellular growth
and invasion, that afflicts every year millions of Americans from all age
categories. The primary motivation of the research project is thus concerned
with one of the grand challenges of our times, that is, to understand the
mechanisms of cancer so that reliable treatments, or better, preventative
measures, can be determined to relieve the impact this disease has on so many
people. It has turned out to be a difficult endeavor, due to many reasons, but
the most important ones could be that there are more than one hundred different
types of cancer and the causes and effects of each type occur on a wide range of
scales-specific mutations happen at the molecular scale while tumors may invade
a significant portion of the human body. It is not too uncommon to believe that
biologists or medical physicians are the main players in cancer research;
however, more and more scientists from other disciplines, such as mathematics or
physics, are getting involved in the investigation of possible causes of tumor
development and behavior. It is in fact our hope that mathematical and
computational tools could provide new insights that could help guide more
fundamental research issues to be addressed by biologists and medical
physicians. We believe that computer simulations represent powerful means for
furthering discovery and acquiring scientific knowledge. These simulations will
help in the future explore detailed mechanisms of tumor growth in natural
environments that cannot be directly studied in patients.
