
* 1118756
* Second Midwest Conference on Mathematical Methods for Images and Surfaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,06/22/2011
* Guowei Wei,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2012
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides support for a two-day Midwest Conference on Mathematical
Methods for Images and Surfaces, to be held on August 27-28, 2011 on the campus
of Michigan State University. This meeting was originally planned to bring
together researchers of all career stages who work or are interested in
mathematical methods for images and surfaces. However, after looking at the
schedules and participants of many other conferences we feel that there is a
strong need to reach out to researchers in their early careers, particularly in
their training period. We have decided to make this conference one that focuses
more on bringing together junior researchers. We hope that this conference will
serve as a venue for junior researchers to connect with one another and with a
group of more senior researchers who have a track record of willingness to
mentor junior faculties. Among invited 15 speakers, 6 are female, 11 are junior
researchers (including PhD student who has done outstanding research work), and
5 are experts from molecular biology, computer science, mechanical engineering,
physiology and radiology. This conference has no invited plenary speakers and
all talks are of equal length, which provides an opportunity for young
researchers to meet each other in a relaxed yet scientifically rigorous setting.
The award will be used entirely for supporting graduate students, postdocs,
junior faculty, and researchers from under-represented groups. The research
areas represented at the conference span a diverse array of topics in
mathematical images and surfaces. Example topics include but are not limited to
level set methods, Mumford-Shah functional, higher-order curvature flows,
geometric flows for biomedical surface generations, differential geometry based
multiscale modeling, partial differential equation transform, surface free
energy minimization, wavelet and multiresolution analysis, compressed sensing,
cellular imaging and cellular image analysis, biomedical imaging, molecular
imaging, bioluminescence imaging, fluorescent imaging, PET imaging, ultrasound
imaging, MRI, the analysis of protein, virus and membrane surfaces, image
segmentation, computational anatomy, pattern recognition, machine learning, and
video analysis and processing. This conference will provide a forum to exchange
new ideas and results in images and surfaces and foster interdisciplinary
collaborations. Further information can be found at our conference web site:
http://www.mth.msu.edu/MCMM2/index.html.
