
* 1129181
* International Conference on Interdisciplinary Applied and Computational Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Catalyzing New Intl Collab
* 08/15/2011,08/04/2011
* Di Liu,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2013
* USD 38,000.00

The proposed International Conference on Interdisciplinary Applied and
Computational Mathematics is a five-day conference to be held June 17-21, 2011
at Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. This conference will bring together
leading researchers in the world to discuss recent advances on Multiscale,
Multiphysics, and Stochastic Modeling, Analysis and Computation of Direct,
Inverse, and Imaging Problems and Applications. The conference focuses on three
related topics. The first is the development of multi-scale, multiphysics
modeling, analysis, and computation techniques that are critically important for
the simulation and design of nano materials and fabrications. The second is the
integration of inverse problem techniques with imaging analysis methods for
important physical processes that arise in nondestructive testing, optical
imaging, near-field microscopy, and nano/bio imaging. The third is the
uncertainty quantification of the large scale problems focusing on imaging and
inverse problems in random media as well as numerical solutions of stochastic
partial differential equations. There will be about three plenary speakers each
day, giving 1-hour talks. While the plenary speakers are predominantly from a
mathematical background, many of the local speakers will be form an experimental
background. Also there will be three introductory talks which lay out the nature
of the challenges in each area, and a forward looking session at the end of the
conference. A poster session will be available to graduate students and postdocs
for advertising their research results. The NSF fund will be used to support US-
based scientists (mostly junior researchers) for attending the conference and
exchanging new ideas in various application areas.

Recent innovative developments of the multi-scale, multi-physics modeling and
computational methods, inverse problem methods, and imaging techniques are
applicable to describe many other physical processes and will have impact on the
modeling and computation of the models in computational biology, multi-scale
modeling of materials science, nano technology, and imaging science. Advances in
these fields will greatly contribute to the development nano technologies for
solar energy harvesting, medical imaging and therapeutics. Many physical
systems, devices and processes of importance to science and engineering are not
very well understood and controlled due to uncertainty in physical models and
their parameters, multi-scale material properties, the operating environment, or
measurement. While numerical simulations offer a viable alternative for critical
decision making, simulation uncertainties from physical, analytical, or
numerical errors must be characterized and managed. General and efficient
mathematical models and novel computational algorithms must be developed for
modeling multi-scale, multi-physics processes with appropriate control of
uncertainty. The understanding of the role of stochastic effects on the direct,
inverse, and imaging problems will have broad impact on the advancement of these
key areas of scientific study. By combining these areas into a focused
conference, and interspersing theoretical, applied, and computational talks, we
hope to promote a cross-fertilization between scientists with various
disciplinary backgrounds. By outlining the potential impact that theoretical
tools can have on the most salient issues of our day, the workshop will
influence and invigorate the educational efforts at the institutions of the
speakers and workshop participants.
