
* 1151308
* CAREER: Direct and Inverse Scattering Problems for Wave Propagation in Complex and Random Environments
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2012,06/28/2012
* Peijun Li,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 432,250.00

In scattering theory, due to the complexity of material properties and
uncertainty in physical models and parameters, precise modeling and accurate
computing present challenging and significant mathematical and computational
questions. The PI proposes to develop mathematical models, examine mathematical
issues, and design computational methods for new and important classes of direct
and inverse problems that arise from the acoustic and electromagnetic wave
propagation in complex and random environments. The mathematical modeling
techniques and computational methods developed in this project address several
key scientific challenges in applied and computational mathematics, which
include: (1) multi-scale modeling and computation of the wave propagation in a
heterogeneous medium; (2) computational stochastic direct and inverse scattering
problems; (3) numerical solution of Maxwell's equations and well-posedness of
associated models; (4) global uniqueness, local stability, and numerical
solution of the ill-posed inverse scattering problems. The educational plan is
to foster greater awareness of the broad and important applications of
mathematics so as to attract more students in pursuing a major, a minor, or a
graduate degree in mathematics. The proposed education activities include: (1)
undergraduate and graduate courses and curriculum development; (2) mentoring of
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoc research; (3) organizing summer schools,
seminars, and workshops.

The dramatic growth of computational capability and the development of fast
algorithms have transformed the methodology for scientific investigation and
industrial applications in the field of scattering theory. Reciprocally, the
practical applications and scientific developments have driven the need for more
sophisticated mathematical models and numerical algorithms to describe the
scattering of complicated structures, and to accurately compute acoustic and
electromagnetic fields and thus to predict the performance of a given structure,
as well as to carry out optimal design of new structures. The proposed
computational models and tools are highly promising for qualitative and
quantitative study of the complex physical and mathematical problems in optics
and electromagnetics, and provide an inexpensive and easily controllable virtual
prototype of the structures in the design and fabrication of optical and
electromagnetic devices. The research is multidisciplinary by nature and lies at
the interface of mathematics, physics, engineering, and materials sciences. In
addition, it has significant potential to advance the frontiers of applied and
computational mathematics, and even to have impact on other branches of science.
