
* 1207829
* Challenges in Geometry, Analysis and Computation: High Dimensional Synthesis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 02/15/2012,08/26/2013
* Yair Minsky,CT,Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2014
* USD 50,000.00

This award will provide support to defray expenses of participants, especially
junior investigators, women and mathematicians from under-respresented groups in
the sciences to attend the conference "Challenges in Geometry, Analysis and
Computation: High Dimensional Synthesis" to be held at Yale University during
June 4-6, 2012. The conference is motivated by the development in recent years
of new powerful tools for overcoming the challenges associated with problems set
in high dimensional spaces. These tools include compressive sensing, random
projections, diffusion maps for parameterizing high-dimensional data sets, fast
multipole methods, and many more. The premise of the meeting is that these
different techniques share an intellectual heritage in a body of work
originating from harmonic and functional analysis. A major problem confronting
scientists nowadays is dealing with massive quantities of data. Over the last
decades, the development of powerful computers has been very useful in treating
many computational problems. Nonetheless severe limitations occur when the
amount of data becomes too large. The interaction of Harmonic Analysis,
Computational Mathematics, Combinatorial Geometry, Probability and Operator
Theory has initiated a host of powerful methods to deal both with the processing
and organizing of massive data sets, as well as efficient Numerical Analysis.
More importantly they reveal new mathematical structures and open fundamental
questions which need to be addressed, questions related to the analysis of
functions in high dimensions, their sampling, effective descriptions, and
approximations for efficient computability. Any further progress will have an
enormous impact on our digital data driven world.

The program for the conference features: (1) Lectures by leaders in the field.
The conference will feature about 15 lectures by distinguished researchers . (2)
Panel discussion on future directions. The conference will feature a panel
discussion with some of the principal investigators from the major federal
research agencies and national laboratories (ONR, DARPA, AFOSR, ARO, Livermore
National Lab, Pacific Northwest Lab, Oak Ridge Laboratory) joined by Ronald R.
Coifman, Peter W. Jones, Vladimir Rokhlin whose research influenced and laid
much of the mathematical foundations of the field. The purpose is to identify
fields of research that are likely to be both in demand by applications, and
intellectually ripe for substantial progress. (3) Poster sessions. Younger
researchers will be invited to present posters during the meeting with prime
slots in the schedule reserved for poster sessions, and for a `poster blitz'
presentation. A major goal of this conference is to educate the younger
generation about critical needs in the analysis of data, important open problems
and underlying areas of mathematical research. The scientific techniques under
discussion are likely to have a profound impact on important applications. In
particular help overcome key challenges in computing today and in the future
(the "deluge of data" problem and the communication speed bottleneck). The
involvement of young researchers will contribute to work force development in
key STEM areas.
