
* 1209251
* Direct Transcription Solution of Optimal Control Problems with Delays
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,06/28/2012
* Stephen Campbell,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2016
* USD 284,817.00

In a wide variety of important areas of modern technology from the control of
aerospace systems to guiding vehicles to determining drug therapies to producing
industrial products it is desired to find the optimal or best way to perform
different tasks. The goal is improved efficiency and performance and lower cost.
The physical system can be described mathematically. This project will develop
numerical algorithms, computer software, and supporting mathematics that will
enable scientists and engineers to take these mathematical descriptions and
solve a number of optimal control problems that they currently have great
difficulty in solving. This will contribute to a number of areas of national
need including more efficient industrial processes. The initial areas of
application of this research will be chemical processes, aerospace applications,
and biomedical problems since those collaborations are already under way. The
long term impact is even wider than these areas since the need for increased
efficiency and better performance is a driving need throughout science and
technology.

Mathematical descriptions often involve differential equations. Frequently there
are physical or operational constraints on either the physical process or the
means being used to control this process. One of the more successful numerical
approaches that is often used for complex optimal control problems is direct
transcription where the problem is converted to a discrete problem by various
programing techniques, and then iteratively solved on specially chosen refined
grids until a high quality solution is found. Direct transcription is a popular
technique in industry. Many challenging problems also have delays in either the
state dynamics or the controls or both. Delays can occur for several reasons
including transmission delays, physical processes, actuator delays, or human
operator induced delays. State dependent delays are common in the chemical
industry, for example. These delays, to date, have posed challenges that have
hindered the development of industrial grade direct transcription algorithms for
the computation of the optimal solution of state and control constrained
nonlinear systems with delays. This project will address this difficulty. It is
proposed to develop algorithms, efficient implementations, and supporting
mathematical analysis for the direct transcription solution of state and control
constrained optimal control problems with delays. The proposed research will
result in new algorithms and new theoretical understanding of numerical methods.
These types of algorithms tend to be very sophisticated. Theory backed
guidelines will be developed for both users and developers of these types of
algorithms. The proposed project will result in substantial advancement on a
number of important problems in optimal control, the training of the next
generation of researchers to work on these problems, and contributions to
several areas of national need. Among the broad impacts are the capability to
more widely use constrained mathematical descriptions with delays which will
permit easier simulation and optimization of a wide variety of physical systems
resulting in reduced time needed for design and improved performance. The
implementation of the projects results into an industrial grade code will
greatly hasten and broaden their impact across a number of industries.
