
* 1211292
* Mathematics and Computation of Nonlinear Problems in Diffractive Optics Modeling
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,08/12/2015
* Gang Bao,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2016
* USD 260,000.00

Our proposed mathematical modeling techniques and computational methods will
address key scientific challenges in applied mathematics including numerical
solution of nonlinear Maxwell's equations in second harmonic generation with
strong nonlinearities; multiscale modeling of second harmonic generation via
Density Functional Theory, numerical solution of the inverse diffraction
problems; and optimal design of guided mode grating resonance filters. We will
initiate a mathematical modeling study of second harmonic generation for metal
and diectric interfaces. A significant challenge is to explore novel multiscale,
multi-physics models involving to capture the useful microscopic effects. Novel
computational methods and mathematical modeling techniques will be developed to
solve the underlying PDE problems. When nonlinear optical effects become
significantly strong, numerical methods based on the linearization of the
essentially nonlinear problem are inadequate. Novel techniques must be explored
to develop stable numerical schemes. New robust solution methods for the
associated optimal design and inverse problems will also be developed to
investigate the critical ill-posedness of the model problems.

The goal of this project is to develop new mathematical models and computational
algorithms that meet the basic research needs and provide the necessary modeling
tools for scientists in the areas of diffractive optics and nonlinear optics.
The proposed project has the potential not only to evolve new science, but also
to lead to novel mathematics and computational methods. The capabilities for
controlling and manipulating light are of paramount significance for many areas
of our society, and have applications in critical areas such as energy, sensing,
imaging, and information technology. Nonlinear diffractive optics is a
fundamental and vigorously growing technology with diverse applications
including fast optical switches, plasmonic materials, optical computing, optical
microscopy, spectroscopy, and optical metamaterials. The recent enabling high-
performance computing facilities and modern lithographic techniques have led to
a substantial surge of applications of subwavelength structures, establishing
diffractive optics and nonlinear diffractive optics as two of the most rapidly
advancing areas of modern optical science. The continuous technology
developments have given rise to exciting innovation such as "invisibility
cloaks" and "superlenses"; near-field or super-resolution optical microscopy,
and other resonance phenomena. The future development and analysis of modern
optics devices and theory will benefit from the availability of efficient
computational modeling tools and mathematical analysis techniques. Our
computational models and optimal design tools will provide an inexpensive and
easily controllable virtual prototype of the structures in the design and
fabrication of optical devices, potentially leading to faster information
processing devices that consume less power, sensors with higher sensitivity, and
nonlinear optical devices with high conversion efficiency.
