
* 1214188
* A Smoothed Finite Element Method (SFEM) for Fluid-Structural Interaction Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2012,09/12/2012
* Gui-Rong Liu,OH,University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

Systems in nature and manmade often involves both fluids and solid structures.
The behavior and characteristics of such a system are often affected by the
interactions between the fluid flows and solid structures. Study of the fluid-
structural interaction is of great importance to understand, design and control
such systems, and also presents big technical challenges, due to the complexity
in geometry of the systems and the coupling of multiple physics (nonlinear solid
mechanics, and Navier-Stokes flows). This project aims to develop a Smoothed
Finite Element Method (SFEM) for solving general fluid-structural interaction
problems with complicated geometry for both fluid media and nonlinear solids
undergoing large deformation. This is achieved by developing a set of techniques
and properly designed combinations of these techniques based on essentially the
weakened weak formulation that allows the use of a much more general functions
for field approximation, including a certain class of discontinuous functions
(in a proper G space). The formulations for both fluid flows and solid
structures will be unified in the some framework of SFEM. The developed
computational technique consists largely of 1) an SFEM-Solid solver for modeling
the nonlinear and dynamic behavior of solids and structures; 2) an SFEM-Fluid
solver for dynamic behavior of fluids; and 3) SFEM-FSI solver for dealing with
effectively the coupling at the interfaces of the moving solids in the flowing
fluid. The developed SFEM-FSI model is expected to have important "softening"
effects so that it can work well with triangular/tetrahedral mesh that can be
generated automatically, enabling automation in computation for complicated
systems. For the interaction between the fluids and solids, ideas of the
immersed boundary/finite element methods will be employed and modified for
effectively dealing with the overlaid areas near the interfaces of the fluid
media and solids, without re-meshing to generate the body-fitted mesh.

The proposed project is multidiscipline in nature across computational
mathematics, fluid dynamics, structure mechanics, and biomechanics. The
computational techniques developed in this project are expected to have a
significant impact to all these related areas. In particular, the SFEM
formulations for the fluid-structural interaction problems are expected to offer
a profound new approach in solving complicated problems with coupled multi-
physics. Once developed, the SFEM-FSI will be applicable in the modeling and
simulation of a wide class of problems in science and engineering, such as
flapping wings for special purpose aircrafts (quite, low speed, flapping wings)
such as micro air vehicles (MAV), design of large span and flexible membrane
structural systems, modeling blood flows in human hearts and vascular systems,
etc. Because the SFEM-FSI allows the use of triangular/tetrahedral mesh, it
enables automation-in-computation, and thus is expected to have a pervasive
impact in significantly saving resources for manual operations in the meshing
and re-meshing process. It is anticipated to change significantly the capability
and applicability of the existing modeling and simulation software packages
largely written in the past half a century based on the standard weak
formulations. In addition, through this project students will be well-trained in
the related STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) area
important for the long-term and sustainable development of knowledge-based
economy in the United States.
