
* 1214282
* A data-driven Bayesian framework for the solution of SPDEs on random heterogeneous media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2012,08/14/2012
* Nicholas Zabaras,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2015
* USD 200,000.00

The PI and his colleagues study the solution of Stochastic Partial Differential
Equations (SPDEs) with emphasis on modeling processes in random heterogeneous
media. A holistic mathematical view of the problem is adopted in which the
stochastic input is explicitly modeled from experimental data and uncertainty is
propagated via a deterministic solver. The key aspects of the proposed work are
as follows: (A) Data-driven stochastic input modeling. This includes the
development of reduced-order representations of experimentally observed input
fields, construction of the mapping from the reduced input space to the high
dimensional input space and estimating the probability density of the reduced
input space as induced by the observations. (B) Uncertainty propagation. This
includes the construction of a hierarchical, local, Bayesian surrogate of the
deterministic code made efficient by the informative selection of deterministic
runs using active learning, the sequential refining of the discretization of the
solver, the explicit treatment of output correlations and/or output
dimensionality reduction and analytical/ numerical integration of the surrogate
for the calculation of the response statistics as well as error bars. The work
performed in this project allows better appreciation for the need to account for
variabilities in the analysis and design of engineered and natural systems. It
is such thinking that will contribute towards re-usable multifunctional design
of components and systems in an environment prone to natural and manufacturing
uncertainties. In particular, this research systematically addresses key
problems that arise in modeling random heterogeneous media (existing, very
expensive deterministic multiscale solvers, few experimental input realizations,
non-isotropy of the response, high-dimensionality of input/output) and poses
concrete mathematical questions for their resolution. It serves as a paradigm of
a successful combination of seemingly diverse ideas of applied mathematics and
computational statistics in order to answer realistic engineering questions.
Informative (data-driven) stochastic simulations would improve safety and
greatly benefit the design and optimization process for a wide array of
industries while at the same time reducing costs. The student that participates
in this research is trained in the interface of computational mathematics and
Bayesian statistics. The research activity and courses organized benefit many
diverse communities that have interests in predictive science and design in the
presence of uncertainties. The algorithms, data and software developed are
disseminated to the community through the web.
