
* 1216564
* Domain Decomposition Methods: Algorithms and Theory
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,07/18/2012
* Olof Widlund,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

The development of iterative methods for large algebraic systems is central in
the development of efficient codes for computational fluid dynamics, elasticity,
and electromagnetics. Many other tasks in such codes parallelize relatively
easily. Progress on algebraic system solvers therefore remain very important now
that parallel and distributed computing systems, with a substantial number of
fast processors, each with a relatively large memory, are becoming widely
available. A very desirable feature of domain decomposition algorithms is that
they respect the memory hierarchy of modern parallel and distributed computing
systems, which is essential for approaching peak floating point performance.
This is important since the cost of communication often can dominate for large
computer systems. The domain decomposition methods are also relatively easy to
implement and they have an increasingly solid theoretical basis, which shows
that the rate of convergence can be made independent of the number of subdomains
and only deteriorates very slowly with the dimension of the subproblems
allocated to individual processors. This research is supported by high quality
software systems in particular by Argonne's PETSc library and by collaborators,
who are highly accomplished developers of parallel code. Work will continue on
developing several families of domain decomposition methods for increasingly
complicated systems of partial differential equations. Domain decomposition
algorithms are iterative methods, often of preconditioned conjugate gradient
type, for the parallel solution of the large linear, or nonlinear, systems of
algebraic equations that arise when partial differential equations are
discretized. Much of the work is focused on finite element methods which makes
it possible to build on the well developed theory and practice of that field. In
each iteration step, local problems representing the restriction of the original
problem to a potentially large number of subregions are solved exactly or
approximately. The subregions, often allocated to individual processors of a
parallel computer, form a decomposition of the entire domain of the problem. In
addition, the inclusion of a coarse component often substantially increases the
efficiency of the preconditioner and can dramatically reduce the CPU time. Each
class of applications, e.g., elasticity, incompressible fluid flow, and
electromagnetics, requires a special consideration and, in particular, the
design of an appropriate coarse solver, for the problem at hand, is crucially
important. Of important applications, the main focus of this project is now on
problems of electromagnetics. Work on almost incompressible elasticity and
stationary, incompressible Navier-Stokes will also continue.

This project will combine mathematical analysis with the design and numerical
testing of algorithms. New powerful tools for the analysis of these iterative
methods are now becoming available, which makes it possible to predict the rate
of convergence in terms of geometric properties of the subdomains that are easy
to understand even for quite irregular subdomains such as those that result from
using standard mesh partitioners. This work will have an impact on graduate
education in scientific computing, outside the narrow research community, by
providing new knowledge disseminated through conference and invited talks,
tutorials, journal articles, etc. Furthermore, with a focus on widely used
methods and through direct contact with computational engineering scientists at
the US national laboratories and in academia, the new and improved algorithms
will have an impact on the development of important software libraries of these
laboratories.
