
* 1216970
* Collaborative Research: Computational Framework for Non-asymptotic Homogenization with Applications to Metamaterials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2012,07/16/2014
* Vadim Markel,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 148,426.00

The project is aimed at developing a non-asymptotic homogenization theory of
Maxwell's equations in artificial periodic composites (metamaterials).
Currently, there is a consensus that sufficiently large lattice cell sizes are
necessary for some nontrivial physical effects to occur in such structures. (The
most intriguing of these effects is high-frequency magnetism.) Classical
homogenization theories work well in the zero-cell-size limit but are difficult
to apply to large metamaterial cells. In contrast, the proposed theory is non-
asymptotic and does not involve any series expansions with respect to the cell
size. The electromagnetic field in the material is approximated by a finite set
of functions (modes) usually but not necessarily Trefftz functions such as Bloch
waves. The coarse-grained fields and flux densities are defined via curl-
conforming and div-conforming interpolations, respectively. A linear map between
these interpolants is established and defines an extended material tensor. In a
certain canonical basis, this extended tensor has a classical block of 36 local
parameters and a novel block quantifying nonlocal effects. From the
differential-geometric perspective, this constitutive relationship can be viewed
as a realization of Bossavit-Hiptmair's discrete Hodge operators (linear maps
between discretized 1-forms that correspond to vector fields and 2-forms that
correspond to fluxes).

Over the last decade, metamaterials have attracted unprecedented attention due
to a variety of potential applications that include superlensing,
electromagnetic cloaking, electromagnetically-induced transparency, efficient
antennas, and more. Experimental demonstrations of these effects have been
limited to proofs of principle and at optical frequencies have so far been
incomplete. Subwavelength optical imaging has been achieved only in the quasi-
static (near-field) regime, standard for the more conventional near-field
optics; the so-called "carpet cloak" conceals surface bumps rather than 3D
objects, and so on. Moreover, applications that do not depend critically on the
effective medium description of metamaterials appear to be more easily
achievable than the ones that do. The latter group includes, notably,
superlensing and cloaking. This suggests that, to make further progress,
theoretical and mathematical issues at the heart of metamaterial science must be
unambiguously resolved. The main problem can be stated as follows. Given the
composition of a metamaterial cell and the operating frequency, determine
whether this metamaterial can be reasonably described as a continuous medium
with some effective parameters, just like any natural optical material; if the
answer is positive, develop a rigorous methodology for such a description. The
proposed research is aimed at solving this problem in the most difficult case
when the cell size of the composite is an appreciable fraction of the wavelength
of light. The methodology, once developed, will allow the scientific community
to delineate the possible from the impossible in the field of metamaterials. The
intellectual merit of the proposed research is in the development of a new
paradigm of non-asymptotic homogenization, of new computational methods related
to it, and in the application of the proposed methodology to electromagnetic
metamaterials, allowing one to gain a much deeper understanding of their
properties and limitations. As a new area of research, non-asymptotic
homogenization will also have a broader technical impact in other areas of
applied physics and engineering, such as acoustics, heat transfer and possibly
elasticity.
