
* 1216437
* New evolution equations of the joint response-excitation PDF for stochastic modeling: Theory and numerical methods
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,07/09/2014
* George Karniadakis,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 350,590.00

New theory and corresponding numerical algorithms are proposed for addressing
fundamental open questions in stochastic modeling of physical and biological
systems, e.g., the curse-of-dimensionality, the lack of regularity and the long-
time integration of stochastic systems. Such problems arise in applications
involving processes with small relative correlation length or large number of
random parameters, and for time-dependent nonlinear systems subject to
uncertainty. The new equations are formulated in terms of the time-evolution of
the joint probability density function (PDF) between the system's response and
the stochastic excitation. In particular, functional integral methods are
employed to determine new types of linear deterministic partial differential
equations satisfied by the joint response-excitation PDF associated with the
stochastic solution of nonlinear stochastic ordinary and partial differential
equations. So far the theory is complete for nonlinear and for quasilinear
first-order stochastic PDEs subject to random boundary conditions, random
initial conditions or random forcing terms. For higher-order equations, such the
stochastic wave equation or the Oberbeck-Boussinesq thermal convection
equations, it is proposed to develop a new PDF method based on differential
constraints for the PDF of the solution. It is proposed to investigate the
theoretical and numerical effectiveness of this new approach for high-
dimensional random systems, such as random flows subject to high-dimensional
random boundary or initial conditions in bounded domains.

Stochastic modeling and uncertainty quantification are important new directions
in computational mathematics that will enable accurate predictions of physical
and biological phenomena,in critical applications such as climate, energy and
the design of new products. The proposed work will have significant and broad
impact as it will set new rigorous foundations in uncertainty quantification,
data assimilation and sensitivity analysis for many physical and biological
systems. It will affect fundamentally the way we design new experiments and the
type of questions that we can address, while the interaction between simulation
and experiment will become more meaningful and more dynamic. This work will also
aid in educating a new cadre of simulation scientists in this metadiscipline at
the interface of computational mathematics and probability theory.
