
* 1216732
* Finite Volume Methods and Software for Hyperbolic Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CI REUSE
* 09/01/2012,08/29/2012
* Randall LeVeque,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 399,777.00

This proposal will fund research on finite volume methods for solving linear and
nonlinear hyperbolic systems of partial differential equations, and the
continued development of the open source software package Clawpack. This
software provides an implementation of a class of wave propagation algorithms
that has been extensively tested and used by students and researchers in many
fields, and also incorporates adaptive mesh refinement (AMR). Specific goals of
this research include: (1) Development of Discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods in
the Clawpack framework, which could potentially provide higher order of accuracy
for a certain class of problems and greater efficiency in spite of their higher
cost per time step. (2) Solution of three-dimensional orthotropic poroelastic
wave propagation problems, with applications to the continuing investigation of
Extracorporeal Shock Wave Therapy (ESWT). (3) Development of adjoint equation
technology for AMR error estimation and sensitivity analysis, with application
to tsunami modeling in particular. (4) Development of multilevel Monte-Carlo
capabilities and exploration of this and other uncertainty quantification
techniques, with application to the probabilistic assessment of natural hazards.

The class of algorithms being investigated can be used to solve a wide range of
practical problems in science and engineering that involve wave motion. These
problems are modeled by partial differential equations that cannot be solved
exactly, and so numerical approximations must be generated computationally at
millions of grid points. Development of better algorithms for efficiently
computing accurate solutions is a primary goal of this research. Much of the
work is quite general and can be applied to many different problems, and the
algorithms are implemented in an open source software package Clawpack that is
freely available at www.clawpack.org. Work supported by this grant is strongly
motivated by two specific applications of practical interest. One is the
simulation of hazardous geophysical flows, particularly tsunamis, and the
development of techniques to more rapidly and accurately predict the effects of
a tsunami. For risk assessment and hazard mitigation, it is also necessary to
consider a range of potential earthquakes that could cause tsunamis in the
future. Mathematical and computational techniques will be investigated that can
aid in efficiently estimating the probability of inundation from a large number
of potential tsunamis at many different points in a coastal community. The other
motivating application is the study of shock wave propagation in tissue and bone
and the mechanical stress generated that can lead to biological response, such
as bone growth or wound healing. These studies are important in gaining a better
understanding of shock wave therapy, a clinical procedure that has exhibited
some significant results.


