
* 1216465
* Partitioning of Coupled Flow Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2012,07/01/2014
* William Layton,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 257,789.00

The investigator and his students conduct research in computational fluid
dynamics and numerical analysis on the development, analysis and validation of
modular, uncoupling algorithms for coupled flow problems. The research involves
three related problems: nonlinear filter based turbulence models, geophysical
simulation methods based on fast-slow wave splitting and time filters and
coupled groundwater-surface water flows. The key idea of the first problem is to
use simple turbulence models and adapt / refine the models through an uncoupled,
modular filter step. This approach allows easy introduction of modern models
into legacy codes. It also gives a clear path for improvement of model accuracy.
The second research problem is to develop a mathematically sound understanding
of the most commonly used tools in geophysical flow simulations of the (so
called) CNLF method based on fast-slow wave splitting with time filtering. The
third problem is to develop partitioned methods for coupled groundwater-surface
water flow and contaminant transport problems. The methods studied will allow
the solution of coupled, evolutionary problems for realistic parameter values by
successive calls to separate programs optimized for each physical sub-process.
The three projects treat problems of great importance and long-standing
difficulty. The problems are selected to be ones where a fundamental
breakthrough is necessary in both algorithms and numerical analysis to take a
step forward. Each project involves development of one or more novel ideas that
have promise to breakthrough a fundamental difficulty severely limiting current
methods. The overarching project of multi-rate, partitioned methods for multi-
physics problems lies at the crossroads where the limitations of analytical
technique, computer hardware capabilities and human programmer abilities come
together. The first research theme concerns implementation of new turbulence
models in legacy codes and increasing their accuracy as knowledge of turbulent
flows expands - a central problem in many industrial research groups. The second
is to understand and improve the major tool in atmosphere and ocean codes. This
is of great importance in global change estimation and in estimation of
pollution dispersal. The third is to develop methods for coupled transport of
contaminants to and from surface water and groundwater. This is a problem of
current interest directly related to control of contaminants and cleanup from
industrial and agricultural processes.
