
* 1216318
* Extending Sparse Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, OPERATIONS RESEARCH
* 08/01/2012,07/24/2012
* Stephen Wright,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 240,999.00

Rather than solving an optimization problem exactly, sparse optimization seeks
approximate solutions that satisfy certain structural properties, such as few
nonzeros in the solution vector. Sparse optimization problems and formulations
are now recognized across a wide range of applications, and techniques for
solving these problems draw on a large variety of algorithmic tools, old and
new. This project aims to extend sparse optimization in two respects. First,
work is proposed in application areas that can benefit from the sparse
optimization perspective: machine learning and data mining at extreme scale,
contact dynamics, object packing, medical image reconstruction, and derivative-
free optimization. Algorithmic developments will target key problem formulations
in these areas, paying particular attention to methods that can exploit parallel
computer architectures and specialized hardware. Algorithmic techniques to be
considered include stochastic approximation, randomized directions, augmented
Lagrangian, and reduced-space search using higher-order information. Second, the
project will use general frameworks to analyze such algorithmic ideas as
manifold identification, continuation, first-order algorithms, inexactness, and
convergence and complexity results. The general nature of these investigations
will enable innovations to be spread across a wide range of formulations and
applications.

The field of optimization provides a vital framework for formulating, modeling,
and solving problems in many application areas. In sparse optimization, we note
that many applications require solutions with a special structure that is easy
to specify, but hard to incorporate in traditional algorithms and models. Sparse
optimization arises, for example, in reconstruction of signals and images, where
we know that the signal should contain only a few frequencies, or that the image
should look like a natural image rather than white noise. Important developments
of the past few years have shown that the requirement of structure in solutions,
rather than being a hindrance to efficient solution, can actually lead to more
efficient formulations and faster methods. Notable successes have been achieved
in such areas as compressed sensing and image denoising. This project will build
on these successes by developing algorithms that can be leveraged in many new
and existing applications of sparse optimization. In keeping with modern
optimization research, a bevy of algorithmic techniques will be considered.
Theory will be developed to support the use of these techniques in a wide range
of contexts.
