
* 1216923
* Development and analysis of fast numerical methods for fractional diffusion and advection-diffusion equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,08/15/2012
* Hong Wang,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 240,000.00

Fractional diffusion equations provide an adequate description of transport
processes that exhibit anomalous diffusion, which cannot be modeled properly by
classical second-order diffusion equations. However, fractional diffusion
equations introduce severe computational, numerical, and mathematical
difficulties which have not been encountered in the context of second-order
equations: (i) Fractional diffusion equations lead to numerical methods with
dense or full coefficient matrices, which makes realistic three-dimensional
simulations computationally intractable! (ii) Fractional diffusion operators are
non-local and the adjoint of a fractional differential operator is not the
negative of itself, which significantly complicates the mathematical analysis.
The objectives of this proposal are as follows: (i) Develop fast numerical
methods for fractional diffusion equations with significantly improved
computational efficiency and memory requirement while retaining the stability
and accuracy of standard methods. (ii) Develop efficient preconditioners for the
fast numerical methods, so that the convergence of the preconditioned linear
system is independent of the mesh size. (iii) Conduct corresponding mathematical
and numerical analysis for the proposed fast methods.

Diffusion processes are ubiquitous and occur in nature, sciences, social
sciences, and engineering. Sample applications include how water and nutrients
travel through membranes in living organisms, how mosquitoes spread malaria, how
copiers and laser printers work, and how contaminants in groundwater are
transported, as well as the signaling of biological cells, foraging behavior of
animals, and finance. Fick first sat up the diffusion equation in 1855. But it
was Einstein who derived the diffusion equation from first principle as part of
his work on Brownian motion. In last few decades it was found that increasingly
more diffusion processes cannot be properly modeled by classical diffusion
equations. These discoveries have profound consequences. For example, recent
modeling by fractional advection-diffusion equations indicate that remediation
of contaminated aquifers may take decades or centuries longer than previously
predicted by the classical advection-diffusion equations. Hence, further
investigations are crucial. The results of this work will be applicable to a
wide range of applications. The proposed research activities will also provide
advanced interdisciplinary training to graduate and undergraduate students. All
of these activities will have broad and long-lasting impacts and contribute
directly to the intellectual infrastructure of the nation.
