
* 1216889
* Algorithms, analyses, and model reductions for a class of parametrized systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2012,03/26/2014
* Mahadevan Ganesh,CO,Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2015
* USD 210,000.00

The main aim of the project is to develop, implement, and analyze innovative
fast and highly accurate algorithms for simulation, model reduction, and
quantification of interactions and radiation induced by parametrized
configurations comprising a large number of three dimensional particles. The
focus is specifically on large systems with hundreds or even thousands of
particles in multiscale configurations that arise in atmospheric and biological
sciences applications. Even for a fixed set of parameters describing a large
configuration,standard iterative algorithms (and acceleration techniques) suffer
from computational complexity (and slow convergence). The innovative
preconditioned and accelerated iterative algorithms and analyses in this project
facilitate a practical approach to efficiently simulate scattering and
absorption by (and interactions of) large numbers of particles occurring in
atmospheric and biological sciences. Development of very efficient algorithms
for electromagnetic scattering and absorption by a single three dimensional
particle is essential to simulate interactions in large configurations.

Atmospheric aerosols affect Earth's energy budget directly by scattering and
absorbing radiation, and indirectly by modifying the amount of cloud and the
radiative properties of clouds. One of the highest priority tasks is to advance
the ability to model aerosol-cloud-precipitation interaction in climate models.
The key to quantifying and reducing uncertainty about the impact of aerosols is
to understand the scattering, absorption, and interaction properties of large
configurations of particles well enough to accurately replicate them in the full
climate models. A technically related problem arises in medical diagnostics
where a high priority task is to understand how a laser beam interacts with a
large number of red blood cells (erythrocytes). The focus of the project is to
implement the computational mathematics component of these high priority
recommendations. The project includes training of graduate and undergraduate
students.
