
* 1216559
* Novel Numerical Approximation Techniques for Non-Standard Sampling Regimes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,08/13/2014
* Anne Gelb,AZ,Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 336,853.00

Title: Novel Numerical Approximation Techniques for Non-Standard Sampling
Regimes

Anne Gelb and Rosemary Renaut

The PIs build on their recently developed techniques that fuse methods from
numerical approximation and inverse theory, such as for purposes of
reconstruction fidelity, with those that exploit specific application
information, such as sparsity. Their methods address both theoretical and
practical considerations. Algorithms are proposed for function and/or image
recovery, as well as to characterize and extract important information from a
data set, such as edges, or other features, without necessarily determining the
underlying function. Research objectives include (i) developing novel
approximation approaches for functional and/or feature recovery from data that
is deficient with respect to one or multiple perspectives, i.e. data is under-
sampled or missing, may be noisy, is measured via a dual representation, or is
otherwise non-standard with respect to traditional numerical approximation
techniques; (ii) developing numerical approximation operators that can be
directly applied to practical data sets, or may provide a feedback to
practitioners for improving sampling protocols; and (iii) integrating techniques
from numerical linear algebra and statistical regularization that are
specifically pertinent for obtaining robust but efficient solutions of ill-
conditioned problems when handling practical data. This research will provide
rigorous analysis of all new algorithms in terms of accuracy, efficiency, and
robustness, especially in the presence of of noise, perturbations, or otherwise
incomplete data information.

Practical data collection techniques are becoming increasingly more
sophisticated. User friendly software packages allow disciplinary scientists to
successfully diagnose, predict, model, and determine important characteristics
from a plethora of measured data. Yet, recent investigations into various
reconstruction algorithms for data collected under modern magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) protocols have clearly demonstrated shortcomings that arise when
pragmatic algorithmic modifications are used without considering fundamental
mathematical issues regarding accuracy and measurement error. Some currently
employed algorithms in fact yield both incorrect diagnoses and additional
procedural costs. This project extends the PIs prior research and addresses the
development of novel mathematical techniques for handling issues associated with
extracting functional and feature information from data acquired by non-standard
sampling protocols.


