
* 1216366
* Advances in robust multilevel preconditioning methods for sparse linear systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2012,08/03/2012
* Yousef Saad,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 300,001.00

The primary goal of this project is to investigate multi-level preconditioning
techniques for solving linear systems of equations, placing a high emphasis on
robustness issues. One of the key concepts used in these methods is that of
coarsening, i.e., the method of reducing a set of variables of a system (called
`fine' unknowns) to a smaller set (called `coarse' unknowns) which yields a good
representation of the fine set. So far, coarsening has been viewed mostly from
the angle of algebraic multi-Grid. A number of multi-level ILU type techniques,
primarily based on coarsening ideas, will be studied. The research team will
also investigate a new set of Multi-Level Low-Rank approximation techniques
within Domain-Decomposition type methods. A number of factors make these methods
very appealing, including their robustness and their potential effectiveness on
high-performance computers, e.g., ones employing GPGPUs. Finally, in an effort
to tie the development of preconditioners more closely with applications, the
research team will consider methodologies for developing what may be termed
`application-tailored preconditioners.'

Though enormous progress has been made in the last two decades in the solution
of large sparse linear systems of equations by iterative methods, the state-of-
the-art of these methods remains unsatisfactory in many areas. Foremost among
these is the lack of robustness of iterative techniques in dealing with a
variety of real-life problems. Recent research on Preconditioned Krylov Subspace
Methods (PKSMs) has aimed at achieving a good compromise between generality and
efficiency by incorporating techniques from different horizons, including
multilevel concepts to improve scalability and adopting ideas from direct
solution methods to improve robustness. At the same time that these improvements
are being deployed, the demands on developers of iterative solution methods are
changing. Applications have become much more challenging, and new computational
environments are making obsolete complex software that often took several years
to mature. The aim of this research proposal is to address new challenges and
questions that have emerged for PKSMs in recent years as well as to explore more
common research issues where progress is of vital importance. All general use
codes that will be developed under this project will be freely distributed under
the GNU public use license. The PI already has a long practice with distributing
codes in this fashion. This project will have an impact on the training of
graduate students in a field that is vital to the needs of academia, industry,
and government laboratories. At a time where there is a significant upsurge of
demand for specialists in computational mathematics, the number of graduate
students trained in this broad area has diminished. The PI will place a major
effort in attracting and training students in topics related to scientific
computing and high-performance computing. Because it is important to sparkle the
interest into these areas at an early stage of the student career, the proposal
highlights plans for employing two undergraduate summer interns to work on
specific topics of this proposal, throughout its duration. Among other training
activities the PI will continue the practice of freely disseminating books,
lecture notes, and MATLAB scripts for educational purposes.
