
* 1216481
* Data assimilation in scientific computing
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 09/15/2012,09/08/2012
* Jan Mandel,CO,University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 399,981.00

In this project, the investigators and their colleagues deepen and extend their
asymptotic analysis of data assimilation algorithms for systems of nonlinear
partial differential equations in the presence of measurement error and
stochastic perturbation. This research includes the development of a stochastic
convergence theory for ensemble and particle filters in infinite-dimensional
Banach spaces, a corresponding statistical theory for finite-dimensional
asymptotics, and a study of the behavior of spectral approximations for the
spatio-temporal covariance structures of those filters. Of special importance is
the computational efficiency and statistical convergence of wavelet and FFT
spectral approximations in very-high-dimensional non-Gaussian cases. Connections
between probability measures on Sobolev spaces, random fields in spatial
statistics, and stochastic spectral expansions are exploited to effectively
reduce the dimensionality of the system. The goal is to develop and demonstrate
very fast and memory-efficient algorithms that provably converge in a suitable
stochastic sense to the correct answer. Using high-performance computing
facilities, the investigators' model of the spread of wildland fires, expressed
as a coupled weather-fire system driven by real-world or Monte Carlo data,
serves as the primary testbed for assessing the computational efficiency and
statistical convergence properties of a wide variety of data assimilation
algorithms and approximation methods.

Data assimilation is the art and science of incorporating real-time information,
as it arrives, into a running complex simulation, in such a way that the
simulation adjusts and adapts in a robust and reasonable way to the new data.
The subject area of greatest interest to this project is the tracking of
wildland fires as they spread across extended terrains that can include forests,
grasslands, and human communities. For this purpose the investigators maintain a
wildland fire-and-weather simulator that runs in a high-performance computing
facility, embedded in a data assimilation framework so that the model can
correct itself in response to incoming data (overhead photographs, weather
station data, etc) as it arrives. The general methodology of data assimilation
is of interest to many areas of science, and so it is critical that the
algorithms employed be computationally very efficient and statistically robust,
and that they can be proven to converge in the appropriate limit to the right
answer. This project is dedicated to the development and study of such
algorithms, and to rigorous analytical proofs of convergence and efficiency.
Doctoral students and post-doctoral associates involved in the project receive a
highly interdisciplinary exposure to computational and applied mathematics,
statistics, meteorology, atmospheric physics, and fire science.
