
* 1216801
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Simulation of Graphene Growth
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2012,08/27/2012
* Vivek Shenoy,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 230,000.00

Nanoscale materials hold tremendous promise for the miniaturization of devices
and components in applications ranging from biomedicine to nanoelectronics. As
silicon-based nanodevices reach their natural size limitations, carbon-based
materials such as nanotubes and graphene have emerged as exciting alternatives.
Because graphene consists of a single 2D planar layer of carbon atoms, and
possesses unique physical properties, graphene is thought to be better suited
for large-scale circuit design than nanotubes, which typically exhibit large
intrinsic resistance in contacts that limits their effectiveness. To realize
their promise, large and defect-free graphene sheets must be grown or placed on
non-metallic substrates. It is therefore important to understand the mechanisms
that govern the growth and morphology of graphene. Indeed, controlling the
graphene morphology has proven to be a major challenge, and the kinetics of
graphene growth remain poorly understood. The investigators will address these
issues here. The main objective of this proposal is to investigate the nonlinear
dynamics of the mechanisms that govern the growth and morphology of graphene and
develop strategies to control its growth by (1) developing and applying state-
of-the-art adaptive numerical methods to large-scale computation and (2)
performing analytical, numerical and modelling studies of important constituent
processes. More specifically, the investigators will perform fundamental studies
of the growth of graphene films from a thermal treatment of a silicon carbide
substrate. This process is unique among epitaxial growth mechanisms because
there is no deposition flux of carbon. Rather, silicon desorbs from the surface
freeing carbon atoms to diffuse on the surface and nucleate first to form a
precursor layer and then a graphene layer. A significant challenge is that the
structure and morphology of graphene layers is determined both by atomic-scale
phenomena and by the elastic interaction of surface features over length scales
of hundreds of nanometers. Consequently, no single model is able to describe all
the processes involved in the formation of graphene sheets on silicon carbide.
The investigators will therefore adopt a multiple-scale approach that includes
atomic scale simulations, genetic algorithms for determination of surface
structure, and continuum models for shape evolution and patterning. The highly
nonlinear nature of these problems makes fast, accurate and robust numerical
methods essential to their study.

Nanocrystalline materials have physical properties that make them ideally suited
for a wide range of potential applications including areas of Federal strategic
interests such as nanotechnology, information technology (via advanced
optoelectronic and magnetic storage units), biotechnology, (via biological or
chemical sensors), and energy technology (via photovoltaic devices). Because of
their unique structural and electronic properties, carbon-based devices, such as
defect-free graphene layers, can extend miniaturization beyond the natural
limits of their silicon-based counterparts. Recent advances in experimental
techniques indicate that the key obstacle in achieving large and uniform
graphene layers necessary for device applications is the roughness of the
surface on which it grows. However, a quantitative understanding of the
interaction among the surface properties and graphene growth processes remains
elusive. The investigators will develop new mathematical theory and advance the
state-of-the-art in numerical simulation to perform fundamental studies of
graphene growth. These studies will provide guidance in the quantitative
interpretation of experimental measurements on the dynamics of graphene layer
formation and will suggest mechanisms to control graphene growth. The theory and
methods developed here will also be useful in the study of other nanoscale
materials arrays of semiconductor quantum dots. Two Ph.D. students will receive
interdisciplinary training while performing the proposed work. The investigators
will develop and teach a course on crystal and epitaxial growth for gifted high
school students as part of the Calif. State Summer School for Mathematics and
Science (COSMOS) at UC Irvine.
