
* 1217154
* Accurate high performance computing for nonlinear collisional kinetic theory
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2012,05/04/2015
* Irene Gamba,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2015
* USD 167,677.00

This work will implement, analyze, and benchmark accurate numerical schemes for
nonlinear collisional kinetic equations and their extension to high performance
computing. Kinetic equations describe physical systems at the mesoscopic level,
where there are large numbers of interactions between particles but they are not
frequent enough to be described as a continuum. At each point in phase space a
nonlinear integral term models the effect of interactions with all of the other
particles in the system. This integral is difficult and expensive to evaluate
due to the delicate conservation structure of the interactions and its
dimensionality, however it has many properties that makes it well-suited for
parallel computation. This work seeks to overcome the computational bottleneck
of the collisional integral term in kinetic models by adapting a conservative
spectral numerical method to massively parallel computer architectures, and will
investigate how this scales with increasing computational nodes. The proposed
work will further enhance the method by applying high order space and time
discretization to the transport terms in the system, which was previously
infeasible due to the expense of evaluating the collision term, as well as
investigating methods for reducing the complexity of the integration for further
efficiency. It will also carefully investigate the order of accuracy of
computation with regards to the velocity domain cutoff and quadrature. This work
will extend the conservative spectral method to the case of anisotropic in angle
collisional models, in particular the grazing collisions (Landau) limit and
applications to collisional plasma models. Finally, this work will attempt to
extend the ideas of asymptotic-preserving schemes to efficiently compute the
collision term in stiff regimes.

Many important problems in science can be described at the molecular level as
individual particles bouncing around, each with its speed and direction. These
particles interact with each other as well as other objects through collisions
that exchange energy and momentum, and the average behavior of these
interactions can be felt as wind, for example. Kinetic models describe problems
where particle density is low enough that collisional effects matter in the
dynamics of the problem, but is not so strong that one can simply use the
average behavior to describe the evolution. Kinetic models can characterize a
wide variety of applications such as design of nano- and micro-scale devices,
energy applications in plasma physics such as semiconductors and nuclear fusion,
and atmospheric re-entry for spacecraft and satellites. In addition to physical
applications, these models can be used for the modeling of biological and social
dynamics, such as the dynamics of crowds in confined spaces, or modeling the
flocking and herding of animals, which could be of security and environmental
interest. This work will develop new simulation tools that are able to leverage
high performance computing resources to perform high accuracy simulation of
problems that were previously computationally infeasible, which can provide a
broader view of kinetic applications.
