
* 1217170
* Optimization-Based Moment Models for Multiscale Kinetic Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2012,08/06/2014
* Cory Hauck,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 635,680.00

The focus of this proposal is the design, analysis, and implementation of
optimization-based moment models for solving collisional kinetic equations with
diffusive limits. In the field of computational kinetic theory, moment methods
are an effective, yet highly complex tool for discretizing kinetic equations and
capturing multiscale phenomena. They reduce the kinetic description of a many-
particle system to a set of partial differential equations for velocity averages
of the kinetic distribution. Optimization-based moment models are derived via
the solution of a physically motivated, convex optimization problem that
enforces important properties of the underlying kinetic equation. The driving
application for this effort will be neutrino transport in core-collapse
supernovae simulations, where the computational requirements for a fully
resolved kinetic simulation are well beyond the capabilities of the largest
supercomputers.

The design of tractable reduced models for complex systems is both timely and
important. Indeed, for a broad range of physical, biological, and social science
problems, methodologies are needed to extract relevant macroscopic features from
intractable amounts of microscopic data. In this context, the design and
implementation of moment models is an important part of understanding the
behavior of many-particle systems, for which direct numerical simulation is not
possible. Important examples include rarefied gases, radiation, and charged-
particle transport---all of which play critical roles in advanced energy and
technology applications of national interest. Thus, among other things, the
project will provide a rewarding and relevant research experience to students
and postdocs.
