
* 1217081
* Efficient, Reliable, and Robust A Posteriori Error Estimators of Recovery Type
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,09/01/2012
* Zhiqiang Cai,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 180,000.00

The main aim of this proposed research is to design, analyze, and test
efficient, reliable, and robust a posteriori error estimators for various finite
element approximations to computationally challenging problems; that is, those
problems having the following phenomena: interface singularities,
discontinuities (in the form of shock-like fronts, and of interior and boundary
layers), and/or oscillations of various scales (multiscale phenomena).
Estimators to be developed in this project do not use a priori knowledge of
locations and characteristics of these phenomena; they may then be applied more
readily to highly nonlinear problems and have potential to be applied to complex
systems arising in applications. Estimators to be investigated in this project
are of the recovery type; recovery estimators possess a number of attractive
features that have led to their widespread adoption in engineering practice and
to the subject of mathematical study. However, existing recovery estimators have
several major drawbacks for more challenging problems. The investigator and his
colleagues overcome those obstacles by introducing an innovative recovery
procedure and developing a methodology on how to design efficient, reliable, and
robust recovery estimators for complex systems. The methodology is applied to
various problems arising from continuum mechanics to design robust estimators
that will be studied theoretically and numerically.

Self-adaptive numerical methods provide a powerful and automatic approach in
scientific computing. In particular, Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) algorithms
have been widely used in computational science and engineering and have become a
necessary tool in computer simulations of complex natural and engineering
problems. As identified by the US National Research Council, AMR is one of two
necessary tools (AMR and Parallel Computer) for computationally grand
challenging problems. The key ingredient for success of AMR algorithms are a
posteriori error estimates that are able to accurately locate sources of global
and local error in the current approximation. Success in this project will
empower the ability of AMR algorithms for automatically locating physical
interfaces, detecting layers and discontinuities, and resolving oscillations of
various scales. The methodology developed in the project will shed light on how
to design estimators for indefinite problems such as convection-dominant
diffusion problems on relatively coarse meshes. Research on those indefinite
problems is completely open and requires major breakthrough not only technically
but also conceptually.
