
* 1217156
* Collaborative Research: Innovative Integrative Strategies for Nonlinear Parametric Inversion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2012,09/04/2013
* Eric de Sturler,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2015
* USD 359,942.00

The investigators aim to reduce drastically the costs of numerical inversion (as
occurs, for example, in medical imaging) by blending new parametric level-set
approaches and nonlinear least squares methods together with innovations in
linear solvers, preconditioning, and model reduction of parameterized systems.
Four strategies are combined to reduce the computation necessary while not
degrading accuracy of the solution. First, the dimension of the inverse problem
is drastically reduced by developing low-order parametric inversion methods
replacing the usual voxel-based inversion. Second, the optimization underlying
parametric inversion incorporates novel nonlinear least-squares solvers
specifically designed to deal with ill-conditioned Jacobians. Third, the high
cost of solving many large forward problems is reduced through new model
reduction techniques that are particularly well-suited to the structure of the
inverse problems under consideration. Fourth, the high costs of computing
reduced models and solving forward problems is reduced by innovations in Krylov
subspace recycling and efficient reuse of preconditioners for parameterized
linear systems.

The inverse problems studied here involve recovery of images describing how
unknown quantities of diagnostic interest (such as electrical conductivity) are
distributed throughout a given medium (such as human tissue or soil). These
images can reveal the presence or absence of anomalies, such as tumors in human
tissue or contaminant plumes in soil. The computational extraction of high
quality images from noisy surface measurements in reasonable time is a very
difficult task. As rapid advances in technology make it possible to take vastly
more measurements, computational bottlenecks become ever more acute, impeding
innovation in medical and other areas of imaging. This project aims to combine
innovations in diverse fields within computational linear algebra, systems
theory, and optimization to create dramatically improved strategies for image
extraction.
