
* 1217122
* Convergent Data-Based Algorithms for Model Reduction and Feedback Control of PDEs
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2012,07/24/2012
* John Singler,MO,Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 269,956.00

In complex applications such as design and feedback control of energy efficient
buildings, and wave or wind energy arrays, existing codes are often available
for simulation but these codes are not always suitable for purposes such as
model reduction or feedback control design. The outcome of this research is a
suite of computationally efficient and provably convergent algorithms for grand
challenge problems in PDE model reduction and feedback control. The proposed
work focuses on two fundamental problem classes: (1) computing approximate
solutions of infinite dimensional Lyapunov and Riccati equations used in
feedback control design, and (2) algorithms for PDE balanced model reduction.
This work utilizes specific solution data from PDE systems to produce provably
convergent approximations for PDE model reduction and feedback control problems.
Since the algorithms are data-based, the methods may use existing simulation
codes with specialized discretization schemes and tools such as adaptive
solvers, parallel algorithms, and multigrid methods to increase computational
efficiency and accuracy. Since the algorithms can exploit such advanced
simulation techniques, the algorithms can scale to treat highly complex grand
challenge problems.

The accurate solution of model reduction problems for partial differential
equation systems is important for many applications including fast simulations,
tractable optimization, feedback control design, and real time control
implementation. Feedback control of PDEs has potential applications in many
areas. For example, feedback control of air flow in commercial buildings could
lead to dramatic reduction in energy consumption. In another area, feedback
control of fluid-structure interactions in wave energy converters could lead to
effective ocean wave energy extraction. The proposed work primarily considers
the development and analysis of model reduction and feedback control algorithms
for linear PDE systems, as extensions of these reduced models and feedback laws
can be used to treat problems involving nonlinear PDEs. The algorithms can
exploit advanced existing simulation codes, and therefore the completion of the
proposed work will open the door for large advances in computational feedback
control to challenging nonlinear PDE systems.
