
* 1217175
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive Methods and Finite Element Exterior Calculus for Nonlinear Geometric PDE
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,08/14/2012
* Michael Holst,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 145,001.00

The primary technical aim of this project is to develop general approximation
theory and reliable, convergent adaptive methods for the intrinsic
discretization of a general class of nonlinear geometric elliptic and evolution
PDE on Riemannian 2- and 3-manifolds. The investigators will exploit the
variational crimes framework they have developed for the finite element exterior
calculus (FEEC), extending the FEEC to nonlinear elliptic problems, to problems
on hypersurfaces, and to nonlinear parabolic and hyperbolic problems. This
framework will aid in the design, development, and convergence analysis of AFEM
algorithms for use with FEEC. This approach will allow for a more natural and
general treatment of geometric error due to variational crimes in a posteriori
analysis, following their recent approach for a priori analysis. After obtaining
a solid theoretical framework for a posteriori analysis, yielding a posteriori
error estimates and local indicators, they will develop and analyze adaptive
finite element methods (AFEM) within the extended FEEC framework. The
convergence analysis approach will be based on their recent published work on
AFEM convergence analysis for mixed formulations of linear elliptic problems.
The overall goal is to develop a complete AFEM convergence theory in FEEC,
complementing the recently developed contraction frameworks for non-mixed
formulations of Poisson-type problems and semilinear generalizations. Both
prototype and production implementations will be produced, using the opensource
FETK ToolKit, and the resulting software will be used in ongoing collaborations
with physical scientists and engineers.

The investigators will study and develop methods for the approximate solution of
systems of stationary and evolution partial differential equations (PDE) arising
at the intersection of mathematical physics and geometric analysis. Such systems
of equations, known as Geometric PDE, appear in a wide range of physical and
mathematical problems; examples include Maxwell's equations (or more generally
the Yang-Mills equations), Einstein's field equations, and other Hamiltonian
systems. The Cauchy (or initial-value) formulation for such systems yields a
constrained evolution system containing non-dynamical equations. These non-
dynamical geometric PDE are of great interest in their own right; examples
include the Yamabe problem, the Hamiltonian and momentum constraints in the
Einstein equations, and the Monge-Ampere equations, among others. If our goals
are achieved, the results of this project will have a broad impact on areas of
mathematics such as geometric analysis, as well as in astrophysics and general
relativity. The methods developed here will contribute to the advancement of
numerical methods for complex three-dimensional constrained nonlinear dynamical
simulations. The simulation technology we produce will provide powerful tools
for the exploration of models in astrophysics and relativity as well as in some
areas of pure mathematics such as geometric analysis. Graduate students involved
in the project will be co-trained by both investigators; this will involve
regular interaction between the members of the teams at both partner
institutions. The PI has previously collaborated on such a shared training
structure with great success on past projects; this shared training and transfer
of knowledge and skills between the two research groups will be an invaluable
research resource to both groups.
