
* 1217118
* Computational methods for the study of rare events
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2012,07/16/2012
* Maria Cameron,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2016
* USD 287,174.00

The research problem is concerned with developing computational tools for (A)
rare reactive events and (B) seismic modeling. (A): The problem of finding the
most likely transition paths in systems that are modeled using stochastic
differential equations with small noise is very difficult due to several issues:
(1)transitions between metastable states of the system are rare, hence direct
simulations are very hard; (2)high dimensionality; (3) expensive-to-evaluate
force; (4) multiple local minimizers; (5) temperature dependence of the dominant
reactive channel. The investigator plans to explore a Hamilton-Jacobi-based
approach for the study of rare transitions. It has important advantages over
existing path-based methods. This approach is guaranteed to find the global
minimizer and requires no initial guess. Furthermore, it allows us to find the
most likely transition paths between any attractors of the system, not only
between equilibrium points. The main difficulties in this approach are
associated with high dimensionality and the anisotropic and unbounded speed
function in the Hamilton-Jacobi equation. The investigator proposes several
approaches for dealing with these problems. (B): The majority of methods for
finding the sound speed inside the Earth (the seismic velocity) rely on vast
computing resources and a good initial guess. The investigator and her
colleagues propose an alternative approach that is computationally cheap and
requires no initial guess. This approach is based on theoretical relationships
between the time-migration velocity and the seismic velocity. The sound speed
can be recovered by solving an elliptic partial differential equation with
Cauchy data. Despite the fact that this problem is ill-posed, they have
developed numerical techniques capable of solving it in the required interval of
time. The investigator plans to continue research in this direction and
incorporate methods from the field of computational stochastic processes.

Many processes are modeled using stochastic differential equations, which are
evolution laws that involve a random term (noise). Examples include small-scale
processes in physics and chemistry such as chemical reactions and conformal
changes in molecules. Other examples come from stochastically-modeled computer
networks, pricing of financial securities, and the distribution of money in
society. In the absence of noise a given system evolves toward one of its
equilibrium states and stays there forever. But the presence of noise, even
arbitrarily small, enables transitions between the equilibrium states. In many
important cases these transitions are rare on the time-scale of the system but
not rare on a human time-scale. This fact creates a need for techniques besides
direct simulation for the study of these rare transitions. Such study will help
to understand such phenomena as protein folding and mechanisms for gene
expression. Producing an accurate image of the Earth?s interior is a challenging
aspect of such things as oil recovery and earthquake analysis. First, seismic
data always contain noise and the deeper the data come from the stronger its
influence. Second, important and interesting geological features (e.g. oil
deposition) typically occur where the subsurface structures are complicated and
sound speeds vary severely in lateral (sideways) directions. In result, the
fundamental inverse problem of determining the sound speeds of the Earth is ill-
posed and exceedingly difficult. Yet determination of sound speed is crucial for
accurate seismic imaging. The approach proposed by the investigator and her
colleagues will lead to cheaper and more efficient methods for its
determination.
