
* 1217315
* Quasiatomistic Method of Solids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,09/07/2012
* Jingrun Chen,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 238,210.00

The main objective of the present proposal is to develop a new model for
multiscale analysis of solids, the quasi-atomistic model, which plays a
transitional role between the atomistic and continuum models. In addition, the
PIs propose to develop an energy-based procedure to couple fully atomistic
descriptions and continuum descriptions in a seamless way, which allows for
systematic coarse-graining with controllable error. A second objective is the
analysis of the proposed methodology, including consistency, stability and
convergence. Inconsistency, known as ghost force in this context, can be
systematically removed even in the case of interfaces with corners. Another
component of the project is to combine the principles of the multigrid method
and multi-resolution analysis for the efficient implementation. This will be
done by constructing multilevel grids by multi-resolution analysis and solving
nonlinear minimization problems with multigrid methods.

Molecular mechanics is a common approach to modeling the behavior of matter,
where atoms are treated as the essential degrees of freedom and a potential
function is used to describe the interactive effects between atoms. Equilibrium
structures can be computed by minimizing the potential energy with respect to
the position of the atoms. Other information about the system, such as the
vibrational spectrum, thermodynamic properties, equations of state, and reaction
rates, can also be computed. Extensive applications of molecular mechanics
modeling can be found in materials science, chemistry and biology. The proposed
work will mainly focus on solids, with generalizations to soft matter and
biological systems, and conduct mathematical, numerical and applicative studies
of the proposed methodology.
