
* 1217054
* Math: Algorithms for Parametric (Comprehensive) Groebner Computations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Software & Hardware Foundation
* 08/01/2012,07/26/2012
* Deepak Kapur,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 299,481.00

Algorithms for solving multivariate polynomial systems will be investigated with
a particular focus on parametric polynomial systems in which indeterminates are
classified into two disjoint subsets-- one consisting of parameters and other
consisting of variables. Such polynomial systems are used to model or
approximate problems generically in many application domains, where a generic
problem has parameters such that for every parameter value, the generic problem
becomes specific. The objective is to study the structure of solutions for
different specializations of parameters. This research project will investigate
the use of the framework of Groebner basis computations for this analysis.
Particularly, comprehensive Groebner bases and comprehensive Groebner systems
are elegant mathematical objects which represent all the solutions of a
parametric polynomial system for all possible parameter values. The project will
explore theoretical foundations as well as develop efficient and effective
algorithms for computing comprehensive Groebner systems and comprehensive
Groebner bases for parametric polynomial systems. The concept of a minimal
canonical comprehensive Groebner basis will be developed and its significance
will be explored for studying problems in polynomial ideal theory and algebraic
geometry. An efficient algorithm to compute a minimal canonical comprehensive
Groebner basis will be investigated. Parametric multivariate polynomial systems
are a powerful tool for modeling many problems in various application domains.
The problems of (i) determining whether a given polynomial equation system has a
common solution, (ii) deriving conditions on symbolic parameters appearing in
polynomial equations such that they have a common solution, and (iii) developing
an efficient representation of common solutions are of fundamental significance.
These problems arise in diverse applications, including engineering design,
robotics, inverse kinematics, graphics, solid modeling, CAD-CAM design,
geometric construction, drug-design, control theory, and program verification
and analysis. Given that many problems in various application domains can be
generically modeled using parametric polynomials, fast methods for solving
parametric polynomial systems are useful for those applications. The proposed
research will lead to the development of theory and algorithms related to
comprehensive Groebner computations and investigation of their effective use in
many application domains, with a particular focus on geometric design and
modeling, as well as program analysis and verification. The algorithms developed
during the research project will be implemented in computer algebra systems
including Magma and Singular, and experimented with on a variety of problems
arising from different application domains. Heuristics will be developed and
analyzed to make these algorithms and their implementations efficient.
