
* 1254618
* CAREER: Explicit Adaptive Methods for Coupled Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Physiol Mechs & Biomechanics, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2013,06/30/2014
* Andrea Bonito,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 405,412.00

The design of adaptive algorithms with provable optimal error decay rates on
elliptic problems are well understood, encouraging results are available for
parabolic equations while few results are derived in hyperbolic regimes.
Although coupled problems are ubiquitous in science and engineering, their
adaptive treatment is in its infancy. In fact, ad hoc adaptivity without
rigorous justification is very popular but its efficiency suffers from solid
mathematical grounding. Yet, the increasingly amount of resources involved in
coupled systems makes adaptive algorithms even more essential. The aim of the
proposed research is to design, analyze and implement adaptive algorithms
tailored to coupled problems. The following objectives are put forward: (i)
develop a systematic framework for the design of explicit adaptive algorithms
iterating between the resolution of each quantity of interest; (ii) study a new
concept of approximation able to describe the nonlinear interactions between
each component of the coupled systems; (iii) derive optimal convergence decay
rates in the context of elliptic problems, saddle point systems, and time
dependent problems; (iv) challenge the new algorithms in the context of living
cell motility where numerical methods must confront the complexity of the
numerous phenomena involved and their interactions with the cell geometry.
Modern algorithms are able to optimize and balance the computational effort to
capture small details without over-resolving the quantity of interest. However,
when several processes interacting with each other need to be approximated, the
established theory fails to apply due to two major obstructions: (i) the
algorithm is required to make decisions without complete knowledge of all
interacting quantities; (ii) the abilities to approximate each component of the
system are tangled together in a highly nonlinear fashion. We propose to
initiate a systematic study of couple problems with special emphasis to physical
models related to living cell motility. The difficulty of modeling cell
locomotion is to overcome the inherent great computational expense when
considering multi-scale, multi-dimensional and multi-component phenomena.
Efficient and flexible algorithms are thus critical in this context. The
understanding of cell locomotion has impact on several areas of bio-physics such
as in embryonic development, tissue regeneration, immune response and wound
healing in multi-cellular organisms. In addition, the proposed study will
actually benefit strategic departments such as energy (oil recovery and carbon
dioxide sequestration), environment (groundwater contamination) and material
science (cloaking and filter design).
