
* 1315993
* An Eulerian finite element method for partial differential equations posed on surfaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2013,05/01/2015
* Maxim Olshanskiy,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 06/30/2016
* USD 221,637.00

The goal of this research project is the development and analysis of a new
Eulerian finite element method for solving elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations defined on hypersurfaces. The method uses traces of
volume finite element space functions on a surface to discretize equations posed
on that surface. This project aims at extending the method, its analysis and
applications in several directions: (i) The extension and the analysis of the
method for the case of an evolving surface; This is done in the framework of
space-time finite element methods; (ii) The development of a higher order
surface finite element method; This involves the analysis of the properties of
traces of higher order finite element spaces on hypersurfaces; (iii) An error
analysis for a class of coupled bulk domain - surface problems, discretized with
volume and surface finite element methods; This includes numerical analysis and
experiments for the problem of equilibrium two-phase incompressible viscous flow
with surface active agents (surfactants).

Partial differential equations posed on surfaces arise in mathematical models
for many natural phenomena: diffusion along grain boundaries, lipid interactions
in biomembranes, pattern formation, and transport of surfactants on multiphase
flow interfaces to mention a few. Numerical simulations play an important role
in a better understanding and prediction of processes involving these or other
surface phenomena. Although, the study of numerical methods for equations on
surfaces is a rapidly growing research area, computational technique for
evolving and implicitly defined surfaces is largely in its infant stage.
Numerical methods developed in the project are based on the Eulerian description
of the motion of continuous medium. This choice of the Eulerian instead of the
Lagrangian description is fundamental. It leads to serious algorithmic and
analysis challenges, but it is consistent with most of approaches in
computational mechanics and so enables an integration of the method in many
existing software packages for scientific computing. One example of a specific
application the project aims is the transport of surface active agents on the
interface in two-phase incompressible flow problems. In this application, the
surface (interface between two different fluids, such as water and oil) evolves
driven by a bulk fluid flow. To account for variable surface tension phenomena,
such as Marangoni forces, one has to solve transport-diffusion equations for
surfactant concentration on the evolving surface. Reliable computational tools
for simulation processes on fluidic interfaces are crucial for a rigorous
understanding of the behaviour of such very complex two-phase flow problems.
