
* 1316779
* Numerical Algorithms as Dynamcal Systems - Structure Preservation, Convergence Theory, and Rediscretization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2013,09/06/2013
* Moody Chu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,000.00

The focus of the project is to improve iterative algorithms in numerical
analysis by linking them to particular systems of differential equations. Thirty
years ago, it was realized that the QR algorithm for calculating eigenvalues can
be considered as a time-T map of the Toda lattice. This opens up the possibility
of bringing the qualitative methods of dynamical systems to bear on the
algorithm, and to potentially speed up the algorithm by more efficient
discretizations. The crucial aspect of the Toda lattice is that it is a
continuous conjugation that preserves upper Hessenberg form and therefore the
eigenvalues. In recent research, the PI has achieved similar results with the
calculation of the singular value decomposition by developing a Lotka-Volterra
system that preserves bidiagonal structures, which has led to advances in
computing the SVD. This project investigates other dynamical systems preserving
symplectic and Hamiltonian structure, which are pivotal in many areas of
applications. The ultimate goal is to investigate the connection between their
geometric structures and existing numerical algorithms, to establish a rigorous
mathematical theory on dynamical behaviors, and to develop possible structure-
preserving re-discretizations to improve robustness, speed, and accuracy of
iterations in numerical analysis.

Structure-preserving dynamical systems are natural and ubiquitous. Conservation
laws in the physical world and constrained mechanics in engineered systems are
just two examples. Structure preservation is also imperative in computation
because it makes possible more efficient algorithms, improves physical
feasibility and interpretability, and is more robust in long-term behavior. The
proposed research recasts numerical algorithms as differential systems that
mimic the structure-preserving properties of the corresponding iterative
schemes. Understanding the overall dynamics of the continuum system can shed
light on the convergence properties of the related discrete counterparts, and
can also contribute to the re-discretization of the continuum system into a new
algorithm with better numerical properties. A wide range of applications stands
to benefit from the study of properties and geometric structure of these
systems, which essentially include all disciplines that entail structure
preservation, including classical and quantum mechanics, model reduction,
reversible systems, and molecular dynamics.
