
* 1318916
* Discontinuous Petrov Galerkin Methods and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2013,07/02/2013
* Jay Gopalakrishnan,OR,Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 302,000.00

Computer simulation of many natural and technological processes relies on robust
and efficient algorithms for solution of partial differential equations. In the
continuing pursuit of such algorithms, a class of new Discontinuous Petrov-
Galerkin (DPG) methods emerged as hybrid methods with a least-squares character.
Their unusual stability and localization properties have the potential to expand
the research frontiers in high performance computing. This project extends,
improves, and identifies new applications for these DPG methods. These methods
use a number of local operations, implementable on heterogenous computational
clusters, to guarantee stability. Building on the method's known stability
properties, the following five projects are proposed: (i) an explicit space-time
extension of DPG methods providing a new way to simulate evolution of Friedrichs
systems (ii) analysis and incorporation of adaptivity into DPG schemes thereby
allowing computational resources to be allocated where they are needed most
(iii) understanding DPG methods for harmonic wave phenomena in acoustics,
elasticity, and electromagnetics, (iv) design of efficient preconditioners and
other fast solution strategies for DPG methods, and (v) new tailor-made
computational techniques to simulate biological pattern formation via
chemotactic feedback.

The proposed research is on a new method to solve partial differential
equations, the Discoutinuous Petrov-Galerkin method. Impacts of development of
the new method will apply to several areas, including propagation of acoustic,
electromagnetic, and seismic waves in heterogenous media, and potential
contributions in computational fluid dynamics applied to wind energy. The
research component on biological patterns is inspired by questions of immediate
relevance in health sciences, including a model for simulating tumor invasion,
and simulation of chemotactic cancer cell movement, both intimately related to
cells aggregating to form patterns. Finally, trained workforce additions will be
accomplished by integrating graduate student involvement into the proposed
research.
