
* 1318866
* Multiscale Computational Methods with Applications in Materials Science and Tissue Engineering
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 09/01/2013,08/27/2013
* Yi Sun,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 158,038.00

In this project the investigator will develop new computational multiscale
methods to model and simulate (a) epitaxial growth in materials science; (b)
cellular aggregate fusion in organ biofabrication and tissue engineering. Even
though the two problems arise from distinct disciplines, they all involve
complex phenomena on multiple spatio-temporal scales across several orders of
magnitude. Numerically solving these problems directly at the finest scale with
standard algorithms inevitably leads to an enormous computational cost.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop multiscale methods that share the
efficiency of the macroscopic models while achieving the accuracy of the
microscopic models. In our methods, the microscale dynamics is described by a
lattice model based on the kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm, while ordinary/partial
differential equations are used for modeling the macroscale dynamics on
continuum level. There are several challenging issues to be addressed in the
research: (1) a detailed understanding of the relation between the physical or
biological models at different scale levels; (2) how to apply suitable boundary
conditions and constraints for microscopic models; (3) systematic and accurate
procedures of coarse-graining. Once these issues are addressed, the investigator
will extend the ideas produced in this research to a broad range of relevant
multiscale problems. This computational approach will also set up a paradigm for
investigating (a) both homoepitaxial and heteroepitaxial growth using various
material species; (b) cell fusion and tissue/organ fabrication in general by
incrementally incorporating additional chemically significant protein dynamics.

This research has the potential to significantly and positively impact relevant
applications in materials science, tissue engineering, and cell biology. It can
help us to (a) understand the physical and mechanical processes during epitaxial
growth, which is an affordable method of high-quality crystal growth for many
semiconductor materials and is important in nanotechnology and in semiconductor
fabrication; (b) understand the origin of intercellular forces due to cellular
responses in cells as well as tissue fusion and quantitatively characterize the
mechanochemical process during tissue morphogenesis, accurately predict and
optimize postprinting structure formation in organ biofabrication, and
intelligently develop approaches in drug design and tissue engineering. Through
collaborating with scientists and engineers from these disciplines, the
investigator will develop a suitable computational multiscale framework for
solving these problems to better understand complex phenomena in these systems.
Educational impact includes interdisciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students interested in computational mathematics. Special
attention will be paid to underrepresented groups including minorities.
