
* 1318988
* An Efficient Model for Flows of Large Number of Particles at Moderate to High Reynolds Numbers and Its Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2013,08/30/2013
* Don Liu,LA,Louisiana Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 161,041.00

This proposal develops a computational model for simulating numerous interactive
particles in a fluid at various Reynolds numbers (Re). This model is novel in
the computational efficiency and accuracy. It assimilates interdisciplinary
knowledge and strengths of Eulerian and Lagrangian approaches. It uses one fixed
mesh to resolve the fluid field with spectral accuracy and to track all
particles in a Lagrangian reference. It avoids (1) fine mesh to resolve the
boundary layers of particles, (2) repetitive re-meshing as particles move, 3)
multi-gridding, and (4) many stiff constraints on the fluid field. Inherited the
accuracy from its previous particle-resolving model for flow around spheres and
spectral element methods, this model is capable of capturing drag forces of
particles at moderate to high Re with the accuracy close to a direct numerical
simulation. Since only one kernel function per particle is needed, this model
simulates a flow of large numbers of particles with only a small extra
percentage of the time for solving only the fluid phase and is one to two orders
faster than a direct numerical simulation. This model provides a viable method
for studying particulate flows involving so many particles that other particle-
resolving methods could be cumbersome. Large-scale simulation of 100,000 to
1,000,000 sediment grains will be conducted in a wide range of Re to infer
macro-scale parameters significant to coastal field application and coastal
erosion.

More than 53% of the U.S. population lives in coastal regions, which are home to
a wealth of natural and economic resources. Due to collective impacts of sea
level rise, severe storms, and pervasive anthropogenic alterations of rivers and
the coast over the past century, coastal regions are undergoing fast erosion.
Mitigating coastal erosion requires improved capability of modeling sediment
dynamics in rivers, estuaries and coastal seas in response to the detriment due
to combined natural processes and anthropogenic activities. In addition to
coastal and environmental engineering, the conjugate interactions of a fluid and
large numbers of immersed particles are of vital significance to mechanical
engineering, chemical engineering, combustion and petroleum processing etc. The
proposed model provides an advanced simulation tool for many areas in science
and engineering, and especially contributes to predicting sediment transport,
mitigating coastal erosion, and improving environmental management. Knowledge in
this multidisciplinary research will be used to train graduate students. The
success of this project will accelerate our knowledge in computational
particulate fluid flows and help better understand the mechanisms of coastal
erosion. The discovery of this research will help prevent coastal erosion and
protect the coastal inhabitants and infrastructure.
