
* 1318348
* High Order in Time and Space Numerical Methods for Solving the Miscible Displacement Problem
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2013,06/24/2015
* Beatrice Riviere,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 229,830.00

High order numerical methods in time and space are proposed to solve the
incompressible miscible displacement problem in heterogeneous porous media. A
mixture of solvent and resident fluids moves as a single phase with a velocity
that follows Darcy's law. The solvent concentration satisfies a convection-
dominated parabolic problem, with a diffusion-dispersion matrix that depends on
the fluid velocity in a non-linear fashion. The fluid pressure equation is
coupled with the concentration equation. Under certain conditions, the miscible
displacement becomes physically unstable and the phenomenon of viscous fingering
occurs. Accurate prediction of the number and location of the viscous fingers is
important in the development of a numerical model. Additional numerical
challenges include the nonlinear coupling between the pressure and concentration
equations, and the unboundedness of the diffusion-dispersion matrix. The
investigator and her team propose to use a discontinuous Galerkin method for the
time integration. For the spatial discretizations, locally mass conservative
methods such as mixed finite element methods and interior penalty discontinuous
Galerkin methods are utilized. Several algorithms, based on solving the pressure
and concentration equations consecutively, are formulated. Their cost and
accuracy are compared. Convergence of the numerical solution is obtained under
low regularity assumptions on the data and exact solution using a new
generalization of the Aubin-Lions compactness theorem. The effects of randomness
in the permeability of the porous media are taken into account by sampling the
coefficients and combining the Monte Carlo technique with temporal and spatial
discretizations. The algorithms developed in this project are also used to
predict the onset and growth of viscous fingers. Two factors contributing to
fingering are investigated: the increase of the ratio of the displaced fluid
viscosity to the solvent fluid viscosity, and the variation of longitudinal and
transverse dispersions.

The miscible displacement problem occurs in several applications, including
environment and energy. For instance, a large amount of the oil reserve in the
U.S. is deemed unrecoverable by current technology. Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR),
by changing the properties of the reservoir and the hydrocarbons, will help
produce some of this trapped oil. Miscible displacement is one important
technique used in EOR. The main goal of this project is to provide accurate and
robust numerical solutions to the miscible displacement problem for
incompressible fluids. In EOR, this numerical approximation can be used to
efficiently harvest the remaining trapped oil. This project advances discovery
and understanding while promoting learning through the training of at least one
Ph.D. student and two undergraduate students. In addition, the principal
investigator organizes a Summer program in which participating high school
students learn about computational mathematics and its applications to complex
flow and transport in porous media.
