
* 1318763
* Fluid-structure interaction with multi-layered structures: a new class of partitioned schemes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2013,04/17/2018
* Suncica Canic,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 280,858.00

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems arise in many applications. They
include multi-physics problems in engineering such as aeroelasticity and
propeller turbines, as well as biofluidic application such as self-propulsion
organisms, fluid-cell interactions, and the interaction between blood flow and
cardiovascular tissue. A comprehensive study of these problems remains to be a
challenge due to their strong nonlinearity and multi-physics nature. To make
things worse, in many biological applications the structure is composed of
several layers, each with different mechanical characteristics. This is, for
example, the case with arterial walls. A FSI solver that simulates the
interaction between an incompressible, viscous fluid and a multi-layered
structure would be an indispensable tool for the computational studies of this
class of problems. To date, there are no such FSI solvers for hemodynamics, and
the work proposed here makes a first step in this direction. The investigators
are developing a set of stable loosely-coupled partitioned schemes for solving a
class of nonlinear moving boundary, fluid-multi-structure interaction problems.
The proposed schemes are based on a novel implementation of the Lie operator
splitting, which is designed in such a way that the energy of the discretized
problem mimics the energy of the continuous problem. The proposed program opens
up a new field within the area of FSI problems, bringing to light several new
features that have not been studied before, such as the study of the
regularizing effects of fluid-structure interfaces with mass. The proposed class
of schemes will be implemented and optimized for high performance computing
using an open source library of solvers called LifeV. This will make the
products of this research accessible to a large set of users involving a broad
range of applications.

This is an exciting, novel study requiring the development of original
mathematical and computational techniques motivated by important applications in
cardiovascular flow. The investigators are developing a computational software
that will, for the first time, capture the interaction between different layers
of the human arterial walls as they interact with pulsating blood flow. This
study is motivated by the most recent advances in ultrasound speckle tracking
methods, which reveal that in high adrenaline situations, there is significant
strain between different layers within arterial walls. It has been noted that
the role of this phenomenon in the development of cardiovascular disease has not
been explored yet. The computational models developed in this study will provide
an indispensable tool for the study of the influence of this phenomenon on the
physiology and pathophysiology of the human cardiovascular system. The results
from this research will have impact across different scientific disciplines
through an open source code, which will be freely available to users. The work
proposed here promises to develop a strong partnership between the University of
Houston, the University of Pittsburgh, Emory University, and the Texas Medical
Center in Houston. The broader impacts will be further achieved through student
education, mentoring of students and junior faculty, and organization of
interdisciplinary conferences/workshops. Both investigators are women with a
track record in education and mentoring women and minorities, and this practice
will continue throughout this project.
