
* 1318486
* Novel Discontinuous Galerkin Finite Element Methods for Second Order Fully Nonlinear Equations and High Frequency Wave Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2013,07/29/2013
* Xiaobing Feng,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 260,000.00

The PI proposes to carry out a comprehensive study for two of most difficult
numerical partial differential equation (PDE) problems using discontinuous
Galerkin (DG) methods. The first main goal of the award is to develop convergent
direct DG discretization methods for approximating viscosity solutions of
general second order fully nonlinear PDEs, which builds upon the PI's previous
successful research on developing indirect numerical methods for these PDEs. The
objectives of this part of the research project are: (i) to extend the direct
nonstandard DG methods to high-dimensional Monge-Ampere and Bellman equations;
(ii) to establish a general convergent theory for the proposed DG methods; (iii)
to develop efficient non-Newtonian nonlinear solvers for solving the resulting
nonlinear systems; (iv) to apply the resulting DG methods to fully nonlinear PDE
application problems including the optimal mass transport problem, the
semigeostrophic flow problem, and stochastic optimal control problems; (v) to
further develop the DG finite element differential calculus theory resulted from
the proposed research project. The second main goal of the award is to develop
absolutely stable, solver-friendly, and coercivity-preserving DG discretization
methods and two-level Schwarz fast solvers for high frequency acoustic, elastic
and electromagnetic wave equations. To resolve highly oscillatory waves,
sufficiently fine mesh must be used, which in turn results in huge algebraic
systems to solve. It is the sheer amount of computations coupled with the strong
indefiniteness and the extremely ill-conditioned nature of high frequency wave
problems that makes them intractable even on today's high performance computers
if the brute force approach is adopted. The ultimate solution to overcome the
challenge must be sought at the algorithmic level. The objectives of this part
of the research project are: (i) to design, analyze and implement novel
absolutely stable, solver-friendly, and coercivity-preserving DG discretization
methods for the three types of high frequency wave equations; (ii) to develop,
analyze and test novel parallelizable two-level Schwarz solution methods for
solving the resulting large algebraic systems.

The completion of the proposed research will have a significant theoretical and
practical impact on the emerging field of numerical fully nonlinear PDEs and the
thriving field of high frequency wave computation. The anticipated new enabling
numerical capabilities can be used to solve various fully nonlinear PDE problems
and wave scattering problems arising from differential geometry, antenna design,
astrophysics, geophysical fluid dynamics, image processing, optimal control and
optimal mass transport, petroleum engineering, geoscience, medical science,
defense and telecommunication as well as financial industries. The education
component of this research project is train graduate students in developing
necessary applied and computational mathematics knowledge and skills so that
they can pursue a successful career in either academia or industry in the near
future.
