
* 1319054
* Hybrid Hermite-Discontinous Galerkin Methods with Applications to Elastic and Electromagnetic Waves
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2013,09/08/2013
* Daniel Appelo,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 258,196.00

The Principal Investigator proposes to carry out an interdisciplinary
comprehensive research program combining the development, analysis and
optimization of a new class of numerical methods, with their application to
problems in seismology and electromagnetics. The novel methods hybridizes
arbitrary-order Hermite approximations with arbitrary-order discontinuous
Galerkin methods. The combination of these two methods will result in a new
class of hybrid methods able to handle complex geometries and with unprecedented
computational efficiency through large time steps and high-resolution. The
methods have very large computation to communication ratio and are well suited
for implementation on current and emerging supercomputer systems, enabling the
solution of complex, multiple-scale evolutionary systems. The proposed unified
analysis of discontinuous Galerkin methods and Hermite methods will require new
tools and theories to be developed and will lead to a new theoretical framework
for the analysis of hybrid methods. The proposal will consider methods for both
first and second order formulations of the governing equations of elasticity and
electromagnetics.

The research will have broader impacts in technology and science, as well as in
the training of the next generation of computational scientists. As recent
events in Japan have shown, earthquakes are a societal problem throughout the
world. To better mitigate seismic hazard, effective prevention and prediction is
needed. Careful assessment of seismic hazards through accurate computational
predictions can lead to appropriate building codes. This can be of enormous
impact for human life and societal welfare in the case of a large seismic event
in a densely populated area as the greater Los Angeles or the San Francisco bay.
The broader impacts of the proposed activities also include education. The
project will involve graduate students who will gain experience in state-of-the-
art computational science. The research will be performed at the University of
New Mexico, a Hispanic serving institution that also serves a large body of
native Americans, allowing active recruitment and education of students from
underrepresented groups.
