
* 1319462
* Computational and theoretical study of parameter scaling in particle systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2013,07/30/2017
* Alethea Barbaro,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2018
* USD 142,420.00

Agent-based models are used to simulate the behavior of many interacting agents,
such as insects, fish, robots, or humans. Generally, agents are taken to have
common interaction rules. With these agent-based models, there is always the
question of how to choose parameters in order to best predict the behavior of
the population being modeled. Some models, such as the Czirok-Vicsek model, are
originally formulated in discrete time, while others, such as the Cucker-Smale
model, are formulated in continuous time. Many agent-based models in biology and
the social sciences use the Forward Euler Method to simulate the model. Hence,
even if the model is originally formulated in continuous time, the choice of
timestep often becomes a parameter in the simulations. In addition to the
timestep, the number of agents, particle density, and any applicable ranges of
interaction must be chosen. But what happens as these parameters are changed?
Should the other parameters change as the particle density changes in order to
maintain the same dynamics? The goal of this project is to understand how the
parameters in discrete-time agent-based models, including the number of
particles, the timestep, and parameters such as the interaction range, should
scale with one another in order exhibit the same large-scale dynamics with
different parameter values. Another question of interest is what happens in the
continuum limit, i.e. when the timestep is taken to zero and the number of
agents is taken to infinity. How do such limits affect the dynamics of the
model? A further goal of this project, if time permits, is to explore the
impacts of this investigation on applications of these models and on the
derivation of associated PDE models.

This research stands to have a broad impact on many research areas which
currently employ agent-based models. These models are often applied in biology,
physics, and social science. In these fields, the system being modeled generally
includes a prohibitively large number of organisms, such as people, fish,
insects, birds, or robots, interacting among themselves. As such, it is often
necessary to approximate the behavior of the population by an agent-based model
where each agent represents a group of individuals, even though rules of
interaction are derived with interactions among individual organisms in mind.
Thus, the question of how to scale the parameters as the number of agents in the
simulation changes is central to the successful application of these models.
Furthermore, where these agent-based models are being applied, discrete-time
versions are often employed in place of continuous dynamical systems, and it is
easy to ignore the question of how the timestep should scale with other
parameters. Hence, it is imperative that the effect of these scalings be
understood and disseminated, since they can significantly change the dynamics of
the model. In this way, mathematics, physics, biology, and social science all
stand to gain essential information from the investigations of the PI and her
collaborators.
