
* 1320608
* Algebraic multigrid methods for solving the Dirac equation in Lattice Quantum Chromodynamics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2013,07/09/2013
* James Brannick,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 180,000.00

The goal of this research project is to combine ideas from the finite element
and multigrid methodologies in order to develop an adaptive algebraic multigrid
algorithmic framework with the potential to make an appreciable and broad impact
on computational Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). The proposed research is driven
by three specific interrelated research goals: (1) To render the Galerkin
adaptive algebraic multigrid methods currently being used to solve the Wilson-
Dirac system more robust and more efficient; (2) To design and analyze new
Petrov-Galerkin multigrid methods for solving the domain wall fermion system;
(3) To discover and analyze relationships between lattice field theory and the
rich theory that researchers have developed for the finite element method. This
research encompasses a broad range of fundamental research in algebraic
multigrid methods, including the design and analysis of new multigrid smoothers
based on greedy (randomized) subspace correction methods, randomized methods for
range approximation, adaptive multigrid methods for solving non-hermitian
problems, and multilevel methods for computing eigenpairs and singular value
triplets.

The intellectual merit of this project derives from its potential to make
several distinct mathematical advances and to integrate those advances into
multilevel algorithms and software for large-scale QCD applications. These
advances are expected to significantly reduce the errors that arise in lattice
calculations and, in turn, to make it possible to use simulations to test the
full non-linearities of QCD and confront experimental data with ab initio
predictions. The project's potential to make a broader impact will be realized
by applying the proposed algorithmic solutions to a wide range of problems in
areas beyond the primary focus on fundamental investigations into particle
physics, such as lattice field theories of graphene, models involving Maxwell's
equations, e.g., magnetohydrodynamics, large-scale graph applications, e.g.,
Markov chains as arise in various Stochastic models, and partial differential
equations with random coefficients, as arise, for example, in uncertainty
quantification for groundwater flow. Graduate students involved in the project
will engage in interdisciplinary research led by the PI and have opportunities
to visit and work with multiple collaborators from the US and Europe, such that
they will receive advanced training in both the theory and practice of advanced
mathematical algorithms and high-end scientific computing.
