
* 1320317
* Enhancing the robustness of the immersed interface method for flow simulation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2013,07/29/2013
* Sheng Xu,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 194,174.00

The immersed interface method employs fixed grids and associated fast solvers to
efficiently solve a variety of PDEs involving interfaces. It accurately captures
the effects of interfaces by incorporating interface-induced jump conditions
into numerical schemes. The main objective of this research is to enhance the
robustness of this method to tackle 3-D large-size multi-scale flow problems.
The PI proposes: (1) to derive and implement jump conditions for the method with
a triangular mesh representation of a 3-D fluid-solid interface, (2) to handle
solid collisions in a flow by incorporating into the method the lubrication
theory, (3) to extend boundary condition capturing in the method from rigid
solids to deformable solids, and (4) to use the domain decomposition and master-
slave techniques for distributed-memory parallelization of the method for fluid-
solid interaction and two-fluid flows. The PI and his students apply the
enhanced method to investigate the dynamics of a collection of solid particles
falling in a fluid and the aerodynamic control strategies in insect flight.

The proposed research is to push a computational method, the immersed interface
method, so that it can be used to compute various interesting and important 3-D
flow problems that are of large sizes and multiple scales. In particular, the PI
and his students apply the method to study the dynamics of a collection of solid
particles falling in a fluid and the aerodynamic control strategies in insect
flight. A wide range of biological and physical systems involve the collective
dynamics of objects, for example, schooling, microorganism colony, and particle
suspension and sedimentation. The proposed study in this area will help
understand, model, and design such systems. Winged insects are nature's answer
to perfect small-scale flying machines. Understanding insect aerodynamics is of
great interest to engineers in designing flapping-wing micro air vehicles, which
can be employed in military surveillance, biological warfare detection, and
reconnaissance in confined spaces. The PI plans to disseminate on his web page a
user-friendly software and the associated tutorials on the immersed interface
method to benefit undergraduate and graduate students who want to use the method
for their research. Other educational impact of this research includes the
support of an under-represented graduate student and the involvement of
undergraduate students in computational research.
