
* 1320919
* Novel Algorithms for Separated Representations in Functional Form for the Adaptive Solution of Quantum Chemistry Problems and Other Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2013,09/17/2013
* Gregory Beylkin,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 330,000.00

This proposal develops a new approach for solving partial differential and
integral equations based on novel algorithms for separated representations in
functional form. Separated representations, a natural extension of separation of
variables, is a nonlinear method to approximate multidimensional functions as
sums of separable functions. In this representation functions in a high-
dimensional space are described with a small number of parameters, making
possible to bypass the so-called curse of dimensionality, that is, to avoid the
exponential growth of computational cost in the underlying dimension of the
problem. The term in functional form refers to the handling of the components of
separated representations in each dimension; they are obtained via a nonlinear
approximation rather than via a representation through bases. This approach not
only provides a greater efficiency by reducing the number of parameters but also
expands the current paradigm for solving equations. By seeking solutions via a
self-correcting iterative process, a new efficient algorithm keeps a manageable
number of terms in the representation while maintaining the functional form of
the components and the desired accuracy. The goal of this project is to design,
test and implement such a reduction algorithm and apply it to solve several
multidimensional problems that cannot be addressed by current methods. Many
problems in modern science require computing multivariate solutions and a major
challenge is to develop representations and algorithms to obtain them while
avoiding the curse of dimensionality. The proposed effort develops a functional
calculus for solving high dimensional problems via a self-correcting iterative
process based on a combination of three types of novel algorithms: (1) Separated
representations in functional form as a tool to circumvent the curse of
dimensionality; (2) Highly efficient nonlinear approximations of univariate
functions to achieve adaptivity of the components of the separated
representations; (3) Randomized projections to reduce the number of terms in the
separated representation while maintaining the functional form of the components
and the desired accuracy. These adaptive algorithms should yield accurate
solutions with guaranteed error bounds while requiring a computational time that
scales linearly in the dimension of the problem. A particular emphasis of this
proposal is on a fundamental problem of Quantum Chemistry to accurately compute
the electronic structure of molecules.

Accurate modeling in modern science and engineering requires computations with
multivariate functions and any progress toward making such computations feasible
will either significantly accelerate existing numerical methods or lead to the
solution of many problems that are currently out of reach. Scientific areas to
benefit from proposed algorithms are not limited to Quantum Chemistry and
material sciences where the ability to understand chemical reactions and
properties of materials relies heavily on efficient numerical algorithms, but
also include robotics and the design of multicomponent structures, just to name
a few. This proposal provides numerical tools to address the multivariate nature
of many challenging scientific problems. As a result, topics of the proposal are
expected to give raise to interdisciplinary collaborations as well as become
part of graduate dissertations.
