
* 1320910
* Sparse 3D-Data Representations from Compactly Supported Atoms for Rigid Motion Invariant Classification with Applications to Neuroscience Imaging
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2013,09/10/2015
* Emanuel Papadakis,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 05/31/2017
* USD 229,993.00

The quantitative characterization of neuronal morphology is currently among the
most fundamental objectives in neuroscience, as it is essential to precisely
correlate structure, activity and neuronal communication at the cellular level.
It has been long established that neurons respond to external stimuli through
significant structural changes. Hence, the ability to quantitatively capture and
track these changes is fundamental for understanding the cell-level biology of
brain functions. Dendritic spines, in particular, are are sub-cellular
structures, which play a key-role in how neurons talk to each other; these
structural changes are referred to as synaptic plasticity. Although, this type
of microanatomical plasticity has been associated with drug addiction or even
with autism, the change in the morphology and density of spines in addiction,
autism and in neurodegenerative diseases is still unclear. Recent developments
of high-resolution confocal single photon and multi-photon microscopy, together
with the ability to mark subcellular structures, provide a new window for the
observation of live single or small groups of neurons which never existed
before. However, extracting useful information using this novel imaging is a
challenging task. In particular, observing the variations of spine populations,
which are in the order of several thousands for even a single neuron,
categorizing them in different types and maintaining the timeline of changes are
largely laborious manual tasks that are subject to the inevitable inaccuracies
native to repetitive and tedious manual work.

Our project aims to develop the algorithmic foundations for a new generation of
software tools for extracting global spine morphometric characteristics and
population dynamics from high-resolution confocal single photon and multi-photon
microscopy images with minimal human intervention. Such tools will have a
transformative effect in the logistics of spine studies, because they slash the
required labor cost. To achieve our goal, we will make contributions to both
mathematical analysis and computer vision. We aim to develop robust methods for
the detection, identification of type and estimation of volume regardless of the
position and spatial orientation of spines in a 3D image of a neuron acquired
with the said microscopes. Finally, our project offers educational opportunities
to graduate students in a blend of abstract and computational mathematics and
computer vision. We also plan to continue our outreach activities to local high
schools located in disadvantaged areas of Houston, offering to top students
sneak peeks of the life of the mathematician, the computer scientist and the
biologist researcher.
