
* 1320037
* A new computational method for viscoelastic two-phase flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2013,09/03/2013
* Shahriar Afkhami,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2016
* USD 252,527.00

The investigator proposes to develop novel computational schemes for the study
of flows of viscoelastic liquids in three spatial dimensions. A new formulation
that transforms the constitutive equation for viscoelastic stress into a
conservative form is proposed. This new formulation is amenable to the use of a
state-of-the-art adaptive mesh refinement method on octree finite-volume meshes.
The goal of this proposal is to develop discretization and solution algorithms
that are designed to not only maintain the higher order accuracy, but also
guarantee that the discrete set of algebraic equations possess particular
characteristics that are contained in the differential form of the constitutive
equations. Different constitutive models for viscoelastic liquids are
incorporated into the computational framework, allowing the investigation of the
effects of constitutive laws on improved fitting to the experimental
measurements, especially in flows which contain stress singularities.
Parallelized algorithms combined with adaptive mesh refinement and GPU
optimization are expected to significantly improve the efficiency of the direct
simulations.

The numerical methodologies constructed in this proposed research, while
focusing on addressing two-phase viscoelastic flows, will be broadly-useful in
simulating and investigating a number of different complex flow applications
such as polymer processing, biological flows in microfluidic devices, and
emulsion flows in polymer blending. In nano/microscale geometries, flows of two
immiscible liquids are often dominated by surface tension. Moreover, the
interface of two liquids may undergo large deformation rates as it moves in
networks of nano/microchannels. While the surface tension force discretization
proposed in this work overcomes the former, the improvements proposed for
discretizing the viscoelastic constitutive equations allow practical direct
simulation of viscoelastic flows with strong elasticity.
