
* 1321473
* CONFERENCE: Tutorials in Applicable Algebraic Geometry
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2013,09/05/2013
* Daniel Bates,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2014
* USD 15,520.00

There has recently been a significant increase in the application of the methods
of algebraic geometry to problems outside of mathematics. The resulting
interdisciplinary work necessarily entails much interaction between experts in
algebraic geometry and those from other disciplines. The PI will run a workshop
July 29-31, 2013 focused on introducing non-experts to two fundamental tools
rooted in algebraic geometry: numerical algebraic geometry and toric geometry.
Authors of recent books in these two areas will give lectures: Frank Sottile and
Jonathan Hauenstein for numerical algebraic geometry, John Little and Hal
Schenck for toric geometry. These lectures will serve as a rapid introduction to
the methods and software from these two areas, focused on the value for problems
coming from applications. This meeting will take place at the Pingree Park
mountain campus of Colorado State University.

Mathematical problems in application areas can sometimes be converted into a
certain type of problem, the polynomial system. For years, there was no
efficient way to solve polynomial systems, so researchers had to find different,
sometimes less desirable, formulations for their problems. However, with recent
developments in numerical algebraic geometry and toric geometry, it is now
reasonable to solve relatively large polynomial systems directly. These new
computational tools open the door to study problems that were previously too
difficult to consider. For example, in kinematics, the introduction of numerical
algebraic geometry has already resulted in the ability to solve long-standing
problems and to discover new mechanisms with special properties. The workshop
supported by this award will help to expedite the use of these powerful new
tools by the researchers who need them.
