
* 1414365
* Investigation of Auxiliary Subspace Techniques as a General Tool for A Posteriori Error Estimation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2013,08/18/2014
* Jeffrey Ovall,OR,Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 08/31/2016
* USD 143,860.00

A posteriori error estimation is an essential component of high-performance
finite element computations. Such estimates are used in practice not only to
reliably determine when an approximate solution is accurate enough, but also to
(efficiently) adaptively improve the approximation. This proposal considers
auxiliary subspace error estimates, which are derived from computing an
approximate error function in an auxiliary space. Such an approximate error
function provides great flexibility, in principle, in how it may be used for
adaptive finite, and we are here concerned estimation of and adaptivity with
respect to: error in a variety of norms, higher-order derivatives in a variety
norms, functional error for general classes of linear functionals, and error in
eigenvalue and invariant subspace computations. The robustness of hierarchical
error estimates of energy-norm error is well-established both in theory and in
practice for low-order finite elements and second-order linear elliptic boundary
value problems in two dimensions. This proposal aims to significantly extend
both theory and practice not only to include the various error measures
mentioned above, but also higher-order elements in two and three dimensions (p-
and hp-adaptivity), as well as to different types of operators and finite
elements, including systems of partial differential equations. Additionally, an
adaptive convergence theory would also be developed, where possible. A key
component of the proposed research is the development of a basic framework in
which clear guidance concerning an appropriate choice of auxiliary space for
computing the approximate error function is provided by considering a few basic
properties of the underlying problem and the space which was used for the
approximate solution.

The ability to automatically detect and adapt to relevant fine and coarse-scale
features in the modeling of composite materials is often indispensable as an aid
for design of such materials, as well as for remote sensing in the presence of
complex media (e.g. non-destructive exploration for natural resources). This
proposal concerns the development of a general and very flexible approach to
error estimation and adaptive improvement of approximations in a variety of
contexts, providing careful development of specific cases of interest, such as
those mentioned above. A clear theoretical framework for error estimation and
adaptivity, together with several important practical realizations, will not
only aid practitioners in making appropriate choices in their particular
contexts, but will also make it easier to train students to be able to develop
such tools for problem where little (if any) are available. The various projects
in the proposal include both national and international collaboration,as well as
the education and involvement of graduate students. Additionally, much of the
software developed in conjunction with this proposal will be made freely
available by the proposer from his website.
