
* 1415152
* Early-Career and Student Support for the XIX Householder Symposium, June 8-13, 2014
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2014,09/08/2014
* Ilse C.F. Ipsen,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2016
* USD 20,000.00

This project supports the participation of USA-based early career scientists and
Ph.D. students at the Householder Symposium XIX on Numerical Linear Algebra, a
mathematical discipline that is the basis for many computational methods in
science and engineering. The Symposium will take place on 8-13 June 2014, in
Spa, Belgium. It is the nineteenth in a series, previously called the Gatlinburg
Symposia, and named after the founder Alston S. Householder, one of the pioneers
in numerical linear algebra. The Symposium is very informal, with the
intermingling of early-career and established researchers a priority. Attendance
is by invitation only, and each attendee is given the opportunity to present a
talk or poster. The fifteenth Householder Award for the best Ph.D. thesis in
numerical linear algebra since 1 January 2011 will be awarded. The project will
ensure the attendance of well qualified Ph.D. students at US institutions, as
well as early-career scientists who received their Ph.D. degree after 1 January
2011 and are currently working in the US.

The Symposium places an emphasis on broad relevance, and includes presentations
on the following topics: Krylov space methods for linear systems and eigenvalue
problems, computation of matrix functions, nonlinear eigenvalue problems, tensor
algorithms and analysis, domain decomposition and multilevel methods, algorithms
for structured matrices, randomized algorithms; as well as applications to:
Optimization, differential equations, signal and image processing, control
theory, electronic structure calculations, data analysis, information retrieval,
and engineering. The support of this project ensures the attendance of well
qualified applied mathematics Ph.D. students from US institutions, as well as
early US career scientists who received their Ph.D.'s after January 1, 2011.
Support of this group will have a positive impact on the continued strong
competitiveness of the US in this crucial discipline, with its connections to a
large number of scientific computing topics. Individual benefits for early
career researchers who have attended a Householder Symposium include: Career
advice from established researchers, enhanced visibility in the community, ideas
for REU programs, and several NSF funded research projects that arose directly
from collaborations established or advice received at the Householder Symposium.
Funding for participants takes into consideration participant diversity at the
Symposium. More information can be found in http://sites.uclouvain.be/HHXIX/
