
* 1416742
* Mathematical study and finite element simulation of wave propagation in metamaterials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,07/15/2016
* Jichun Li,NV,University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,880.00

Since 2000, the study of metamaterials has attracted the attention of many
scientists and engineers. Wave propagation in metamaterials is of interest in
various disciplines and could potentially revolutionize design of efficient
antennas, waveguides and radars, nanolithography and subwavelength imaging, near
field control and manipulation (useful for detecting low levels of chemical and
biological agents, and manipulation of molecules), particle detection, and
invisibility cloaking (useful for stealth technology). Developing robust and
efficient algorithms for modeling metamaterials will benefit diverse areas such
as electrical engineering, materials science, optics, physics, nano-technology,
and biomedical technology.

The goal of this project is to study problems of wave interaction with
metamaterials through mathematical modeling and computer simulations.
Mathematical modeling plays an important role in the design and application of
metamaterials. In October 2006 using computer simulations, a group of
researchers at Duke University found a way to fabricate the metamaterials to
build a 2-D "invisibility cloak" that makes an object invisible to certain
frequencies. However, most metamaterial models proposed by engineers are not
well studied and there is a lack of solid mathematical analysis and modeling.
Metamaterials are lossy and dispersive, which leads to governing equations which
are much more complicated than the well-studied Maxwell?s equations in free
space. Approximating solutions of the metamaterial equations accurately and
efficiently is challenging (note that all unknowns are objects in three
dimensional spaces and vary in time) and requires additional research. This
project will develop mathematically robust, accurate, and efficient, finite
element methods that can be be used for simulating wave interactions with
metamaterials. During the proposed project the PI will train graduate students
interested in pursuing careers in computational sciences and engineering.
