
* 1417985
* Semidefinite Programming Methods for Moment and Optimization Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2014,06/29/2014
* Jiawang Nie,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 209,999.00

This project targets at solving moment and optimization problems. A moment is
the integral of a polynomial over a set with densities. Optimization is about
making a decision so that an objective is optimized. An exemplary question is
how to find the lowest valley of an area full of uneven mountains. Semidefinite
programming is an efficient tool for solving moment and optimization problems,
because it provides mathematically easy descriptions for complicated sets. The
research results made in the project will produce plenty of mathematical methods
for solving various computational problems.

This project works on moment and optimization problems. A moment is the integral
of a monomial with respect to a measure. Moment problems are about existences
and constructions of measures satisfying some given properties. Optimization
problems are about minimizing functions, typically nonlinear and nonconvex,
globally over given sets. We propose semidefinite programming methods for
solving these two kinds of problems. For moment problems, semidefinite
programming can be applied to describe the set of moments of desired measures.
For optimization problems, global optimum can be computed by minimizing linear
functions in moment variables, subject to semidefinite programming constraints.
These two kinds of problems are closely connected to each other by semidefinite
programming. The main task of moment problems is to determine whether a given
sequence can be represented as moments of a measure supported in a prescribed
set. In optimization, we are mostly interested in computing global minimizers of
nonlinear nonconvex functions. An efficient tool for unifying moment and
optimization problems is semidefinite programming. The underlying mathematics
includes convex geometry, duality theory, complex and real algebraic geometry,
matrix theory, optimization theory, and scientific computing. The PI has
expertise on the proposed subjects. Novel methods and tools for overcoming
research challenges are proposed with supporting evidences. The research results
produced by the project could not only make significant advances in the PI's
field, but also generate novel methods for many other areas in computational
mathematics. Moment and optimization problems have broad applications in science
and engineering. Typical applications include: matrix theory, computational
algebra, convex algebraic geometry, tensor computations. The moment and
optimization problems in such applications have their own special features and
properties. Education is an important part of the project. The students will get
trained by taking advanced courses as well as conducting research activities.
Achievements produced by the project will be disseminated to the scientific
community timely in various outlets.
