
* 1417676
* Modeling and Computation in Elastography
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,07/27/2014
* Junshan Lin,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 144,812.00

Elastography is an emerging imaging modality that seeks to non-destructively
determine the mechanical properties of elastic/viscoleastic media from their
response to external forces. It has a wide range of applications in medical
diagnostics and non-destructive testing. The relevance and high cost of physical
experimentation in such instances has driven the need for novel and efficient
numerical algorithms to accelerate the corresponding design and identification
process. To date, however, existing models and numerical schemes for their
resolution have proven inadequate for this purpose. This research project
initiates an integrated program for the remediation of this situation through
the development of fast methods of broadly applicable models that are based on
rigorous mathematical analysis. The results of the work should have a direct
impact in a number of these instances, enhanced by the PI's access to real data
and experiments from leading practitioners. Improved reconstruction schemes
should lead to more accurate identification; their fast implementation, in turn,
will allow for true guidance in the design of improved imaging systems.

The objective of this project is to examine fundamental mathematical issues and
develop efficient computational methods for solving the direct and inverse
problems in elastography. For the forward modeling, fast and accurate integral
equation based solvers shall be developed for solid and solid/fluid interaction
problems, aimed at attaining fully efficient and reliable simulation
infrastructures for the underlying physical models in elastography. The approach
proposed will address a number of significant challenges associated with the
design of high-order quadratures for hypersingular integrals, with the
accelerated evaluation of long-range potentials, and with the development of
suitable preconditioners. To tackle the inverse problems, novel procedures with
a combination of the multi-frequency continuation with fast linear
approximations at long wavelengths shall be developed to address classical
difficulties related to the nonlinear and ill-posed character of the inverse
problems. This, in turn, should enable the possibility of true virtual design
leading to advances in the area of PDE-constrained optimization.
