
* 1418908
* Simulation of the Wave-Matter Interactions: Geometrical Optics and Nano Optics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,07/22/2014
* Songting Luo,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 109,234.00

Broader Significance and Importance: The proposed project is devoted to
providing reliable models and the state-of-the-art numerical methods for
studying the wave-matter interactions as in geometrical optics and nano optics
with practical applications arising from seismic imaging, medical imaging,
nanotechnology, nanosciences, and so on. The proposed models and numerical
methods are based on knowledge of geometrical optics, physical optics, nano
optics, computational chemistry and scientific computing, aiming to provide
numerical tools and guidance for applications. Interdisciplinary collaborations
will be pursued to extend the practical applications of the proposed methods.
The project also involves the integration of research and education in
computational mathematics. Graduate and undergraduate students, and members from
underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate in the project to
enhance their knowledge and research. The proposed project will further the
training and education of students and encourage them to pursue future career in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The PI will develop
reliable models and efficient numerical methods to simulate the wave-matter
interactions as in geometrical optics and nano optics. When the size of the
matter is much larger than the wavelength, the interactions are equivalent to
simulating high frequency waves in nonhomogeneous media with the effect of
matter averaged and embedded continuously as medium constants. The PI will
combine geometrical optics and physical optics along with scientific computing
to design and analyze efficient numerical methods. When the size of the matter
reaches nanoscale, the interactions require to simulate the motion of the matter
and the evolution of the waves simultaneously as in the study of the optical
responses of nanostructures in nano optics, where the quantum effects of the
matter must be considered. The PI will use the semi-classical theories as the
guideline to derive simple models to characterize the interactions and propose
multiscale methods to simulate the interactions. The proposed models and methods
consist of the following core ideas: (1) for simulating high frequency waves,
the Huygens-Kirchhoff integral with the Green functions serves as the
formulation and mechanism for advancing the wave propagation, where geometrical
optics provides asymptotic approximations of the Green functions. The phase and
amplitude to approximate the Green functions can be computed efficiently with
accurate methods for Hamilton-Jacobi equations. The oscillatory Huygens-
Kirchhoff integral can be evaluated efficiently with multilevel algorithms based
on low-rank matrix decompositions. And data compression techniques to compress
the phase and amplitude ensure the feasibility of building the waves in both two
and three-dimensional spaces. And (2) for studying the optical responses of
nanostructures, the semi-classical theories that treat the waves classically
with the Maxwell equations and retain the quantum mechanical description of the
matter provide characterizations of the light-matter interactions. The Born-
Oppenheimer approximation and the ab initio molecular dynamics can be utilized
to resolve the difficulty of dealing with the many-body system quantum
mechanically, which results in simple semi-classical models that are numerically
trackable with proposed multiscale schemes.
