
* 1418737
* Collaborative Research: Wavelet Frames for Variational Models in Imaging: Bridging Discrete and Continuum
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,08/02/2016
* Weiyu Xu,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 129,167.00

From the beginning of science, visual observations have been playing important
roles. Advances in computer technology have made it possible to apply some of
the most sophisticated developments in mathematics and the sciences to the
design and implementation of fast algorithms running on a large number of
processors to process image data. As a result, image processing and analysis
techniques are now applied to virtually all natural sciences and technical
disciplines ranging from computer sciences and electronic engineering to biology
and medical sciences; and digital images have come into everyone's life.
Mathematics has been playing an important role in image and signal processing
from the very beginning. There are two major mathematical approaches for image
restoration, namely, wavelet tight frame approaches and differential/variational
approaches. The main research objective of this project is to investigate
geometric aspects of the former approach by connecting it with the latter. It
will give rise to new mathematical models and numerical algorithms that benefit
researchers in academia, national research laboratories, as well as in industry.
The understandings of the geometric aspects of the wavelet frames and the
connections with differential operators will contribute to both the community of
computational harmonic analysis and the community of variational techniques and
numerical PDEs. The education plan will bring undergraduate and graduate
students to the frontiers of research in computational mathematics, computer
vision and medical imaging; and strengthen the collaborations among
mathematicians, engineers, computer scientists and medical doctors.

Wavelet frames are systems of functions that provide linear representations of
functions living in certain function spaces such as L2(Rn). In contrast to the
classic (bi)orthogonal wavelet bases, such representations are generally
redundant which is desirable in many applications. Although most theoretical
aspects of wavelet frames have already been well understood in the literature,
geometric meanings of the wavelet frame transform are still generally unknown.
In fact, the lack of geometric interpretations is one of the major flaws of
wavelet frames that prohibits the applications of wavelet frames in some
important problems of data analysis that require geometric regularization of the
objects-of-interest reside in the data. The main research objective of this
proposal is to develop a generic geometric interpretation to the wavelet frame
transform, by studying its relations with differential operators within various
variational frameworks. Based on the geometric interpretation, we propose new
models and algorithms for several important applications such image restoration
(deblurring, inpainting, CT/MR imaging, etc.). Through both theoretical analysis
and numerical experiments, we will explore the advantages of the proposed
wavelet frame based models over the existing variational and differential models
for different applications. The proposed research will focus on: (1) the
approximation of the differential operators by the wavelet frame transform
within general variational frameworks; (2) solving large-scaled ill-posed
inverse problems (e.g., image restoration, blind deconvolution) through
convex/nonconvex optimizations using wavelet frames; (3) designing and solving
wavelet frame based models in real-world applications in imaging such as low-
dose CT image reconstruction, removing blurs caused by camera shaking, etc. The
study of the geometric meanings of the wavelet frame transform will interpret
wavelet frames and their associated optimization models from a whole new angle.
Such fundamental study enables us, for the very first time, to fully utilize the
unique properties of wavelet frames in geometry-involved data analysis tasks and
finding numerical solutions of PDEs. The practical advantages (such as the
quality of restoration for inverse problems) of wavelet frame transform over
standard finite difference approximations in various applications will become
more evident after the proposed studies. Furthermore, this project will also
bring new understandings to numerical methods solving variational models; and
answers some fundamental and important questions of variational models that are
unclear from the literature.
