
* 1418889
* Numerical Methods for Graph and Network Analysis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 07/15/2014,07/08/2014
* Michele Benzi,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 179,999.00

Network science, the study of large, interconnected complex systems, has been
the focus of much effort on the part of many scientists in recent years. The
modeling and analysis of natural, engineered, and social networks, ranging from
molecular and biological networks to the Internet, the World Wide Web, and also
to online social media like Facebook and Twitter, has emerged as an important
multidisciplinary field of study. Progress in this area is rapidly affecting
many traditional fields of science and engineering as well as areas like public
health, business, marketing, finance, and national security. The project
concerns the development and analysis of computational methods for studying the
structure of networks and of certain dynamical processes taking place on them.
In particular, the project will develop mathematically sound approaches for
maximally increasing the connectivity and robustness of networks when only a
limited number of links can be added or modified. Network robustness is of
paramount importance when designing infrastructure networks, since real world
networks must be resilient to damage resulting from natural disasters or by man-
made, malicious attacks. In addition, the project will develop efficient
techniques for simulating the spread of information, viruses, rumors, etc. on
networks, as well as the propagation of shocks. The techniques will be
implemented on computers and tested on existing available data sets, and the
software will be made available to other researchers.

In the first part of the project we will design efficient algorithms for
increasing network robustness and connectivity using as an objective function
the total communicability of the network, which is a scalar quantity associated
with the adjacency matrix of the graph. In particular, we will investigate
different criteria for the addition of links in such a way as to (approximately)
maximize the increase in total communicability. Edge rewiring and deletion will
also be studied. The second part of the project deals with the numerical
analysis of so-called Quantum Graphs. We will study numerical methods, including
finite element discretizations and fast linear algebra, for solving PDEs posed
on metric graphs (1D simplicial complexes), such as the diffusion and
Schroedinger equations. In particular, we will study domain decomposition and
iterative substructuring methods for solving the large linear systems arising
when solving elliptic and parabolic problems on graphs. Exponential integrators
based on Krylov subspace methods will also be investigated.
