
* 1418983
* A spectrally accurate hybrid moment-of-fluid and level set method for multiphase flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2014,08/12/2016
* Mark Sussman,FL,Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 349,993.00

State-of-the-art, highly accurate and efficient numerical algorithms will be
developed for simulating multi physics and multi-phase flows of engineering and
technological importance. These new numerical methods are also designed to be
scalable with respect to an exceedingly increasing number of computer
processors, and thus easily implemented on the current and immediately future
high-performance computing platforms. They will constitute an enabling
technology for use by practitioners in science, engineering, medicine, industry
and military. The primary applications of this technology will be to the design
of fuel injectors for diesel engines, the design of swirling flow injectors in
modern aircraft gas turbine engines, the design of flat fan nozzles employed in
combustion, painting, spray cooling, agriculture irrigating applications, the
design of off-shore facilities for the conversion of natural gas into liquid
state, patient specific drug delivery, and the design of aircraft wing anti-
freezing devices. The high accuracy and efficiency of these methodologies will
allow parameter studies and design optimization procedures, more sophisticated
geometries and models, which have proved until now to be prohibitively
expensive.

A hybrid methodology coupling an adaptive mesh refinement, easily
parallelizable, spectral-element method with the moment-of-fluid method will be
developed for numerically simulating multi-phase flows. The principal
investigators have already developed an adaptive, parallel, moment-of-fluid
algorithm for incompressible and compressible multiphase flows. The primary
objective of this proposal is to take the previous work of the principal
investigators to a higher level, where each material has its own spectral-
element representation, and a grid cell containing multiple materials will
contain independent solution expansions for each material. A robust cell
integrated semi-Lagrangian method will be implemented so that each material in
each rectangular grid cell has a separate mapping from the departure region to
the target region in such a way that the combination of all mappings tessellate
the computational domain. A cut-cell spectral-element algorithm will be
developed for numerically solving the pressure projection equation (a Helmholtz
equation) and for numerically solving for the viscous forces in multi-material
flows. The benefits of the new algorithm will be the greatly improved accuracy
(without loss of robustness) in predicting the shape of deforming material
boundaries where there are thin shear layers and/or thin thermal boundary
layers.
