
* 1418994
* Numerical Analysis and Methods for Simulating Moving Interfaces and Controlling Shape
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,07/31/2014
* Shawn Walker,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 153,520.00

Understanding physical laws and developing mathematical models to make
predictions enables advancement of modern technology and industrial processes.
Moreover, optimization of these processes allows for better and more efficient
designs. The direct impacts to society are in general cost savings, more robust
infrastructure, and better quality of life. The goal of this research project
(see technical description) is to target a specific set of physical/industrial
processes that involve moving boundaries or interfaces (e.g. the surface of a
melting ice-cube in water is an interface between the solid "ice" phase and the
liquid "water" phase). Examples include growing solid phases in a desired shape
from a liquid melt (controlled crystal growth), modeling liquid crystals
(display technology), micro-fluidics that control small droplets of liquid by
electric fields (useful in the bio-medical field), and self-assembly of
particles and polymer chains on deformable membrane surfaces (design of
materials). The research will enable better design, optimization, and control of
these systems. In addition, the project will create new methods for creating
computer models of complex shapes that efficiently capture moving boundaries.
This is known as grid generation, which is a basic tool used in many areas, from
computer graphics (for creating life-like animations) all the way to commercial
product design (engineering design of structures such as bridges). Grid
generation is still an expensive task in terms of man-hours and money. Any
computational tools developed by this research will be made available to the
public through online resources. Furthermore, undergraduate and graduate
students will benefit from a special course developed by the PI on computational
free boundary problems. Lastly, the PI is guiding middle school students in
science fair projects motivated by this research.

The proposed research will develop numerical analysis tools and methods for
simulating moving interface and multi-physics problems and for optimal control
of free boundaries. We will take advantage of variational/finite element
methods, stability/energy estimates, shape differentiation, and automatic
meshing technology in the following projects: (A) develop and analyze new
discrete formulations of the Stefan problem (phase change/solidification) in 2-D
and 3-D and explore well posedness questions of the time-dependent interface
motion (in a finite element method (FEM) setting); (B) develop a new FEM for
liquid crystals with provable stability/convergence properties and explore
dynamics and equilibrium configurations; (C) develop PDE-based optimal control
techniques and numerics for directing and controlling shape; (D) develop stable
and accurate numerical methods (FEM) for simulating geometric objects that obey
the no self-penetration condition; and (E) create new mesh generation methods to
handle 3-D problems in a robust and automatic way with attention given to
parallel implementation issues. This project will advance the fundamental theory
of free boundary problems by investigating well-posedness of time dependent
domain-deforming problems and optimal control of shape. It will further the
development of methods for multi-physics problems with coupling to non-linear
interfacial physics, such as anisotropic surface tension. It will create novel
numerical analysis and efficient methods for simulating dynamic curves and
surfaces that respect *no self-penetration*, i.e. that enforce the excluded
volume constraint.
