
* 1418806
* Advanced Modeling, Numerical Studies and Analysis of Fluid-Structure Interaction Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,06/16/2016
* Pengtao Sun,NV,University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 132,219.00

The purpose of this project is to develop advanced modeling and novel numerical
techniques in order to effectively perform stable, precise, and state of the art
simulations for a type of dynamic fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problem with
a possibly large rotational and deformable elastic structure. Coupled fluid-
structure problems, which are characterized by the interaction of fluid forces
and structural deformations/rotations, play prominent roles in many scientific
and engineering fields such as aerodynamics, bio-engineering and hydrodynamics.
Yet, a comprehensive study of such problems remains a challenge due to their
strongly nonlinear coupling and multidisciplinary nature, so a correct
mathematical model equation to precisely demonstrate the basic characteristics
of FSI becomes more important. For most FSI problems, analytical solutions to
the model equations are impossible to obtain, whereas laboratory experiments are
also limited in scope; thus to investigate the fundamental physics involved in
the complex interaction between fluids and solids, mathematical modeling and
numerical simulations become more necessary and promising. Because of the
complexity of the underlying mathematical model of FSI problems, current
solution techniques are still far from being satisfactory, and therefore more
efficient and robust numerical techniques are urgently needed.

While there is still a long way before such multiphysics FSI problems can be
completely solved in an efficient and precise manner, this proposal will be
devoted to the development of advanced modeling and novel numerical techniques
for the following three methods: Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) method,
fictitious domain method, and full Eulerian-phase field method. These methods
still possess the problems of well-posedness, stability and/or convergence
analysis, as well as a number of critical numerical difficulties caused by the
mismatched grid on the interface, nonlinear coupling, and
discontinuous/degenerate coefficients. The goal of this project is to address
these difficulties, develop and analyze proper discretization schemes, robust
iterative methods, and high performance computing techniques to solve the
discretized system of FSI model in the sense of stable, fast and accurate
convergence. The advanced and novel modeling and numerical techniques to be
developed include: (1). A newly developed FSI model for a rotational and
deformable elastic structure that is immersed in fluid, and its efficient
numerical method with an ALE approach and method of characteristics (MOC). (2).
A new fictitious domain method for FSI problem with incompressible fluid and
compressible structure, and its well-posedness analysis. (3). A new stable
implicit scheme for a full Eulerian FSI model with phase field formulation to
deal with the degenerate structural momentum equation in Eulerian description.
Newly developed numerical techniques will be immediately implemented to enrich
our in-house codes and to validate our FSI model with the obtained numerical
solutions. It is hoped that the effective numerical techniques developed in this
proposed project will result in one to two orders of magnitude of improvement
over current existing FSI solvers. Industrial applications are natural outcomes
of this research because of its extensive applications in industry, and the
close ties of my collaborators with engineers in the fields of hydrodynamics and
bio-engineering.
