
* 1418706
* Collaborative Research: Fluctuating Hydrodynamics of Suspensions of Rigid Bodies
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2014,06/29/2014
* Aleksandar Donev,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 252,190.00

Over the last decade there has been rapid progress in the manufacturing and
design of materials and devices that employ small-scale active particles to
produce novel physical behaviours such as self-organizing flows (e.g., active
colloidal suspensions), or to perform specific tasks such as cargo transport
(e.g., targeted drug delivery). While much progress has been made
experimentally, theoretical and computational modelling lags behind, due to the
difficulty in designing suitable numerical algorithms and the lack of public-
domain codes capable of capturing the complex multi-physics of active
propulsion. In this work we develop novel computational methods for simulating
active-particles suspended in fluid, and implement the developed techniques in
the public-domain code IBAMR, therefore making them available to applied
researchers in physics and engineering. A specific distinguishing aspect of the
work is the consistent inclusion of the random Brownian motion necessarily
present when dealing with small-scale flows due to the small numbers of
molecules involved in the process. Such stochastic effects are important in
flows at micro and nano scales typical of nano- and micro-fluidic and
microelectromechanical devices, novel materials such as nanofluids, and
biological systems such as lipid membranes, Brownian molecular motors, and
nanopores. We therefore expect the work to have a broad range of applications in
science and engineering, beyond the specific research goals detailed below. The
scientific component of this project will be supplemented by an educational and
outreach component, including the development and enrichment of new graduate
courses, such as Coarse Grained Modeling of Materials, which will include
training in statistical mechanics, applied stochastic analysis, fluid dynamics,
and high-performance computing.

This collaborative project focuses on computational methods for problems
involving Brownian rigid and semi-rigid structures immersed in a fluid. Examples
include colloidal particles, polymer chains, and macromolecules in a solvent. We
aim to develop novel methods for fluid-structure coupling at small Reynolds
numbers that consistently include the effects of thermal fluctuations. At small
scales, the motion of immersed structures is driven by thermal fluctuations,
giving rise to Brownian motion strongly affected by hydrodynamic effects. We
plan to develop methods that couple an immersed-boundary Lagrangian
representation of rigid bodies to a fluctuating finite-volume fluid solver.
Unlike commonly-used methods based on Green's functions, we rely on an explicit-
fluid fluctuating hydrodynamics formulation in which we add a stochastic stress
tensor to the usual viscous stress tensor. We will handle complex rigid (e.g.,
synthetic nanorods) and semi-rigid (e.g., short DNA segments) bodies by
composing each structure from a collection of spherical particles constrained to
move (semi)rigidly. The underlying fluctuating hydrodynamics formulation
automatically ensures the correct translational and rotational Brownian motion.
The novel methods developed in this project will build upon prior work by the
PIs and enable simulations of the long-time diffusive (Brownian) dynamics of the
immersed structures. In particular, we will develop, implement, and apply
computational methods that: (1) do not employ time splitting and are thus
suitable for the steady Stokes (viscous-dominated or low Reynolds number)
regime; (2) strictly enforce the rigidity constraint; and, (3) ensure
fluctuation-dissipation balance in the overdamped limit even in the presence of
nontrivial boundary conditions.
