
* 1418784
* Numerical Analysis of Selected Variational and Quasi-variational Inequalities
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2014,08/07/2014
* Abner Salgado,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 134,265.00

Unilateral and constrained phenomena are ubiquitous in science and engineering.
The quantities that govern a physical process are often subject to constraints:
Be it of mechanical, physical, thermodynamical or practical nature. Examples of
these can be impenetrability conditions (two bodies cannot be at the same place
at the same time), the fact that mass cannot be negative and that entropy cannot
decrease or simply the fact that we are not able to produce more than a fixed
amount of forcing. In addition, many of these constraints might depend on the
quantities of interest themselves (e.g. friction). One final example is
mechanical contact which is, in fact, the only mechanism through which we can
exert any mechanical action on another body. These examples show that the
derivation of realistic models for the description of these phenomena is of
fundamental importance in applications. However these models will be, as a rule,
nonlinear. The development and analysis of numerical techniques for
approximating the solution of these problems is of practical relevance.

The models that govern constrained phenomena carry the name of variational and
quasi-variational inequalities. This proposal aims at the study of numerical
techniques for a collection of variational and quasi-variational inequalities
which have not been considered before and to which the classical ideas and
techniques do not apply. They include: variational inequalities for nonlocal
operators, evolution problems for degenerate parabolic equations and the general
study of time discretization techniques for quasi-variational inequalities. The
numerical methods that will result from this project will be of interest to a
wide range of practitioners, since the proposed problems have a wide range of
applications. For instance, obstacle problems with fractional diffusion appear
in control theory, fluid mechanics and even finance; the degenerate parabolic
equations that will be considered find applications in imaging and materials
science; the prototypical example of a quasi-variational inequality is friction,
but they also arise in game theory - when trying to find Nash points - and in
control theory when dealing with impulse controls.
