
* 1418779
* Multiscale Basis Dictionaries and Best Bases for Data Analysis on Graphs and Networks
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,07/18/2016
* Naoki Saito,CA,University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 475,000.00

In recent years, the advent of new sensors, measurement technologies, and social
network infrastructure has provided huge opportunities to visualize complicated
interconnected network structures and record data of interest at various
locations in such networks. Consequently, there is an explosion of interest and
demand to analyze such data and make inferences, predictions, and diagnostics.
Examples of such data include, but are not limited to: biology and medicine
(e.g., blood flow rates in a network of blood vessels); computer and social
sciences (e.g., information flows in social networks); electrical engineering
(e.g., sensor networks); hydrology and geology (e.g., river flow measurements in
a ramified river network); and civil engineering (e.g., traffic flow on a road
network). The investigator and his team will develop mathematical and
computational tools referred to as "multiscale basis dictionaries" on a given
graph, which will have a positive impact in solving practical data analysis
problems on graphs and networks in diverse fields as listed above. In
particular, these dictionaries will be able to capture subtle features
discriminating anomalous events from normal events on graphs, which may shed
light on underlying causes of such anomalies. Students engaged in this project
will be trained to be the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists who
have deep knowledge in one area yet have open mind to the other areas and try to
actively seek collaborations with domain experts. Such an attitude and a
perspective will be indispensable for their future career, either in academia or
in industry.

The goal of this project is to develop above-mentioned multiscale basis
dictionaries and best bases selected from such dictionaries for graphs and
networks, and demonstrate the usefulness by examining their performance on a
variety of data analysis tasks on graphs and networks such as compression,
denoising, semi-supervised learning, and anomaly detection. Mathematical and
computational tools for analyzing such datasets, particularly for those on
directed graphs, have not been well developed. For more conventional data
supported on simple Euclidean domains and data sampled on regular lattices,
harmonic analysis tools such as Fourier and wavelet transforms as well as
multiscale basis dictionaries, e.g., wavelet packets and local trigonometric
transforms, have a proven track record of success. This project can be viewed as
the continuing effort of the investigator to transfer and extend these
computational harmonic analysis tools from the realm of regular lattices and
simple Euclidean domains to more general graph domains. The multiscale basis
dictionaries for graphs including a complete Haar-Walsh basis dictionary will
certainly enrich the current collection of data analysis tools on such domains
because these dictionaries contain a huge number of possible bases from which
one can quickly select a basis most suitable for a given task via the best-basis
selection algorithm. In particular, any addition of mathematical and
computational tools for data analysis on directed graphs is well rewarded since
there are comparably few tools available despite their practical importance.
This is partly because so many classes of directed graphs exist, and
consequently, there has been confusion over the definitions of graph Laplacian
matrices. Instead, this project provides a new viewpoint: on a directed graph,
the connectivity between any two vertices are not a local concept; rather it is
a global concept. Finding a shortest path connecting a given pair of vertices
provides critical information on a directed graph. To utilize such information
fully, spectral analysis of the distance matrices and the associated integral
operators on a directed graph is performed using the singular value
decomposition instead of analyzing the graph Laplacians using the
eigendecomposition.
