
* 1418928
* Collaborative Research: Determining Forms and Data Assimilation with Stochastic Data
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2014,08/15/2014
* Eric Olson,NV,Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 119,784.00

Among the numerous factors that make accurate weather forecasting a challenge is
initialization. The finite number of data collecting instruments distributed
about the globe and atmosphere give only an incomplete description of the state
of the weather at any instant. Yet there is a wealth of such data over an
extended time period in the past, which when combined with certain mathematical
models can provide a more complete description. The general procedure for this
is called data assimilation. It provides more accurate starting values for
computer simulations of the weather going into the future. This award funds
research into a new method of data assimilation that is flexible enough to be
combined with a variety of simulation techniques. The work will concern both the
implementation of this method, and the effect of measurement errors in the data,
which inevitably occur. The assimilation process leads to another mathematical
model that can be used to cleanse the past data of such noise. In this second
direction, the goal is not to obtain a higher resolution condition for starting
a simulation for the future, but to reconstruct a highly resolved version over
the time period of the original data. This has natural applications in voice and
pattern recognition.

The research team will implement a recent data assimilation algorithm based on
feedback control for several important physical systems. The approach can be
applied with a variety of determining parameters, such as nodal values, and
finite volume elements. The team will also carry out computations with a new
determining form based on feedback control. The steady states of this ordinary
differential equation are precisely the finite-dimensional projections of
trajectories in the global attractor. The team will study both computationally
and analytically the effects of stochastic perturbations in the data. In the
case of the data assimilation algorithm, the plan is to quantify and control the
effect of the noise on the highly resolved state to be used in a subsequent
direct numerical simulation. In the case of the determining form, the idea is to
use its evolutionary process to remove the noise from the data itself.
