
* 1418752
* Numerical algorithms for nonlinear subsurface flow and transport
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2014,05/24/2016
* Todd Arbogast,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 365,000.00

Assessment, design, and monitoring of human activities involving reservoirs and
aquifers in the Earth's subsurface require large-scale computer simulation of
flow and transport processes over long time periods. Such simulations are used
to guide scientists and engineers regarding, e.g., petroleum production,
groundwater management, and secure storage of wastes such as carbon dioxide and
nuclear contaminants. Computer simulation of the subsurface environment is
especially important because it is largely inaccessible to direct observation
and therefore also difficult or impossible to rectify human failures. The
project involves fundamental research and education on immiscible, two-phase
subsurface flow. This project has the potential for significantly greater
fidelity simulations by properly accounting for the nonlinearly coupled behavior
of the physical processes embodied in the governing equations, and the numerical
algorithms should work well on modern supercomputers. Moreover, many models of
scientific and engineering interest consist of similar nonlinearly coupled flow
and transport systems, and so general progress here is likely to support efforts
more broadly. The project will fund the research of two STEM Ph.D. graduate
students and involve at least two undergraduate students. They will work in the
Center for Subsurface Modeling of the Institute for Computational Engineering
and Sciences, which provides an interdisciplinary environment mixing expertise
in mathematics, computational science, petroleum engineering, and geological
science. The students will be prepared for employment opportunities in academia,
government laboratories, and industry. External collaborations will enhance the
impact of the project.

The project involves fundamental research on and development of new algorithms
for nonlinear, coupled systems of partial differential equations with algebraic
constraints. The target system to be addressed is immiscible, two-phase
subsurface flow, which is used for numerical simulation of the movement of
underground fluids. The project emphasizes the highly nonlinear physical
processes of flow and transport, and how they influence each other. The
objectives of the project are: (1) Improved numerical algorithms of mixed type
for approximation of nonlinear flow within a multi-scale, heterogeneous porous
medium when coupled to a transport model; (2) Development of Eulerian-Lagrangian
Weighted Essentially Non-Oscillatory numerical algorithms for multi-dimensional,
nonlinear transport when coupled to a nonlinear flow model; (3) Demonstration of
the effectiveness of the algorithms in specific applications such as petroleum
production, groundwater management, and carbon sequestration; and (4) Education
and training of two graduate and two undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary setting. The project is expected to result in significantly
better numerical approximations of subsurface flow and transport, even over very
long time periods. Project success will be seen by the development of numerical
algorithms that preserve mass locally, produce little to no overshoots or
undershoots, exhibit low levels of numerical diffusion, and are of high order
and accurate on coarse computational meshes. They will require a significantly
relaxed CFL time-step restriction for stability. Most importantly, the methods
will be shown to work well for the nonlinearly coupled system, in that the two
systems will complement each other in terms of accuracy and efficiency.
