
* 1418961
* Collaborative Research: Efficient High-Order Parallel Algorithms for Large-Scale Photonics Simulation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2014,08/11/2016
* Andreas Kloeckner,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 209,999.00

The focus of this research project is to develop efficient, accurate, and
scalable computational techniques and provide much-needed simulation design
tools for the photonics industry. More and more of modern life is based on fast
and cheap communication. The transmission of information by electrical circuitry
is limited in latency by power concerns and in bandwidth by cost. Photonic
circuits virtually eliminate these constraints and provide a way to make high-
bandwidth, low-latency interconnects that are, in many applications, far
superior to their electric counterparts. But photonic circuits are extremely
challenging to design. Indeed, the current state-of-art integrated photonic
circuits chip contains only hundreds of photonic components due to the lack of
efficient and reliable tools for the design of integrated photonic circuits. The
difficulty here is that the design of integrated photonic devices requires
accurate simulation of propagating electromagnetic waves which, in turn,
requires extremely large numbers of unknowns even for modest accuracy in a
volume discretization. The tools developed by this project will address these
important challenges.

The fundamental mathematical model for most photonics applications consists of
Maxwell's equations with complex, structured material coefficients under wide
variation of feature length scales. At computational scales feasible for a
design engineer, existing techniques are too inaccurate for the design of
complex photonic devices. This inaccuracy/inefficiency trade-off severely limits
the usefulness of simulation in a design feedback loop. It further represents an
impediment to the rapid development of the photonics industry since design
iteration through manufacturing is typically very expensive and can take months
of turn-around time on a single design. Lifting this inefficiency constraint is
challenging, and it has the potential to play a pivotal role in the development
of ambitious photonic circuits and devices. The investigators propose to develop
the following techniques to overcome the obstacles encountered in practical,
large-scale photonics simulation. (1) Modularization of photonic device
simulation via boundary integral equation methods. Specifically, the so-called
mode calculation will be converted to a nonlinear eigenvalue problem of boundary
integral equations, and the so-called propagation problem will be converted to a
standard scattering problem and then solved via boundary integral equation
methods. (2) Extension of the QBX method ("Quadrature by Expansion"), a general-
purpose, high order quadrature scheme to treat three-dimensional problems with
domains having corners, edges and multi-scale structures for accurate photonics
simulation. (3) Seamless combination of the QBX method with a novel variant of
the Fast Multipole Method (FMM) to solve integral equations in a matrix-free
form with near optimal operation and storage requirements.
