
* 1418787
* Dynamical Systems on Tensor Approximations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,07/27/2014
* Martin Mohlenkamp,OH,Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 210,000.00

Functions of many variables arise in numerous mathematical, statistical, and
scientific problems; a particularly notable example is the multiparticle
Schrodinger equation in quantum mechanics. The effort required to compute in a
straightforward way with such functions grows extremely rapidly as the number of
variables increases, and soon becomes prohibitive. Mathematical methods have
been developed that in some cases allow one to compute without this rapid
growth, but crucial parts of the method are poorly understood and unreliable.
This project seeks to understand and then fix these crucial parts. Students will
be actively involved in the project and so learn mathematics and how to conduct
mathematical research; they will also develop skills in writing, presenting
seminars and posters, and software development and usage.

A mathematical study will be conducted on the approximation of tensors using
sums of separable tensors and the approximation of multivariate functions using
sums of separable functions. The objectives are to understand (1) how such
approximations behave and (2) how such approximations can be effectively
computed. The method is to consider iterative tensor approximation algorithms as
dynamical systems to probe the set of sum-of-separable tensors and to understand
the behavior of the algorithm within this set. The approximation of tensors by
sums of separable tensors enables a promising computational paradigm for
bypassing the curse of dimensionality when working with functions of many
variables. This project addresses a bottleneck, in understanding and in
computation, that prevents the computational paradigm from achieving its full
potential.
