
* 1418853
* Theory and Implementation of Novel Numerical Methods for Equations with Singularities
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,07/29/2014
* Hengguang Li,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 152,805.00

Elliptic partial differential equations are essential mathematical models in
various scientific disciplines, and the development of methods for approximating
solutions of these equations has been a central focus of computational
mathematics. The performance of numerical methods in general depends on the
smoothness of the solutions under study. Quite common in practical applications,
singularities in the solution can severely deteriorate the efficacy of the
numerical approximation. Addressing major concerns in scientific computations,
the study of finite element methods for singular solutions has led to many
effective algorithms, but most of them are for two-dimensional singular
problems. The area of finite element approximations for three-dimensional
singular solutions is much less explored and much more challenging. Due to the
anisotropic multiscale character of the singularity and the complexity of three-
dimensional geometry, the existing methods are complicated and difficult to
implement and are still missing some critical pieces of theoretical analysis.
This project will significantly improve the effectiveness of existing numerical
simulations in many areas where multi-dimensional computations are essential.
These areas include aircraft design in aerospace engineering, crack propagation
in mechanical engineering, elastography in medical imaging, Black-Scholes models
in finance, modeling of fluids and of electromagnetic fields, and computation
for the Schr√∂dinger equation in quantum mechanics.

In this project, the PI proposes a systematic research on finite element methods
(FEMs) for singular solutions of elliptic PDEs, especially in 3D. Targeting
fundamental theoretical and numerical issues, this research has two main
components. (I) Innovative numerical advancements: the development of new 3D
meshing algorithms. Simple, explicit, and well structured, these meshes can
effectively capture the local behavior of the singular solution and lead to
optimal FEMs. (II) Rigorous theoretical investigations: (1) sharp regularity
estimates in new function spaces; (2) sharp error analysis in energy and non-
energy norms on both 2D graded meshes and the proposed 3D meshes; (3) fast
multigrid-based numerical solvers on these meshes; (4) a-posteriori estimates on
the proposed 3D meshes and extensions to other 3D PDEs with singularities.
Pushing forward the frontier of the FEMs for 3D singular solutions, this
proposed research will bring new ideas to the development of novel numerical
algorithms for 3D PDEs with broader applications. In addition, the sharp non-
energy error estimates and a-posteriori analysis can provide theoretical
justifications for nonlinear models and optimization control problems.
