
* 1418724
* Highly Scalable Algorithms and Solvers for Eigen-Problems: Unconstrained Optimization and Multiple Power Iterations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2014,06/29/2014
* Yin Zhang,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 240,000.00

In today's big-data era, many organizations are facing the challenge of making
sense of or use of massive datasets collected or flowing in at unprecedented
rates. The first step is often to reduce the size of data to a manageable level
by extracting essence and removing redundancy. Many techniques for data
reduction and information extraction rely on so-called "principal component
analysis" which requires intensive mathematical calculations. As data size keeps
growing fast, such intensive computations need to be carried out on high-
performance parallel computers that are able to execute a large number of
independent tasks simultaneously. Currently, bottlenecks have appeared in
commonly used mathematical methods that prevent big tasks from being broken up
into enough independent small pieces to be quickly handled in parallel. In other
words, the current mathematical methods have encountered difficulty in
scalability. To break through the bottlenecks, this scalability issues must be
attacked by devising new methodologies. This project proposes a few new
approaches of higher scalability. Preliminary experiments have demonstrated
clear promises, offering multi-fold speedups on a wide class of problems even on
commodity computers. Careful theoretical and experimental investigations will be
carried out in this project to fully develop the proposed methodologies.

Computing a relatively large number of principal eigenpairs or singular pairs of
large-scale matrices (or data sets) is a fundamental computational problem with
wide-ranging applications, especially in today's big-data information era. Fast-
increasing problem sizes and ever-evolving computer architectures have posed new
algorithmic challenges. A constant challenge is to reach for higher algorithm
concurrency in order to solve critical application problems on massively
parallel computers. Currently, the main bottleneck to high scalability lies in
the combined tasks of Rayleigh-Ritz and orthogonalization (RR/Orth, in short)
that are heavily used by most state-of-the-art eigensolvers. The proposed
research is to explore new strategies for developing highly parallel and
scalable algorithms. A key idea is to reduce the use of RR/Orth operations in
exchange for operations of higher concurrency. One approach makes use of
unconstrained optimization formulations without orthogonality constraint so
that, in principle, reasonable unconstrained optimization algorithms can be used
without needing RR/Orth operations; another approach utilizes a simple but
embarrassingly parallel procedure called multi-power method (MPM). Preliminary
theoretical and numerical results are presented to demonstrate the potential of
these approaches. In particular, the MPM approach has been empirically shown to
achieve an "optimal performance" under reasonable conditions. It remains
challenging to attain robustness and efficiency levels comparable to those of
state-of-the-art eigensolvers.
