
* 1418962
* Modeling Nanoscale Fluid-Solid Interfaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2014,06/27/2017
* Nikolaos Voulgarakis,WA,Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 151,170.00

Computational modeling of fluid-solid interfaces at the macroscale has long
since crossed the boundary of pure academic interest to become an essential tool
for industry. Sectors such as aerospace, automotive, medical, and chemical
manufacturing routinely design, test, and optimize their products using one of
the many inexpensive software packages that are now available. Unfortunately,
these macroscale methodologies are not applicable at the nanoscale. The forces
dominating the fluid-solid interfacial processes at the nanoscale are quite
different and more complex than those at the macroscale. The ability to model
such nanoscale interactions could find broad use in nanotechnology,
biotechnology, and materials science, three of the primary areas of Federal
strategic interest. Understanding, for example, how the size of some types of
nanoparticles affect their reactivity with fluidic environments can lead to the
production of significantly more effective materials for energy storage and
conversion (batteries). The goal of this project is to develop mathematical
models capable of describing nanoscale fluid-solid interfaces, culminating in
the development of open-source software for general-purpose simulations of
nanoscale motion and energy transfer. Similar to macroscale systems, where
automotive engineers, for instance, use software packages to design cars, it is
expected that this project will grow to become an essential computational design
tool for nanoscale motion that will help scientists create nanomachines capable
of delivering drugs to pathogenic cells, for example.

This research project aims to develop a multiscale-multiphysics methodology to
simulate nanoscale fluid-solid interfacial processes and their effects on
nanoscale motion. The specific objectives of the project are: (1) The
development of a novel field-particle methodology, which will concurrently
describe three of the most dominant forces at the nanoscale: thermal
fluctuations, viscosity, and surface tension. With this approach, structures and
fluctuating fluid are coupled directly through excluded volume effects and
hydrodynamic forces without the imposition of boundary conditions. (2) The
coupling of first-principles kinetic Monte Carlo methods with fluctuating
hydrodynamics to describe nanoscale energy transduction and transfer from
heterogeneous catalytic surfaces to the surrounding fluid environment. (3) To
overcome computational efficiency challenges typically present in multiscale
multi-domain approaches by the integration of algorithms in a large-scale
parallel code for nanoscale computational fluid dynamics. This method will be
applied to study how energy released from catalytic nanostructures can be
utilized to achieve controlled nanoscale motion. Although the primary focus of
this research is controlled nanoscale motion, the algorithms and software
developed are expected to have an important multidisciplinary impact to other
topics, such as nanocatalysis and drug delivery. The method developed in this
project will be transformative to current fluid-solid interaction methodologies
since it makes the realization of active and dynamic interfacial processes
possible without the implementation of boundary conditions or computationally
expensive techniques for tracking interfaces. Hydrophobic forces, wetting-
dewetting phenomena, stochastic electrokinetics, and other out-of-thermodynamic
equilibrium transfer processes between solids and fluids will be incorporated
into traditional computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methodologies. The research
results will be a rational extension of CFD to the nanoscale where interfacial
and stochastic processes cannot be ignored. The large-scale parallel software
for nanoscale motion will be released to the scientific community and is
expected to help pave the way toward advanced computer-based approaches for
designing moving nano structures.
