
* 1419103
* Multivariate splines in algebra, analysis, and combinatorics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,09/05/2016
* Amos Ron,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 410,000.00

This research project is at the interface among multiple sub-disciplines of
mathematics: analysis, approximation theory, and data representation on the one
hand; combinatorics and algebra on the other hand. The research involves the
construction of a new spline class. Past mathematical research on the theory and
practice of spline functions led to some of the most significant contributions
of the mathematical community to science and technology. Splines have become
indispensable tools in computer-aided design and manufacturing of cars and
airplanes, in the production of printers' typesets, in automated cartography, in
the production of movies, and in many other areas, often concealed at the core
of elaborate software packages. This project will merge knowledge and skills
from disparate areas of mathematics to provide new multivariate spline
constructions as well as new theoretical results in algebra and geometry.

Spline functions are piecewise-polynomials in one or several variables.
Zonotopal algebra is a mathematical methodology that encodes combinatorial and
geometric properties in rich algebraic and analytic structures. It presently
handles the special polytope known as a zonotope and its dual hyperplane
arrangement. At its core one finds the spline theory known as box splines,
splines that are defined over zonotopes, arguably the most successful spline
theory in several variables. Zonotopal algebra and its associated box splines
are connected to a myriad of topics inside and outside mathematics, including
approximation, wavelets, subdivision, matroids, graphs, algebraic geometry and
more. There is evidence that zonotopal algebra should have a pair of spline
constructs: box splines and another spline class over the dual geometry. This
project aims to recover this additional class, in particular through extending
zonotopal algebra to a class of polytopes that are invariant under group
actions. Embedding such invariance into zonotopal algebra and understanding the
correct algebraic structures and spline constructions over these non-commutative
geometries is another goal of this project.
