
* 1419060
* Hierarchical model reduction techniques for incompressible fluid dynamics and fluid-structure interaction problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2014,06/29/2014
* Alessandro Veneziani,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 248,384.00

Networks perfused by fluids are found in several engineering applications,
ranging from hydrogeology, oil distribution, and internal combustion engines to
hemodynamics. A quantitative analysis of these problems is of utmost interest
for understanding fluid dynamics in the network, for predicting effects of local
changes on the network (for instance, the effects of a surgical operation over
the fluid dynamics in the arterial tree), and for optimizing flow distribution.
Mathematical description and numerical approximation of these problems are
challenging when coupling the accurate description of local dynamics with the
large scale of the network. This proposal investigates a novel numerical method
to undertake the quantitative analysis of fluid dynamics in complex networks
called HiMod (Hierarchical Model Reduction). The primary (but not exclusive)
application is the physiopathology of the arterial system, including in the
mathematical model up to almost 2000 segments of the network. Several specific
properties of this method need to be investigated for its development and
engineering. The research provides a graduate student the opportunity of working
on advanced mathematical and numerical techniques - including theoretical as
well as practical aspects - in a truly interdisciplinary framework with frequent
contacts with engineers and doctors expected to be the end users of these
methodologies.

Network of pipes are often modeled by assembling simplified equations describing
each segment, like the well known Euler equations. Originally proposed for blood
flow (incompressible fluid in compliant pipes) they have been extensively used
in gas dynamics - for instance - in internal combustion engines (compressible
fluid in rigid pipes). These equations are the result of several approximations
to reduce the fully 3D mathematical model to a 1D set of hyperbolic equations.
Unfortunately, this model reduction prevents proper capture the local features
of the network that affects the global dynamics. The HiMod approach moves from a
different perspective. We couple different numerical approximation techniques
along the mainstream and the transversal directions. We use a finite element
approximation for the mainstream and a spectral or modal approximation
transversally. The number of modes can be locally and adaptively tuned to get
the best possible trade-off between accuracy and computational efficiency. The
rationale is that a relatively small number of modes is enough to guarantee good
accuracy for the transversal dynamics, leading to a system of 1D problems
(called a "psychologically 1D" model). Moving from preliminary promising studies
for advection-diffusion problems, in this proposal we aim at developing the
method for the 3D incompressible Navier-Stokes equations and fluid-structure
interaction problems. Inf-sup stability and accuracy of the HiMod discretization
as well as its role as preconditioner of the full problem will be investigated,
together with adaptive techniques for the appropriate (automatic) selection of
the transversal modes.
