
* 1419105
* Collaborative Research: Construction, Analysis, Implementation and Application of New Efficient Exponential Integrators
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 09/01/2014,08/24/2017
* Mayya Tokman,CA,University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,977.00

As the scale and complexity of scientific and engineering problems grow,
computer simulations become a necessary and integral part of the vast majority
of research endeavors. An ability to create a computer model of a process under
investigation, whether it comes from physics, economics, biology or some other
field, provides not only significant cost savings for a study, but also brings
insights inaccessible through experimental procedures alone. The growing
complexity with which we describe phenomena of interest requires increasingly
more sophisticated computer models. In particular, it is important to be able to
simulate many complex processes over very long times, which is a computationally
intensive and challenging task. This project is focused on developing new
computational methods that allow simulating and studying time evolving phenomena
from a wide range of scientific and engineering disciplines over long time
intervals of interest. The mathematical and computer tools created during this
project will enable researchers to study problems at a scale and complexity not
possible with currently available computational tools.

This project will advance the state-of-the-art in both the theory and practice
of time discretization methods. In the course of the project a complete
theoretical framework and high performance implementations of the new generation
of exponential time integrators will be developed. The new methods will
significantly improve computational efficiency of numerical models in many
important areas of science and engineering, and will enable simulations at a
scale and complexity that are not currently possible. The research will advance
core numerical analysis through the development and study of new classes of
exponential propagation iterative (EPI) methods such as split, hybrid,
partitioned, and Krylov-based techniques. In addition, specialized efficient
schemes will be designed and optimized for a wide range of problems. The
theoretical work will be complemented by the creation of a mathematical software
package that will provide high quality implementations of the most efficient
exponential integrators to the broad scientific community.
