
* 1500067
* Conference on Multiscale Modeling with Partial Differential Equations in Computational Science and Engineering
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2015,05/16/2017
* Salim Haidar,MI,Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,590.00

This award supports participation in a regional conference on the topic of
multiscale modeling. The conference is organized by the Great Lakes Section of
the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) and will take place at
Grand Valley State University in Grand Rapids, MI on May 2, 2015. Multiscale
modeling from atomistic to macro scales, which is at the core of computational
science and engineering (CSE), has affected almost every modern industry and all
disciplines of basic science, engineering, as well as social sciences. To bridge
gaps in communication among mathematics, statistics, computer science,
environmental science, basic science, engineering, and industry, the 2015 Annual
Conference of the Great Lakes Section of SIAM (GLS-SIAM) brings together
researchers in CSE to foster advanced discovery and understanding of multiscale
modeling, while promoting training in CSE. The conference features a series of
keynote talks by world-leading researchers in CSE that address current
challenges and opportunities in advanced multiscale simulations. The conference
has significant impact for the establishment of CSE-related research activities
and training in the Great Lakes area.

In recent years, modeling and simulation of multiscale phenomena have attracted
enormous attention from the mathematical and scientific research communities,
with profound positive impact on transcendent technologies and future product
development in both academia and industry. These modeling problems are
characterized by having multiple scales of length and time, interactions among
multiple phenomena or components, generation of truly big data, and unknown
levels of uncertainty. They require innovative approaches to be able to
formulate accurate, reliable models to bridge the macro-nano-molecular-atomic
scales by capturing the complex dynamic interactions that are vital to the
simulation of any real device and to the optimization of design-cycle times.
However, this systematic multiscale framework presents central mathematical and
scientific challenges both in theory and computation required for successfully
combining models or coupling algorithms across various scales. This conference
shall provide a forum for scientists to communicate their new findings in
multiscale modeling, and furthermore, to develop new collaboration in research
and student training. The conference website is http://www.gvsu.edu/siamgls2015/
