
* 1500254
* Collaborative Research: Algebra and Algorithms, Structure and Complexity Theory
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, FOUNDATIONS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Special Projects - CCF
* 09/15/2015,05/03/2019
* Keith Kearnes,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 144,199.00

This project is a collaboration between mathematical researchers at five
universities, including young mathematicians at the early stages of their
careers, who are joining forces to tackle fundamental problems at the confluence
of mathematical logic, algebra, and computer science. The overall goal is to
deepen understanding about how to recognize the complexity of certain types of
computational problems. The project focuses on a suite of mathematical problems
whose solutions will yield new information about the complexity of Constraint
Satisfaction Problems. These problems (CSP's) include scheduling problems,
resource allocation problems, and problems reducible to solving systems of
linear equations. CSP's are theoretically solvable, but some are not solvable
efficiently. The research will be aimed at identifying a clear boundary between
the tractable and intractable cases, and at providing efficient algorithms for
solutions in the tractable cases. Many fundamental problems in mathematics and
computer science can be formulated as CSP's, and progress here would have both
practical and theoretical significance. A second component of the project
investigates classical computational problems in algebra in order to determine
whether they are algorithmically solvable. A third component of the project is
the further development of the software UACalc, which is a proof assistant
developed to handle computations involving algebraic structures.

The researchers shall work to decide the truth of the CSP Dichotomy Conjecture
of Feder and Vardi, which states that every Constraint Satisfaction Problem with
a finite template is solvable in polynomial time or is NP complete. They will
further develop the algebraic approach to CSP's by refining knowledge about
relations compatible with weak idempotent Maltsev conditions and about algebras
with finitely related clones. A second goal of the project concerns the
computable recognition of properties of finite algebras connected with the
varieties they generate, such as whether a finite algebra with a finite residual
bound is finitely axiomatizable, or whether a finite algebra can serve as the
algebra of character values for a natural duality. One of the more tangible
accomplishments of this project will be a broadening and strengthening of the
applicability of the UACalc software. The agenda for this part of the project
includes parallelizing the important subroutines, building in conjecture-testing
and search features, adding further algorithms, and further developing the
community of users and contributors.
