
* 1518925
* Problems in mathematical foundations of adaptive finite element methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,03/11/2015
* Alan Demlow,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 166,752.00

A posteriori error estimates and adaptive finite element methods (AFEM) are
widely-used tools for solving partial differential equations (PDEs) arising in
science and engineering applications. A posteriori estimates provide computable
bounds on discretization errors, while AFEM are efficient solution techniques
which accurately reflect solution properties via automatic local mesh grading.
The goals of this project are to better understand the mathematical
underpinnings of AFEM and to provide new a posteriori error estimates and
adaptive algorithms in several specific application areas. A major part of the
project is devoted to development and analysis of a posteriori error estimates
and AFEM for PDEs on surfaces. Specific projects concern Eulerian formulations
of parabolic PDEs on evolving surfaces, solution of elliptic PDEs on surfaces
for which the only available information is a discrete approximation, and
elliptic eigenvalue problems. Another emphasis is fine properties of FEM, in
particular the development of a priori and a posteriori error estimates in
nonstandard norms. The PI will develop new a priori error estimates in such
norms on the types of highly graded meshes typically seen in practice, prove new
a posteriori maximum-norm bounds for elliptic interface problems, and integrate
similar error analysis into his study of surface eigenvalue problems.

A wide variety of applications in science and engineering give rise to partial
differential equations (PDEs) which must be solved in order to obtain accurate
predictions about the physical world. PDEs are typically solved approximately on
computers in modern applications, and there is a tradeoff between the quality of
the approximate solution and the investment of computational resources. The PI
will study the mathematical underpinnings of adaptive algorithms which
automatically generate more accurate solutions while efficiently employing the
computing power at hand. Part of the project is aimed at enriching mathematical
understanding of existing algorithms, and part to developing new and
mathematically well-justified adaptive algorithms for various applications.
