
* 1519934
* High-Order Added-Mass Partitioned Algorithms for Fluid-Structure Interaction Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,06/27/2017
* William Henshaw,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 270,000.00

This research project will dramatically improve computer algorithms used for the
simulation of important problems in applied science, engineering, and bio-
medicine, such as the modeling of blood flow in human veins, which provides
critical data to evaluate surgical procedures and to design medical devices and
implants. The area of fluid-structure interaction (i.e. coupling fluids with
deforming solids), which this project addresses, is of current and growing
interest due to its importance in many areas of engineering and applied science,
including not only bio-medicine but also the modeling of flow-induced vibrations
of structures (aircraft, undersea cables, wind turbines, buildings), wave energy
devices, parachutes and airbags, acoustic lenses, thermal expansion in nuclear
reactor cores, and shock-structure interactions (blast effects). Computing
accurate solutions of fluid-structure interaction problems efficiently is very
challenging due to their complex physical and geometrical properties, but also
due to challenging mathematical issues. The new techniques developed by this
project will address both these challenges.

A wide class of important fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems are
difficult to simulate due to the so-called added mass instability. The focus of
the research is on FSI problems coupling incompressible flow with elastic or
rigid structures. Of particular interest are problems in which the mass of the
fluid and that of the structure are similar, such as in applications of
hemodynamics, where added-mass effects are strong. The overarching goal of this
project is to develop stable and high-order accurate partitioned algorithms for
FSI problems that overcome the numerical difficulties associated with complex
fluid-solid couplings and strong added-mass effects. These algorithms will be
based on newly devised Added-Mass Partitioned (AMP) schemes that represent a
conceptual breakthrough in the field by providing a path forward to develop
accurate schemes for fluid-structure interaction problems. An important property
of AMP schemes is that they remain stable even for light solids when added-mass
effects are significant. The new algorithms will be incorporated into a flexible
computational framework that will allow efficient simulations for wide class of
complex fluid-structure interaction problems.
