
* 1521563
* Multiscale multilevel iterative substructuring
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2015,09/01/2015
* Bedrich Sousedik,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,920.00

The PI will develop novel algorithms that can be used for the simulation of flow
through porous media in real-world reservoir models. The simulation of flow in
porous media finds applications in a number of areas, such as water management,
oil and gas recovery, carbon dioxide (CO2) sequestration, and nuclear waste
disposal, to name a few. The underlying mathematical models and efficient
numerical simulation is challenging due to several aspects. The reservoirs are
typically very large, so the discretized mathematical model leads to systems of
equations with hundreds of millions of unknowns, they have irregular structure,
which complicates the model geometry, and they consist of materials that
significantly differ in geological properties, which translates in the model to
jumps in coefficients over several orders of magnitude. Moreover, the geological
formations quite often also contain fractures that alter the effective
permeabilities, and therefore need to be be accurately incorporated into the
numerical model. For example, the flow of water in granite rock, which
represents one of the suitable sites for nuclear waste deposit, is conducted by
the complex system of vugs, cavities and fractures with various topology and
sizes. Alternatively, the fractures might result from the engineering
activities, for example hydraulic fracturing (also known as fracking) used for
the extraction of natural gas.

The PI will develop novel algorithms for solving saddle-point linear systems
combining numerical upscaling techniques with parallel, domain decomposition
iterative solvers. There are many aspects of multiscale and domain decomposition
methods that are quite well understood, but the major drawback of current
methodologies is that they do not take full advantage of their potential by
using the multiscale phenomena in the design of the solvers, which results in
their inefficiency. Multiscale methods also frequently consist in fact only of
two scales, whereas in a porous medium there are typically many scales. At the
same time, advances in multicore architectures, networking, high end computers,
and large data stores, are ushering in a new era of high performance parallel
and distributed simulations. Naturally, with these new capabilities come new
challenges in computing and system modeling. The goal of this project is to open
new avenues to tackle these issues. In particular, the PI will develop
multiscale methods that allows for a multiple of scales, and uses the upscaling
algorithm to build a multilevel preconditioner for the iterative solver. The
components of the method are thus recycled, which significantly decreases the
computational cost. Moreover, this approach can be applied recursively and thus
naturally offers a multilevel multiscale potential, unlike many traditional
multiscale approaches that consist in fact of only two scales. It is expected
that understanding of the issues related to design of multiscale and multilevel
methods for extremely large problems will ultimately contribute to development
of the next generation of parallel iterative solvers suitable for implementation
on future exascale supercomputers.
