
* 1521537
* Construction of Finite Elements Using Generalized Barycentric Coordinates and Its Application for Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,07/22/2015
* Ming-Jun Lai,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,336.00

Continuous and smooth functions piecewisely defined over a domain which is a
union of polygons or polyhedrons will be studied. These functions are called
polygonal splines. Traditionally, functions defined on a domain consisting of
triangles or tetrahedra were studied and used for many applications such as
scattered data interpolation or fitting and numerical solution of partial
differential equations. These traditional functions called finite elements or
multivariate splines have been playing a significant and successful role in many
applied problems in physics, chemistry, engineering, and biological studies.
Polygonal splines defined on polygons instead of triangles can extend our
ability to handle applied problems over complicated domains more effectively.
For example, polygonal splines over a union of irregular cubes will be more
efficient than trivariate splines or finite elements since each cube has to be
split into at least 5 tetrahedra in order to define finite element or trivariate
spline functions over the cube. There are several fundamental properties one
must understand in order to use them well for applications. For example, how
many basis functions of polygonal splines over a collection of polygons are
there? Another problem is how well polygonal splines can approximate arbitrary
functions.

The finite element method is the fundamental tool for numerical solution of
partial differential equations (PDE) which finds extensive applications in all
applied sciences. The PI will develop a new approach to construct serendipity
finite elements using generalized barycentric coordinates over polygons or
polyhedrons. One of the advantages of serendipity elements is to reduce the
number of elements used for the numerical solution of PDE so that the
computation will be more efficient. Polygonal splines developed in this project
can be constructed over any irregular cubes. The PI will generalize some of the
existing ideas to construct serendipity finite elements over a 3D convex
polyhedron, e.g. irregular cube with six 2D quadrilaterals as its boundary faces
as well as other more general convex polyhedra in the 3D setting. The PI will
implement these serendipity finite elements for some linear and nonlinear PDEs
in the 3D setting. Furthermore, the PI will construct differentiable high order
serendipity elements over convex polygons in 2D and 3D which will be useful for
higher order PDEs.
