
* 1521573
* Advances in Robust Multilevel Preconditioning Methods for Sparse Linear Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Algorithmic Foundations
* 08/01/2015,07/14/2015
* Yousef Saad,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 265,548.00

Scientists and engineers in many disciplines, ranging from mechanical or
aerospace engineering to chemistry and economics, need to solve large linear
systems of equations. These systems are typically 'sparse' in that most of their
entries are zeros. Linear systems that arise from three-dimensional physical
systems are often exceedingly costly to solve by standard direct elimination,
also called direct methods. In such cases, iterative methods, which produce a
sequence of approximations to the solution, become mandatory. These methods have
made important advances in recent years but their lack of robustness when
dealing with a variety of real-life problems remains an issue. Recent research
on so-called Preconditioned Krylov Subspace Methods has aimed at achieving a
good compromise between generality and efficiency by incorporating techniques
from different horizons, including multilevel concepts to improve scalability
and adopting ideas from direct solution methods to improve robustness. At the
same time that these improvements are being deployed, new demands from
challenging applications as well as from the new computational environments are
making obsolete algorithms and computational codes that often took several
decades to mature. The aim of this project is to address these new demands and
the challenges that have emerged for iterative methods in recent years, as well
as to explore other research issues that are of great practical importance.

This project will explore a class of iterative methods for solving linear
systems of equations, emphasizing robustness and scalability issues. The
starting point of the proposed research is to investigate a new set of Multi-
Level Low-Rank (MLR) approximation techniques within Domain-Decomposition (DD)
type methods. MLR preconditioners, especially within the DD framework have a
great potential for a number of reasons. First, because they rely on approximate
inverses, these methods tend to be far more robust than their Incomplete LU
(ILU) counterparts. As such they can be much more effective than existing
methods when dealing with highly indefinite linear systems, e.g., those arising
from wave scattering simulations. Second, MLRs do not require factorizations and
are excellent candidates for high-performance computers, e.g., ones equipped
with Graphical Processing Units (GPUs). Finally, they are easy to update in that
it is inexpensive to augment or refine them in order to improve their accuracy
in the situation when their observed performance is not satisfactory. Different
ways to define low-rank approximations will be explored that are all rooted in
the Domain-Decomposition framework and Schur complement techniques. This project
will also continue to explore standard multi-level preconditioners, placing a
high emphasis on robustness issues. Finally, other important topics related to
the impact of high-performance computing on the one hand and to the development
of effective software on the other will be considered. Among the broader impacts
of this research the project highlights the dissemination of computational
software and the training of students in an area that is of vital and growing
importance. In addition, the PI will continue the practice of freely
disseminating articles, books, lecture notes, and MATLAB scripts for educational
purposes.
