
* 1521965
* Fast and Stable Compact Exponential Time Difference Based Methods for Some Parabolic Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,07/28/2015
* Lili Ju,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 200,954.00

The goal of this project is to develop and analyze fast, stable, and accurate
methods for numerical solutions of a family of parabolic equations that appear
in diverse applications in science and engineering. The research will lead to
production of very efficient and effective computational tools for problems
typified by phase transition modeling, chemical reactions, population dynamics,
cell membrane modeling, molecular beam epitaxy, fluid dynamics, and light
propagation. The well-designed robust high-order algorithms would allow
researchers to accurately catch the dynamics of these systems without high
computational costs. This project also offers new insights into the
understanding of the kinetic processes of microstructure coarsening, shape
transformation of membrane lipid vesicles, and epitaxial growth of thin films
through extensive numerical simulations. Graduate students will be directly
involved in and benefit from their participation in the frontier research.
Although exponential time integrator based techniques have been widely
researched in the literature for solving semilinear or nonlinear parabolic
equations of different orders, there still lack careful numerical and
theoretical studies on accurate and stable treatments of stiff nonlinearities,
direct and explicit incorporation of various inhomogeneous boundary conditions,
and corresponding fast implementation algorithms. The methods in this project
are explicit in nature, and they will utilize compact representations of high-
order finite differences or spectral approximations for spatial operators in a
rectangular domain, exponential multistep or Runge-Kutta approximations for
accurate time integrations of boundary and stiff nonlinear terms, linear
splitting schemes for effectively enhancing numerical stabilities, and FFT-based
fast calculations for greatly reducing computational costs. The research will
systematically study several techniques for improving accuracy and efficiency of
the compact exponential time differencing methods in both space and time, and
develop energy stability and error analyses for these schemes. The project will
also generalize and apply these methods to some important problems arising from
the study of some biological and physical phenomena, such as phase field bending
energy models for cell membrane shape transformation and molecular beam epitaxy
models for thin film growth.
