
* 1522687
* Stable, Efficient, Adaptive Algorithms for Approximation and Integration
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,07/12/2017
* Fred Hickernell,IL,Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 270,000.00

Computational methods allow the simulation of experiments that are too costly,
too dangerous, or otherwise infeasible to perform in physical situations.
Examples include evaluating the safety and efficiency of designs for nuclear
reactors, predicting the frequency of breakdowns in power grids, and assessing
the risks and rewards of financial investments. This research project will
develop new ways of computing surrogate models for time-consuming simulations.
These new surrogate models will be quicker to compute, avoid catastrophic
computer error, and more faithfully represent the processes that they are
designed to model. More clever ways of exploring future scenarios will be
developed to decrease the computational time required to find the average, or
the worst possible, behavior of complex systems such as those mentioned. The new
algorithms arising from this research will be made publicly available for other
researchers and practitioners. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in
developing these algorithms will be better prepared for scientific careers.

Function approximation and integration are two fundamental problems in
computational mathematics. This research project will construct algorithms for
function approximation and integration that are computationally stable, avoiding
catastrophic round-off error. These algorithms will be adaptive, determining the
algorithm parameters based on function data to meet the user-specified error
tolerance with rigorous justification. The algorithms will also be
asymptotically efficient, requiring essentially the same computational effort as
the best possible algorithms. Function approximation algorithms will be based on
the Hilbert-Schmidt SVD decomposition that the investigators have developed for
kernel methods. Integration algorithms will be developed that adaptively
determine the sample size required. The investigators will continue to mentor
students as well as post-doctoral scholars and will establish the usefulness of
the algorithms under development through collaborations with domain specialists.
