
* 1522603
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Simulation of the Growth of Graphene Multilayers and Heterostructures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,09/11/2015
* Vivek Shenoy,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports research and educational activities in mathematical and
computational modeling of two-dimensional materials. Motivated by recent
technological advancements in the isolation and transfer of different two-
dimensional materials, such as grapheme and hexagonal boron nitride, the
investigators will focus on two types of problems: heterostructures, where two
materials are brought together in the same plane, and stacked two-dimensional
layers of graphene. Compared to homogeneous monolayers, heterostructures and
stacked layers contain many more degrees of freedom that can be exploited to
fabricate materials with specifically designed electronic, micromechanical and
optical properties. These novel materials have applications in many areas
identified as critical to US strategic interests such as nanotechnology,
information technology, and energy technology. Thus far, efforts in this area
have been mainly experimental, using trial-and-error approaches. The multiscale
mathematical and computational models developed here will make a substantial
contribution to the field by providing a rational framework to optimize the
production process. Further, this framework can be extended to examine other
materials such as arrays of semiconductor quantum dots, and magnetic clusters,
or metal-organic surface networks that are promising candidates for energy
conversion, thermal transport, and other device applications. Two graduate
students will receive interdisciplinary training and will present their findings
at conferences, which will enhance their professional training. Outreach efforts
include teaching high school students as part of the California State Summer
School for Mathematics and Science (COSMOS) at UC Irvine. These efforts will
help develop future generations of scientists.

This project will investigate the nonlinear dynamics of the mechanisms that
govern the growth and morphology of graphene multilayers and heterostructures
and to develop strategies to control its growth by (1) developing and applying
state-of-the-art adaptive numerical methods to large-scale computation and (2)
performing analytical, numerical, and modeling studies of important constituent
processes. The research will provide a novel framework for the rational design
of such materials. A significant challenge is that the structure and morphology
of heterostructures and stacked layers is determined both by atomic-scale
phenomena and by the diffusion of multiple species and elastic interactions over
length scales of hundreds of nanometers. Consequently, no single model is able
to describe all the processes involved in the formation of graphene
heterostructures. The investigators will adopt a multiple-scale approach in
which atomistic and mesoscale algorithms will be developed to determine material
properties and to predict the role of strain in heterostructures and vertically-
stacked sheets as well as the atomic structures and defects. The atomistic
simulations will provide material parameters and forces to new continuum phase
field models that describe the growth of multicomponent in-plane and vertically-
stacked sheets at larger scales. The highly nonlinear nature of these problems
makes fast, accurate, and robust numerical methods essential to their study.
