
* 1522548
* OP: High Order Perturbation of Surfaces Methods for Crossed Surface Plasmon Resonance Sensors: Simulation, Validation, and Design
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2015,07/13/2015
* David Nicholls,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 179,979.00

Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) sensors are a relatively new yet pervasive
technology for measuring biological and chemical interactions. These devices
respond to the change in the refractive index of a structure due to the
occurrence of a biological or chemical reaction. Such a change modifies the
behavior of surface waves at metal-dielectric interfaces within the structure,
which are then measured to form the basis for thousands of highly sensitive and
effective tests for not only chemical and biological species detection, but also
medical diagnosis and environmental measuring. Indeed, a 2008 survey article (J.
Homola, Surface plasmon resonance sensors for detection of chemical and
biological species. Chemical Reviews, 108(2):462Â­493, 2008) lists SPR biosensors
for Food Quality and Safety Analysis (62 listed), Medical Diagnostics (33
listed), and Environmental Monitoring (21 listed). In the decade since the
appearance of this publication the list has grown substantially. This project
shall advance the state of the art in the numerical simulation of these SPR
sensors. The numerical simulation will be validated and verified through direct
collaboration with experimentalists.

The algorithm of "High Order Perturbation of Surfaces" (HOPS) is optimal among
the wide class of potential schemes for simulating solutions of the relevant
model equations. Despite their advantageous properties for the problem at hand,
the HOPS methods require further enhancements for their use by engineers. This
research project aims to develop several improvements. First, the project will
study extensions to the three dimensional, vectorial, multiply layered
configurations of current interest. Second, the project will investigate the
possibility of a joint expansion of the scattered fields in both boundary
deformation and wavenumber. These latter developments will mandate new rigorous
analysis (which this project will deliver) to determine their domain of
applicability. Once these additions have been implemented and tested, these
algorithms will be vaildated against the laboratory experimental results. After
this, the project aims to create an optimization framework to design SPR sensors
with enhanced sensing capabilities. This will involve the design of appropriate
objective functions, followed by the efficient interfacing of the new forward
solvers to state of the art minimization libraries.
