
* 1522629
* Fast Sparse Nonlinear Optimization and Its Application to Optimal Control
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2015,07/31/2017
* William Hager,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,793.00

New computational algorithms will be developed in this project for solving
sparse optimization problems. These are large, complex problems that arise in
science, engineering, and industry where the goal is to operate a large
interconnected system in an efficient way. Applications range from power grids
to air traffic control systems to the fabrication of computer chips. A specific
application developed in the project is to optimal control which has a wide
range of uses including space flight maneuvers, the optimal design of
aerodynamic shapes, and the optimal design of manufacturing processes. The
algorithms developed in the project for the sparse optimization problem provide
solutions much faster and with much greater accuracy than was previously
possible. The computational techniques developed in the project will be built
around a new error estimator, which yields a tight bound for the error in a
solution to an optimization problem in terms of the violation in the first-order
optimality conditions, and a new dual-based approach to polyhedral projection.
At the same time that the error in the solution is estimated, approximations to
the dual multipliers at a stationary point are generated. The new polyhedral
projection algorithm will be incorporated into a new algorithm for polyhedral
constrained nonlinear optimization. With linearization and globalization
techniques, the new algorithms will be used to achieve a fast and accurate
solver for the general sparse constrained nonlinear optimization problem. The
new optimization framework will be used to develop hp-orthogonal collocation
techniques for solving optimal control problems. The research will focus on mesh
refinement techniques for which the fast and accurate optimization solver will
be instrumental in advancing the technology.
