
* 1522656
* Collaborative Research: Reduced Order Modeling of Realistic Noisy Flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,07/28/2015
* Traian Iliescu,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 143,196.00

Many flows in engineering, geophysics, and medicine pose two significant
challenges for computations. First, the computational resources that are
available for the numerical simulations can accommodate only low spatial and
temporal resolutions. Therefore, standard numerical methods usually yield
extremely inaccurate results. To alleviate this, state-of-the-art numerical
methods generally use spatial filtering to eliminate the noise (i.e., numerical
artifacts). The second challenge posed by these realistic flows is that they
require numerous repeated runs (e.g., to determine optimal parameters in
automobile design or cardiovascular flow simulation, or to find appropriate
initial conditions in weather forecasting and climate modeling). These repeated
runs can tremendously increase the computational cost of the numerical
simulations. Thus, low cost surrogate models (called reduced-order models) that
target only the dominant flow structures are generally used. Combining state-of-
the-art data generation methods and reduced-order modeling is required for an
accurate and efficient numerical simulation of realistic flows. A simplistic
attempt to combine these two approaches is, however, doomed to fail due to
numerical instability, noisy data, and modeling inconsistency. This project aims
to develop a framework that will transform reduced-order modeling into a robust
tool that can tackle the challenges raised by realistic noisy flows in
engineering, geophysics, and medicine. The numerical simulation of many
realistic flows is fraught with difficulties (insufficient numerical resolution;
numerical instability; need for repeated runs). To address these challenges,
state-of-the-art numerical approaches are needed: large eddy simulation (LES)
and regularized models tackle the lack of numerical resolution and the
instability, whereas reduced-order models (ROMs) based on proper orthogonal
decomposition (POD) balance the computational cost and accuracy when repeated
runs are needed. A simplistic attempt to combine LES and regularized models with
standard ROMs is, however, doomed to fail due to the following reasons: (i)
standard ROMs are plagued by numerical instability; (ii) although LES and
regularized models stabilize the numerical simulations, the data that they
generate for ROMs is inherently noisy; and (iii) the modeling inconsistency
between data generation (i.e., regularized and LES models) and ROMs can yield
inaccurate results. This project will develop a modeling, theoretical, and
computational framework that will transform reduced-order modeling into a robust
tool that can tackle the challenges raised by realistic noisy flows. The main
innovation is the explicit POD spatial filter, which bridges the inconsistency
gap between the data generation (i.e., regularized and LES models) and ROMs.
This breakthrough paves the way for the development of novel regularized ROMs
and the introduction in a ROM setting of genuine LES models that use approximate
deconvolution to recover subfilter-scale information. Over the last decades, a
wealth of regularized and LES models have been highly developed in the
engineering and geophysics communities. The explicit POD spatial filter
represents the missing link that finally allows the leverage of these successful
approaches in reduced-order modeling.
