
* 1522398
* Algorithms for Complex Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2015,08/13/2015
* David Aristoff,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 179,802.00

Complex systems arise in many scientific problems. They are high dimensional
structures, comprised of many locally interacting agents, with emergent
phenomena often occurring at multiple length and time scales. Such systems have
global structural and dynamical properties that are usually impossible to
determine exactly. Instead, these properties must be estimated by computer
experiment and simulation. Unfortunately, due to the size and multiscale effects
in complex systems, straightforward algorithms are often too slow. Thus, fast
algorithm design, along with a rigorous study of accuracy, is crucial. This
research project focuses on designing, improving, and quantifying the error of
state-of-the-art algorithms for complex systems. Potential applications include
a wide range of problems arising in materials science, computational chemistry,
and solid-state physics. In particular, the methods studied could help pave the
way for cheap and efficient in silico drug design.

The principal investigator will analyze state-of-the-art algorithms using a
mixture of rigorous mathematical analysis and computer experiment. An important
application will be the efficient simulation of metastable systems, in which the
system dynamics tend to remain for very long times in certain subsets of state
space. Such systems are widespread in molecular dynamics, an increasingly
important tool in computational chemistry. In molecular dynamics, metastability
arises from the well-known time scale problem: atomic vibrations occur on a time
scale much smaller than that of thermally activated reactions and other
interesting dynamical events. For this reason, it is usually impossible to
observe the most interesting aspects of the dynamics by direct atomistic
simulations. For metastable dynamics, many approximate simulation methods serve
as alternatives to direct atomistic simulation, but they are limited by
applicability and accuracy. The project will focus on several methods for
overcoming metastability, including the parallel replica method, milestoning,
and kinetic Monte Carlo. The PI will introduce a mathematical framework for
generalizing these algorithms, based largely on the quasi-stationary
distribution, a mathematical object that encodes metastability. The PI will show
how the more general framework leads to new applications, including more
efficient simulation of Markov State Models and glasses. Moreover, the PI will
use this framework to pursue rigorous error estimates, which are crucial for
extracting quantitative information from simulations.
