
* 1522587
* Intrinsically Parallel Spectrum Decomposition Algorithm for Large Eigenvalue Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,08/06/2015
* Yunkai Zhou,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Eigenvalue problems are of fundamental importance in a wide range of science and
engineering disciplines, including electronic structure calculations in
materials science, and clustering, ranking, and matching in data science. Large-
scale eigenvalue problems arise naturally from significant modern applications
in these materials science and data science computations. However, the
associated rapid increase in the dimension of the eigenvalue problems can easily
overwhelm existing algorithms. This generates pressing demand for more efficient
algorithms, especially those that can scale well on modern supercomputers with
many thousands of cores. This research project centers on designing highly
efficient algorithms for solving large-scale eigenvalue problems and
implementing them in robust software that can be effectively utilized by other
researchers.

The project focuses on the essence of algorithm acceleration for eigenvalue
problems, represented by spectrum filtering (both by polynomial filtering and by
rational function "preconditioning"). The investigator will study both standard
and generalized eigenvalue problems, which often arise from first-principles
calculations. The project will use a tailored filtering method as the first step
for spectrum estimation and develop a practical spectrum decomposition algorithm
that is intrinsically parallel. The spectrum decomposition method is designed to
overcome the main difficulties encountered in state-of-the-art spectrum slicing
algorithms. The investigator will develop novel approaches such as adaptive Ritz
iteration and adaptive selection of (locally) optimal shifts; both techniques
are important for achieving efficiency as well as robustness for intrinsically
scalable methods. The research will significantly extend the forefront of
practical methods for solving large-scale eigenvalue problems. The project will
provide useful algorithms and software to facilitate cutting-edge research that
requires solving increasingly larger eigenvalue problems.
