
* 1522707
* A Posteriori Error Estimation through Duality and Some Other Topics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2015,07/04/2017
* Zhiqiang Cai,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 260,000.00

Self-adaptive numerical methods provide a powerful and automatic approach in
scientific computing. In particular, Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) algorithms
have been widely used in computational science and engineering and have become a
common tool in computer simulations of complex natural science and engineering
problems. As identified by the US National Research Council, AMR is one of two
necessary tools (AMR and Parallel Computing) for computationally tackling Grand
Challenge problems. The key ingredient for success of AMR algorithms is a
posteriori error estimates that are able to accurately locate sources of global
and local error in the current approximation. Another challenge in computer
simulations of complex systems is the reliability of computer predictions. These
considerations (efficiency in AMR algorithms and error control) demonstrate the
need for an error estimator that can a posteriori be extracted from the computed
numerical solution and the given data of the underlying problem. Such an a
posteriori error estimate ideally should provide an underlying rigorous
mathematical theory for estimating and quantifying discretization error in terms
of the error's magnitude and its spatial distribution. Success in this project
will allow AMR algorithms to automatically locate physical interfaces, detect
layers and discontinuities, and resolve oscillations of various scales. The dual
estimators to be developed in this project will resolve the most natural but
extremely difficult question of discretization error control on coarse meshes
for a class of problems and hence partially guarantee reliability of computer
simulations.

This research project focuses on the development, analysis, and test of a
posteriori error estimators through the methodology of duality. The dual
estimators to be developed in this project will have a guaranteed reliability
bound with reliability constant being one. Hence, these estimators are perfect
for discretization error control and may be used as an accurate stopping
criterion for iterative solvers. The methodology of duality may be applied to a
large class of problems arising from continuum mechanics including linear and
nonlinear problems. Since these estimators will not use a priori knowledge on
the locations and characteristics of interface singularities, discontinuities
(in the form of shock-like fronts, and of interior and boundary layers), and/or
oscillations of various scales (multi-scale phenomena), they may then be applied
more readily to highly nonlinear problems and have the potential of being
applied to complex systems arising in applications. The emphases and the
difficulties of the proposed research are (1) explicit or local construction of
an approximation to the dual variable such that the resulting indicator is
efficient and robust, and (2) theoretical and numerical confirmation of the
efficiency and robustness. Finally, a small portion of the proposed research
addresses an open theoretical question on the robustness of estimators for
interface problems.
