
* 1522585
* Study of Limiting Methods for Computation of Conservation Laws and Other Hyperbolic Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,06/05/2020
* Yingjie Liu,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 236,581.00

Many natural systems are modeled by differential equations of so-called
hyperbolic type. For example, models used for weather forecasting, aircraft
design, and study of ocean currents and biofluids are all hyperbolic
differential equations. This research project concerns the development of
techniques to approximate the solutions of hyperbolic differential equations.
More precisely, the project continues the development of numerical methods for
hyperbolic equations with non-smooth solutions (such as is the case when the
terms appearing in the model itself are subject to the influence of non-
smoothness; say, because of non-smooth boundaries, or interfaces). In such
cases, effective methods must be able to remove approximation artifacts
introduced by the non-smoothness, while maintaining as much as possible a
behavior close to that of the underlying expected true solution. The impact of
the project on applied domains in the sciences and engineering will be in
introducing techniques to guarantee more accurate and efficient solutions based
on numerical methods. Additional broader impacts include mentoring and
collaborating with a graduate student and disseminating the research findings to
the larger scientific community through seminars and public lectures.

The project studies numerical methods for hyperbolic differential equations, in
particular for problems that do not have smooth solutions, where accurate
computations largely depend on nonlinear limiting methods. The PI will develop
several techniques to improve existing numerical methods and also to develop new
methods. One goal of the project is the development of new limiting methods for
the "back and forth error compensation and correction method." A second goal of
the project is to improve on the Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) numbers of Runge-
Kutta discontinuous Galerkin methods for hyperbolic conservation laws. Here, the
main idea of the PI and collaborators is to use extra conservation constraints
as penalty for the variational energy functional, and thereby achieve CFL
numbers several times larger without increasing the complexity or reducing order
of accuracy.
