
* 1522765
* Collaborative Research: Random Dynamics on Networks
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2015,08/17/2017
* Pierre Gremaud,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Transport and distribution networks come in a number of forms, from animal
cardiovascular and respiratory systems to communication and industrial
infrastructures. Practical issues abound: prediction of local spikes, estimation
of perfusion, and impact of structural changes such as vessel occlusion. The
complexity of such phenomena can be illustrated by the well-known Braess'
paradox: adding links to a transportation network might not improve the
operation of the system! In spite of recent successes, our understanding of
network flows is usually limited to small deterministic problems, while most
applications correspond to large uncertain ones. The goal of this project is to
enable improved predictions in biological and technological transport and
diffusion networks. For instance, can one predict how cerebral blood flow will
be affected if one of the carotids becomes narrow or blocked? Will the
vasculature allow for re-routing? If so, with what probability and how fast? The
main challenge in this research project is the presence of uncertainties. For
many applications, only partial information about the systems is available. For
instance the size or even the presence of a specific vessel might be uncertain
or the status of a router unknown. The analysis of such problems requires the
creation of novel mathematical tools and numerical methods to describe how
uncertainties propagate through vast and complex networks. The computational
tools to be constructed will provide information, usually probabilistic in
nature, regarding phenomena that are difficult, expensive, or impossible to
measure.
