
* 1522760
* Algorithms for Inverse Problems that Exploit Kronecker Product and Tensor Structures
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Algorithmic Foundations
* 07/15/2015,07/15/2015
* James Nagy,GA,Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,933.00

In many scientific and engineering applications, it is necessary to solve an
inverse problem; that is, to determine quantities defining an object or a system
through indirect measurements. The mathematics used to produce images in devices
such as X-Ray Computed Tomography (CT) and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) are
excellent examples. The mathematical models describing an inverse problem are
often so complicated that it is not possible to find an exact analytical
solution, and it is necessary to use an approximation based on a set of simpler
equations. However, many equations may be needed; in medical imaging, for
example, it is not unusual to compute approximations by solving millions of
equations. Additional complications arise because an inverse problem may have
infinitely many solutions, or the solutions may change dramatically if there are
small errors in the indirect measurements. Thus, additional constraints and
mathematical tools (often referred to as regularization) are needed to stabilize
the numerical methods. The type and amount of regularization is problem
dependent, requiring the algorithms to be able to easily adapt to user and/or
problem specifications. The aim of this project is to develop mathematical tools
and algorithms that exploit particular mathematical structures (called Kronecker
product and tensors) in the matrices associated with equations that make up the
inverse problem. Exploiting these structures will allow for better
approximations, more efficient algorithms, and better facilitate the
incorporation of regularization methods. One targeted application is for inverse
problems that arise in image reconstruction for breast cancer detection;
advancements in this area would have a clear benefit to society.

Efficient singular value decomposition (SVD) approximation methods for large-
scale matrices that arise in discrete ill-posed inverse problems will be
developed. The approach will exploit inherent Kronecker product and tensor
structures, and will be the basis for a computational platform for the efficient
solution of large-scale ill-posed problems. Efficient approaches to solve
Kronecker product and tensor structured SVD updating problems will be developed.
Iterative methods that can incorporate regularization, sparse and low-rank
constraints on the solution will also be considered. The SVD approximations and
updating methods developed in this project can be used as tools to obtain
approximate solutions of ill-posed inverse problems, as preconditioners to
accelerate iterative solvers, or as tools to build solution methods for
nonlinear problems. The computational platform, based on SVD approximations,
developed will have a broad scientific impact for applications where it is
necessary to compute solutions of large-scale ill-posed inverse problems,
including astronomy, cosmology, geophysics, microscopy, and medical imaging.
