
* 1548520
* U.S. Participation in Newton Institute Program on Stochastic Dynamical Systems in Biology: Numerical Methods and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 01/01/2016,07/29/2015
* Samuel Isaacson,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 12/31/2016
* USD 23,530.00

From January 4 through June 24, 2016, the Isaac Newton Institute for
Mathematical Sciences at Cambridge University in the UK will host a thematic
program on Stochastic Dynamical Systems in Biology: Numerical Methods and
Applications. Stochastic dynamical systems are prevalent throughout biology and
medicine, and include many key processes in gene regulation, cell signaling,
tissue development, and cancer proliferation. Mathematical and numerical methods
are key tools in understanding both the function of these systems, and how to
control and manipulate their behavior. The program will bring together a diverse
set of international researchers from across the mathematical and biological
sciences, each working on the design and application of such methods. The
program offers a unique opportunity to exchange ideas and work collaboratively
in order to tackle the many challenging open problems of the field by enabling a
large number of researchers to participate for extended periods of time. To
introduce graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to the field, the opening
workshop will offer tutorials and plenary talks focused on providing a broad
overview of current research problems. This grant provides travel funding for
early career researchers and graduate students from the United States to make
extended visits during the program and to participate in the program workshops.

It has become clear that to effectively understand stochasticity in biological
systems, a combination of modern numerical analysis, estimation and sampling
techniques, and rigorous analysis of stochastic dynamics is required. To
highlight open problems and current work in these areas, the Isaac Newton
Institute for the Mathematical Sciences is running a thematic program on
Stochastic Dynamical Systems in Biology: Numerical Methods and Applications. The
program will include an introductory, tutorial-based workshop and three research
workshops, broadly focused on: multi-scale methods; well-mixed systems; and
spatially distributed systems. In addition, each week of the program twenty to
thirty long-term participants will be in residence, each visiting the institute
for at least two weeks. The interactions between these researchers are expected
to advance the field through the development of new cross-disciplinary
collaborations. In the mathematical sciences these collaborations will lead to
new mathematical techniques and numerical methods for studying ordinary and
partial differential equations, discrete and continuous-time stochastic
processes, and a variety of statistical models. To enable the broader scientific
community to benefit from the program, all lectures and seminars will be
available to view through the institute website (with the speaker's permission).
This grant specifically supports the travel costs to visit the institute and
engage in the activities of the program of several early career and trainee
mathematical scientists from the United States. Further information on the
program is available on the website, http://www.newton.ac.uk/event/sdb.
