
* 1555072
* CAREER: Uncertainty Quantification and Big Data Analysis in Interconnected Systems: Algorithms, Computations, and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2016,07/06/2020
* Guang Lin,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,759.00

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) and big data analysis have received increasing
attention in recent years. Extensive research effort has been devoted to these
topics, and novel numerical methods have been developed to efficiently deal with
large-scale data sets and complex problems with uncertainty. Both UQ and big
data analysis enable us to better understand the impacts of various uncertain
inputs (boundary and initial data, parameter values, geometry, network etc.) to
numerical predictions. UQ and big data analysis are thus critical to many
important practical problems such as climate modeling, weather prediction, ocean
dynamics, and smart grids. As the data size and dimensions of parameter space
increase, one of the biggest challenges in UQ computations and big data analysis
is the computational cost for analyzing the data and running the simulations.
For large-scale complex interconnected systems, deterministic simulations can be
very time-consuming, and conducting UQ simulations further increases the
simulation cost and can be prohibitively expensive. This project aims to address
these critical challenges. A novel set of highly efficient UQ and big data
analysis algorithms will be developed to make big data analysis and UQ
simulations amenable for large-scale complex interconnected systems. The new
algorithms will significantly advance the current state of the art of UQ and big
data analysis methods. The project also integrates educational opportunities,
including exposing a range of undergraduate students to UQ and big data, giving
graduate students the advanced skills needed to apply them, and mentoring Ph.D.
students to be leaders in UQ and big data education and research.

The approach under development in this research project is based on scalable
algorithms for multivariate Bayesian-treed Gaussian process and power network
reduction; high-dimensional UQ algorithms; dynamic state estimation and model
calibration for non-Gaussian noisy data; and advanced stochastic contingency
analysis. The new algorithms will be based on building multi-fidelity models in
both network models and probability space. Such algorithms can accommodate big
data in linear time. In addition, while current contingency analysis allows only
assessment of a static power grid status without considering uncertainty, the
new approaches will allow analysis of contingency dynamically and
probabilistically for cascade failures. The new algorithms will allow
investigators to establish an efficient framework to rigorously quantify the
uncertainty, analyze big data, and endow smart grid simulations with a composite
error bar.
