
* 1615800
* Modeling Tissue Division Patterns and Loss of Cell Polarity in Cancer
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/01/2016,06/29/2018
* Alexandra Jilkine,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,184.00

Cancer represents one of the biggest problems for modern societies. In 2015,
there were 1.6 million new cancer cases and 590,000 cancer-related deaths in the
US. Mathematical and computational models enable critical examination of
mechanisms that may be involved in the initiation and development of tumors. Due
to ongoing renewal of tissue, some individual human cells divide as many as 5000
times during a lifetime, accumulating deleterious mutations that may result in a
cell becoming cancerous. The principal investigator will test how the
probability of tissues accumulating mutations depends on the spatial
organization of cells, and the developmental stage of the cell where the initial
cancer-causing mutation occurs. Determining which cellular division patterns
slow down mutation accumulation and delay the onset of cancer will advance our
understanding of mechanisms driving tumorigenesis and provide quantitative
predictions that can be validated experimentally. The project will train
undergraduate and graduate students through research involvement in an
interdisciplinary field. The mathematical models developed in this research
project will be incorporated into a summer course on Cancer Dynamics in the
q-bio Summer School that introduces students from diverse disciplines such as
mathematics, physics, and computer science to modeling in biology.

Dynamical models will be used to study the effects of cellular differentiation
hierarchy on the estimated time to cancer development and treatment outcomes in
various cancer types. Trade-offs between symmetric cell division and the
production of more differentiated cells via asymmetric division will be explored
in a stochastic model of different cell types and their spatial locations. On an
intracellular level, a model for unequal distribution of cellular components
(cellular polarity) that regulates asymmetric divisions will be developed.
Computational tests will examine the effects of mutations of different key
proteins in the polarity biochemical network and relate them to macroscopic
behavior in a population level model of tissue. This project will aid in
understanding how disruption of asymmetric division mechanisms can act as a
cancer promoting mechanism.
