
* 1619821
* Reduced order models for imaging and inversion with waves and diffusive fields
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2016,06/19/2018
* Alexander Mamonov,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 209,879.00

The project's focus is on development of novel techniques for computational
inversion and imaging problems arising in medical imaging, geophysical
exploration, nondestructive evaluation and testing and other applications where
the internal structure and properties of objects must be determined without
direct access to the object's interior. The object is subjected to probing
fields and the measurements of its response are made. Electromagnetic fields and
acoustic waves are most often used for probing. Conventionally an inverse
problem of determining an object's properties from the measurements is
formulated as a minimization of a misfit between the measured data and the
prediction of a forward model. Such problems are notoriously difficult to solve
due to a highly nonlinear dependence of measurements on model properties. We
propose an approach to inversion and imaging based on the theory of reduced
order models (ROMs). This approach aims to alleviate the nonlinearity of the
inverse problem thus making it much easier to solve. It allows one to obtain
images free from various types of artifacts that conventional methods often
struggle to remove. The proposed framework is general enough and can be applied
to inversion and imaging both with waves and in diffusive regimes. First, a ROM
is constructed as a projection of the partial differential equation (PDE)
operator on subspaces of PDE solution snapshots either in the time or the
frequency domain. This ensures that the ROM response interpolates the measured
data. Even though neither the PDE operator nor the solution snapshots are
directly accessible in inversion, projections can be computed from the measured
data using the tools of linear algebra. After the ROM is constructed it may be
used in at least two ways. First, it can be used in an imaging algorithm. Since
the ROM is a projection of the PDE operator, an image can be constructed from
the back-projection of a ROM. Model reduction takes into account nonlinear
interactions between the reflectors and thus allows one to eliminate artifacts
caused by multiple reflections. This is a vast improvement over conventional
imaging approaches that are often based on linearizations (Born, Kirchhoff)
which miss or misinterpret the nonlinear effects. Second, the ROM can be used to
reformulate conventional optimization problems to minimize ROM misfit instead of
data misfit. Such optimization objective is expected to be more convex which
makes inversion less prone to local minima. Another consequence is accelerated
convergence. The following specific aspects of ROMs for inversion and imaging
are proposed: (1) new imaging functionals;(2) backscattering and non-collocated
source/receiver data measurement settings; (3) nonlinear data preprocessing; (4)
reformulations of conventional optimization approaches; (5) non-iterative
inversion methods.
