
* 1619755
* Computational Methods and Consistency for Dirichlet Graph Partitions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2016,06/19/2018
* Braxton Osting,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 180,000.00

This project will investigate theoretical properties, computational methods, and
applications for a particular method of graph partitioning. Generally speaking,
graph partitioning is the mathematical problem of subdividing a set into smaller
components with desirable properties. This problem has diverse applications in
image analysis (medical, satellite, and material), surveillance, social network
analysis, and topic modeling, among many others. The results of this project
could significantly impact these areas and due to the multidisciplinary nature
of this activity, all involved parties will gain awareness and literacy outside
their own respective fields. The project provides opportunities for the
principal investigator to continue advising and mentoring students.

This project will prove fundamental theoretical results and develop
computational methods for the Dirichlet graph partitioning problem, formulated
as minimizing the sum of the principle Laplace-Dirichlet eigenvalues for each
partition component. This graph partitioning problem has rich and exploitable
mathematical structure: it is motivated by a geometric problem and has both a
variational characterization and an associated stochastic process. The project
will have three goals. The first goal is to prove, via Gamma convergence with a
suitable metric, the consistency result that Dirichlet partitions of geometric
graphs, obtained by sampling from a probability space, converge to Dirichlet
partitions of that probability space as the number of sampled points tends to
infinity. This result will yield a better understanding of the relationship
between the graph and continuum partitioning problems as well as possibly
suggest subsampling strategies for extremely large datasets. The second goal
addresses important computational aspects of the Dirichlet graph partitioning
problem. Although two different relaxations of this problem have been
identified, computational methods based on these relaxations necessarily have
increased computational complexity. The PI will seek provably convergent new
methods that combine variational arguments with ideas from geometry, partial
differential equations, and Markov processes in order to extend and overcome
these shortcomings. The third goal is to address concrete, real-world problems
and to engage the developed algorithms in practical applications.
