
* 1620335
* Positivity preserving limiter and new development on elliptic interface problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2016,06/15/2016
* Jue Yan,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

This research will contribute to the fundamental understanding of algorithm
development that are widely applied in vehicles designs and aerospace
engineering. The PI and her collaborators will perform mathematical studies on
the performance and properties of the algorithms. Specifically the proposed
method assists to stabilize the algorithm implementation such that numerical
studies of physical properties, for example the pressure distributions around
fast flying airplanes, can be carried out. Comparing with lab experiments,
computer simulations are way less expensive and more efficient. In this project,
the PI also develops a new idea and new algorithms for interface problems. One
application is the compound materials studies in which highly accurate and
efficient solvers are demanded. The investigator will integrate research with
education activities and communicate the research in a broader context. The PI
will develop third order maximum principle satisfying limiter for general
convection diffusion equations. The objective is to prove the high order
polynomial solutions staying in the given bounds without losing accuracy. The PI
further extends the studies to obtain positivity preserving limiter for
compressible Navier-Stokes equations. In this project, the PI also develops new
methods to solve elliptic interface problems with mesh either aligned to or cut
through the interface. The research is based on the direct discontinuous
Galerkin methods previously designed by the PI. With the extra flexibility on
the numerical flux formula, the PI manages to prove the quadratic polynomial
numerical solutions satisfying strict maximum principle on unstructured
triangular meshes with at least third order of accuracy. There is no geometric
restriction on the meshes and obtuse triangles are allowed. The PI will prove
the density and pressure approximations to compressible Navier-Stokes equations
being maintained positive at all time levels. As a by-product, bounding the
polynomial solutions or preserving the solution's positivity can be considered
as a strong stability result. The findings of this research will improve the
capability of a numerical method to those challenging problems from
computational fluid dynamics. For elliptic interface problems, the PI will
modify the numerical fluxes defined at element edges to implicitly enforce the
interface solution jump and flux jump conditions.
