
* 1620318
* Adaptive Multiscale Simulation Framework for Reduced-Order Modeling in Perforated Domains
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2016,05/11/2021
* Yalchin Efendiev,TX,Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 210,000.00

Processes in perforated domains occur in many important applications. These
include complex processes in soil, membranes, and filters. With current imaging
techniques, detailed microscale geometries of these perforated materials can be
constructed. However, it is prohibitively expensive to solve complex processes
in these perforated domains due to a rich hierarchy of scales. For this reason,
some types of reduced-order computational techniques are needed. The goal of
this project is to develop and analyze novel computational techniques for
solving challenging multiscale problems in perforated domains. The new
approaches will bring the information from the detailed geometries to large-
scale simulations and will improve the predictions in the simulations. This will
further allow deigning new materials and optimize processes. Many current
approaches for multiscale methods for problems in perforated domains have been
restricted to homogenization, which is applicable when the media has scale
separation. However, in many realistic perforated media, there is no scale
separation, i.e., pore sizes can have a wide variety of scales. The multiscale
methods of this project develop a general framework that allows rigorous and
systematic reduction. The PI's goals are: (1) to develop systematic local model
reduction tools for computing multiscale basis functions; (2) to develop and
analyze new finite element techniques using these basis functions; (3) to study
the interplay between localization of the basis functions and the global
coupling mechanism; (4) to apply the developed methods to a wide variety of
flows with nonlinearities and multiphysics in 3D; (5) to test and demonstrate
their capabilities for solving problems in engineering and geosciences.
