
* 1620158
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Three-Dimensional Multiphysics Simulation of Multi-phase Flows with Magnetic Fluids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2016,09/15/2016
* Philip Yecko,NY,Cooper Union
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 109,699.00

Advances in the synthesis of Ferrofluids (engineered fluids that respond to
magnetic fields and have a number of well-established industrial applications)
have increased the scope of potential applications of these fluids to new areas.
Emerging applications of ferrofluids include: magnetic targeting of drugs, cell
sorting in biomedical systems and magnetically driven contaminant removal. In
each of these applications the use of ferrofluids enables new techniques that
depend on the use of magnetic fields for 'remote control' of the ferrofluid.
However, the realization of such technologies is hampered by complexities
simulation of these systems for further development and design. The proposed
research program includes the development of effective, robust computational
tools that will enable such simulations. In particular, the computing codes will
include the particular magnetic physics of ferrofluids as well as the forces
resulting from the magnetic fields, which serve as the means of control in these
applications. The development of these effective simulation tools will support
and accelerate innovation in these emerging these technologies. Moreover, the
proposed program of code development, simulations and integrated physical
experiments will serve as a proof-of-concept for the inclusion of realistic
multiphysics fluid simulations for complex scientific and engineering
applications. The proposed research program will involve undergraduate and
masters-degree students in leading-edge research, including students who are
members of groups under-represented in STEM disciplines such as women and first-
generation college students.

In magnetic drug targeting, a ferrofluid whose constituent nanoparticles have
been functionalized to carry theraputic drugs is directed to a tumor or other
localized site (e.g., in the eye); sorting of(nonmagnetic) biological cells by
immersion in a ferrofluid so that the force of an applied magnetic field depends
on cell size; purification of a polluted fluid by adsorbption of contaminants to
magnetic nanoparticles, which are then separated from the fluid by magnetic
forces. However, advances in these applications are stymied by the complex,
multi-scale and multi-physics nature of the fluid-dynamical systems in which
they occur. In particular, because contemporary fluid-dynamics codes are not
designed to incorporate the additional physics of magnetic-fluid systems,
effective simulation with these codes is difficult. The proposal describes a
plan to develop and test a new parallel, multi-phase code for fully three-
dimensional flows. This project will lead to a flexible and efficient, multi-
phase magnetic-fluid simulation code that is fully three-dimensional and
parallelized for high-performance computing. Hence, the code will enable
realistic simulations relevant to the significant applications addressed.
Specifically, in order to address the above-noted applications, the code will
model and simulate flows with dynamic interfaces between the ferrofluid and
other fluids. Moreover, the code will implement models of viscosity effects
(magnetoviscosity) as well as driving forces that result from applied magnetic
fields (magnetophoresis) in a flexible manner that simplifies adjustment and
updating of the models.
