
* 1620109
* RUI: Computational algebraic geometry and combinatorial algorithms for neuroscience and biological networks
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,09/08/2016
* Elizabeth Gross,CA,San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 133,547.00

This project is focused on applications of computational mathematics to problems
arising in neuroscience and systems biology. Beyond utilizing currently
available methods in creative ways, the main aim is to develop new computational
methods to meet the needs of specific biological applications, particularly in
systems biology and neuroscience. In systems biology, the goal is to understand
complicated biological processes by studying interactions in a network setting
rather than in isolation. While in neuroscience, the goal is to better
understand neural connections in the brain, and how the brain interacts with
it's external environment. On the systems biology side, the work in the proposed
project will help make sense of two types of networks: biochemical reaction
networks, deterministic models for molecular interactions, and protein-protein
interaction networks, relational data collected, confirmed, and refined over the
past decade. On the neuroscience side, the focus will be on neuronal networks,
schematics that record connections between neurons, and combinatorial neural
codes, a form of discretized cell firing data.

The techniques employed will come from combinatorics and computational algebraic
geometry, two subfields with applications in an array of fields including
statistics, physics, engineering, and biology. The proposal has three main
research components. First, techniques and theory from computational algebraic
geometry, such as toric ideals and Groebner bases, will be used to understand
and visualize neuroscience data. Second, new algorithms for sampling random
graphs with fixed properties will be developed for testing statistical
hypotheses about protein-protein interaction and neuronal networks. Third, new
algorithms for computing elimination ideals will be developed with the goal of
applying these new methods to model selection in biochemical reaction network
theory.
