
* 1620103
* Collaborative Research: Density-enhanced data assimilation for hyperbolic balance laws
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,08/30/2016
* Daniel Tartakovsky,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 200,000.00

The research addresses the urgent need to develop efficient computational tools
to process the dramatically increasing amounts of observational data. Management
of many complex systems (e.g., traffic) has to confront the uncertainty in both
their current and future state. This uncertainty typically increases with time,
leading to less accurate and useful predictions. Thus, it is important to
develop practical methods for ?adjusting? the probabilistic state of the system
and reducing uncertainty using observational data. This approach is broadly
referred to as data assimilation. We will develop novel techniques for
incorporating observational data to reduce uncertainty in predictions in two
particular areas of national interest: fluid dynamics (e.g., flood forecasting)
and traffic management. Both are of vital importance to sustainable development
of our society.

We propose to develop a novel data assimilation framework for physical processes
whose time-dynamics is described by hyperbolic conservation laws. This framework
takes advantage of a kinetic representation of hyperbolic systems and, thus,
availability of explicit deterministic equations for the time evolution of
probability density function for dependent variables. These equations can often
be derived and solved exactly, yielding explicit analytical solutions for the
marginal and joint probability density functions. For systems of hyperbolic
conservation laws an appropriate closure assumption is needed. Thus, the
proposed framework relies on the kinetic representation, which takes the form of
linear equations for joint probability density functions. Bayesian updating is
utilized to incorporate observations into the prediction.
