
* 1620342
* Collaborative Research: Prediction, Optimization and Control for Information Propagation on Networks: A Differential Equation and Mass Transportation Based Approach
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,09/05/2016
* Xiaojing Ye,GA,Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,770.00

Have you ever been wondering how fast news spreads or a topic becomes trendy in
online social networks? It is actually very challenging to answer such questions
quantitatively and accurately. The difficulty, in mathematical language, is that
the process takes place in extremely large heterogeneous networks, and the
spreads exhibit pervasive randomness. For example, a Twitter user may retweet a
post at literally any time, or just ignore it. Therefore, understanding and
predicting the spread of trendy topics are among the most emerging problems in
social networking. The study also has applications in smartphone/computer
malware outbreak and epidemiology of infectious disease since the spreads share
similar mathematical underpinning. Therefore, we use a general notion of
information propagation on networks to describe the dynamic nature of those
problems. The 'information' being propagated on networks can be a trendy topic,
a new computer malware, or an infectious disease; the nodes can be users of
social networking sites, computers on the internet, or human hosts; and links in
the networks can be the followee and follower relationships, the network
connections of computers, or the proximity or physical contact between people.
In this project, we aim at developing new theory and efficient computational
methods for several important problems about information propagation in
networks. We advocate a new approach to model the propagation as continuous-time
discrete-space stochastic processes, and propose to address these problems by
novel theory and algorithms rooted in modern optimal transport theory and
Fokker-Plank equations on graphs. In particular, we focus on three closely
related problems which are fundamental in information propagation: influence
prediction, propagation optimization, and propagation control. We will develop
efficient numerical methods based on the novel approach to tackle these
problems, and expect the results can greatly advance our ability to understand
and control information propagation.

The focus of this project is on theoretical analysis and computations of
information propagation on large-scale heterogeneous networks. The research has
extensive applications in the real-world including social networking, cyber
security and epidemics of infectious diseases. We concentrate on the
investigation of three key problems on prediction and decision-making related to
information propagation on networks. 1) Influence prediction: for a given source
set of active nodes in the network, predict the influence, i.e. expected number
of activated nodes (nodes which receive the information) in the future. 2)
Optimal source distribution: select an optimal source set of nodes to achieve
maximal influence. 3) Network control: change and manipulate resource
distribution and network topology dynamically to achieve the desirable outcomes
for information propagation on networks. These problems are difficult to solve
due to many factors, such as large scale and heterogeneous structure of
networks, uncertainties in propagation, incomplete knowledge of propagation
dynamics, and noise in datasets. To overcome these difficulties, we take a novel
and effective approach which is different from any existing method. In
particular, we establish systems of differential equations, based on recently
developed Fokker-Planck equations on graphs, to describe and compute the time
evolution of the probability density functions for the activation states of the
network and estimate the influence. We design graph-based stochastic
optimization methods, which are closely related to the recent advancements on
optimal transport theory, to effectively find optimal source distribution and
propagation control strategy. The proposed methods are efficient, accurate, and
can tackle those problems on large-scale real-world networks.
