
* 1620014
* Real algebraic and combinatorial structures in matrix spaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,08/30/2016
* Cynthia Vinzant,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to apply mathematical tools to study objects from
optimization, engineering, and statistics. The research involved will lead to a
better understanding of the underlying mathematics and further the development
and analysis of algorithms. Development of such theory benefits both the
mathematical and broader scientific communities and strengthens the connections
between them. Another important part of this project involves mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students. Participation in this project will expose
students to a wide range of fields in mathematics, impress upon them the
importance of interdisciplinary research, and train them in the theory and
computational skills needed to carry it out.

The broad goals of the proposed research are to develop computational techniques
in real algebraic geometry and combinatorics in order to study objects arising
in optimization and other applications. Real algebraic geometry is the study of
solutions to polynomial equations and inequalities, which can describe a vast
array of systems from engineering and science. Tropical geometry is a powerful
tool for extracting discrete data from real algebraic sets as well as for
constructing examples of real algebraic sets with desired properties. The
proposed research applies these powerful mathematical tools to problems in
linear algebra and convex optimization. Stable polynomials, determinants, and
linear spaces of matrices are fundamental objects in these fields. A better
understanding of their underlying geometry would advance these fields and the
connections between them.
