
* 1620288
* Adaptive Discontinuous Galerkin Methods and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,07/12/2021
* Ohannes Karakashian,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 196,453.00

Scientific computing and especially computational mathematics are recognized as
crucial to the advancement of science. By replacing expensive and sometimes even
impossible laboratory experiments (e.g., supernova explosions), numerical
simulations have grown steadily in importance as effective alternatives to
these. Therefore, the development of state of the art algorithms and codes, with
the concomitant increase in confidence in their predictions, is important to
progress in all these fields. The research program in this project aims at the
development, analysis, and computer implementation of numerical methods designed
to approximate the solutions of some partial differential equations that govern
key phenomena in the fields of applied mathematics, biomedicine, engineering,
and physics. In particular, this research program will be applied to generate
efficient numerical algorithms for the effective simulation of the functioning
of the heart by focusing on its electro-mechanical nature and the resulting
fluid flow patterns. Another application of importance to society will be to
apply the newly developed algorithms to the simulation of the Earth's climate by
studying the influence of various chemicals including greenhouse gases, as well
as pollutants such as aerosols, dust and black carbon. The knowledge gained will
be communicated to other researchers through seminars and conferences. New
courses will be developed and students will participate in all phases of the
project. The latter aspect is crucial in developing the new generation of
researchers.

The numerical methodologies described in this proposal namely the finite element
method and in particular the discontinuous Galerkin method have been studied for
several decades now. Yet there is ample need for growth in both the analytical
and application arenas. Research on traditional as well as recently introduced a
posteriori error estimates will be conducted extending these estimates to
classes of equations that had stayed beyond the reach of such methods. These
will lead to improved and flexible adaptive methods that will be applied to
solving problems of practical importance. An additional application of adaptive
methods will be to answer questions of analytical nature concerning the
existence, uniqueness, and stability properties of solitary wave solutions of
nonlinear dispersive equations. The crucial problem of solving the resulting
systems of linear and nonlinear equations will form an integral component of the
proposed research with multilevel domain decomposition and multigrid methods
forming the backbone of the thrust in this context. Implementation on massively
parallel computers will be pursued actively given that most of the problems
studied involve three spatial dimensions as well as time.
