
* 1620316
* Collaborative Research: Algorithm and Theory for Interface Computations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2016,06/08/2016
* Yoichiro Mori,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 149,998.00

Phenomena in which a fluid interacts with an immersed elastic structure abound
in nature and in every day life. Such fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems
include the swimming of microorganisms, the flying of birds, blood flow in the
heart and the deformation of leaves to the wind. One powerful way to understand
such FSI problems is through computer simulation. Many FSI problems lead to
challenging computational problems that require significant improvements over
currently available algorithms. The immersed boundary (IB) method is a popular
computational method for FSI problems, and one major goal of this project is to
understand the mathematical properties of the IB method to aid in the
development of faster and more robust numerical algorithms. Another goal is to
adapt the IB method so that it can handle problems in which fluid (water) can
flow through an elastic structure. Such problems are particularly important for
the understanding of movement and shape changes of biological cells. This cell-
biological aspect of our work will be performed in collaboration with
experimental biophysicists. The project will introduce and train undergraduate
and graduate students in these problems and more broadly in the mathematical and
computational sciences. This project consists of two major aims in theory and
algorithmic development for computational problems with moving membrane
interfaces. On the theoretical side, the PIs will establish a convergence theory
for the immersed boundary (IB) method. The IB method is a widely used numerical
method for fluid structure interaction problems, but despite its popularity, its
convergence properties are poorly understood. Convergence analysis for the IB
method will be one of the first to be established for a fluid structure
interaction algorithm in which a dual grid is used; one for the fluid and
another for the elastic structure. Such an analysis will clarify the effect of
grid and time discretization parameters on the stability properties of the IB
method. On the algorithmic side, the PIs will develop a numerical scheme to
handle electrodiffusion of ions and transmembrane water flow in the presence of
deformable elastic membranes. A novel feature of the osmotic water flow problem
in contrast to conventional fluid structure interaction problems is that the
interfacial membrane does not move with respect to the local fluid velocity and
that this slip velocity is controlled by the jump in concentration of a
diffusing chemical across the membrane interface. The fluid structure
interaction will be treated with the IB method whereas chemical diffusion will
be treated using a cartesian embedded boundary method. This algorithm will be
applied to study the interplay between electrophysiology/osmotic water flow and
cell mechanics, an area that is poorly explored theoretically but whose
importance is becoming increasingly clear.
