
* 1620168
* Novel numerical methods for fully nonlinear second order elliptic and parabolic Monge-Ampere and Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2016,06/19/2018
* Xiaobing Feng,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 269,989.00

Fully nonlinear second order elliptic partial differential equations (PDEs)
arise from many scientific and engineering applications such as differential
geometry, antenna design, astrophysics, geophysical fluid dynamics, image
processing, mathematical finance, optimal mass transport, and stochastic optimal
control. These PDEs are among most difficult PDEs to study analytically and to
solve numerically. Two major and distinct classes of fully nonlinear second
order PDEs often arise from applications, namely, the Monge-Ampere (MA) type
PDEs and the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) type PDEs. They have very different
structures and arise from distinct application fields. However, a recent
discovery by the PI's research team finds that these two classes of PDEs are
intimately related. This finding opens a door for utilizing and adapting the
relatively wealthy numerical methods and techniques for HJB-type PDEs to solve
MA-type PDEs and enables a possibility for bridging the gap on numerical methods
between those two major classes of fully nonlinear PDEs. It also provides a
deeper understanding about the strength and weakness of the existing numerical
methods for both classes of fully nonlinear PDEs. The education component of
this research project is to engage and train two graduate students in developing
necessary applied and computational mathematics knowledge and skills so that
they can pursue a successful career in either academia or industry in the near
future.

In this project, the PI will develop efficient numerical methods for both MA-
type and HJB-type fully nonlinear PDEs. The PI will achieve the following goals
in this project: (1) to establish equivalent (in the viscosity sense) HJB-
reformulations for general MA-type equations, in particular, for the MA-type
PDEs from optimal mass transport and for parabolic MA-type PDEs; (2) to
systematically develop a high order semi-Lagrangian methodology and framework,
which take the advantages of wide-stencil finite difference methods and
unstructured triangular finite element and discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods,
for HJB-type and MA-type PDEs. (3) to develop convergent narrow-stencil finite
difference, finite element and DG methods and framework for HJB-type and MA-type
fully nonlinear PDEs based on some new and generalized numerical monotonicity
concept; (4) to incorporate uncertainty into fully nonlinear PDE models by
considering and developing efficient numerical methods for stochastic MA-type
and HJB-type PDEs; (5) to apply the anticipated numerical methods to fully
nonlinear PDE application problems arising from optimal mass transport,
semigeostrophic flow, and stochastic optimal control from mathematical finance.
By addressing the challenging numerical PDE problems and establishing
fundamental numerical fully nonlinear PDE methodologies and theories, this
project will have a significant theoretical and practical impact to the emerging
field of numerical fully nonlinear PDEs and to computational and applied
mathematics at large. The new numerical techniques can be used to solve various
fully nonlinear PDE problems arising from differential geometry, antenna design,
astrophysics, geophysical fluid dynamics, image processing, mathematical
finance, optimal mass transport, and stochastic optimal control.
