
* 1620108
* High order accuracy WENO methods for high dimensional problems on sparse grids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2016,06/16/2016
* Yongtao Zhang,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 193,338.00

High order accuracy numerical methods are especially efficient for solving
mathematical models in computational fluid dynamics and computational biology
which contain complex solution structures. The computational cost increases
significantly when the number of grid points is large or the spatial dimension
of the problem is high, due to the "curse of dimensionality". How to achieve
fast computations by high order accuracy methods is a very important question
especially for long-time simulations. This research project aims to develop
efficient high order accuracy numerical methods on sparse grids for high spatial
dimensional problems. The new methods have the potential to be applied to a
broader class of applications in quantum electronic systems, molecular motors,
finance, collective cell motions in biology, gene regulatory network, etc.

The PI will design, analyze and implement novel high order Krylov integration
factor (IF) weighted essentially nonoscillatory (WENO) algorithms for solving
hyperbolic or convection-diffusion partial differential equation (PDE) problems
on sparse grids by using the sparse-grid combination technique to deal with the
high dimensional challenge. The sparse-grid method is a powerful approximation
tool for high dimensional problems. It has been successfully used in many
scientific and engineering applications. Discretizations on sparse grids involve
much fewer degrees of freedom than that on single grids. Efficient numerical
simulations of these high dimensional systems will help in studying interesting
biological questions in this area. The proposed research will contribute in the
active area of dealing with the "curse of dimensionality". A suite of powerful
computational tools for solving high dimensional nonlinear PDEs will be
developed. These techniques are expected to make positive contributions to
computer simulations of complicated phenomena in biological and physical
systems. The proposed activity will also provide excellent training and
education opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students interested
in research at the interface of mathematics, computation, and applications.
