
* 1620128
* Micro-Macro Decomposition Numerical Schemes for Multiscale Simulation of Plasma
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,08/01/2018
* James Rossmanith,IA,Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 196,035.00

Plasma physics is the study of the dynamics of ionized gases. Because plasma,
often referred to as the fourth state of matter, is the most abundant form of
ordinary matter in the universe, there exist many important application problems
for which an understanding of the plasma dynamics is critical. Some examples of
these applications include understanding the dynamics of stars, the affect of
the solar wind on the Earth's magnetosphere, the dynamics of magnetically
confined fusion devices, and the dynamics of laser-plasma devices that could be
used in medical imaging applications. The objective of this research is to
develop highly accurate and efficient computational tools for simulating the
dynamics of the electrons (negatively charged particles) and the ions
(positively charged particles) that constitute the plasma of interest. This
research aims to develop novel computational techniques based on novel
multiscale methods that divide the underlying equations into macroscopic (large
scale phenomena) and microscopic (small scale phenomena), and couple these
scales in some appropriate manner. These methods will be implemented in computer
code that will take advantage of modern parallel computer architectures. The
resulting methods and codes will be used to simulate various application
problems in order to verify and validate the approach.

The primary objective of this research is to develop accurate and efficient
computational methods for solving nonlinear differential equations used to model
plasma dynamics. The goal is to solve a class of multiscale models of plasma
using a novel micro-macro decomposition approach. The idea behind the micro-
macro decomposition is to start with a general enough model that contains the
coupled dynamics of macroscopic and microscopic phenomena, to then write this
model into two parts with appropriate coupling terms, and finally to apply
potentially different numerical techniques to each part in order to optimize
efficiency. The specific schemes that will be used in this research are based on
high-order discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods with novel time-
stepping strategies to achieve computational efficiency. This research will
develop new computational tools for simulating plasma dynamics. In particular,
new micro-macro decomposition techniques will be designed and implemented that
allow for the efficient numerical solution of multi-species plasma systems. New
strategies will be developed to adaptively turn on and off the microscopic
solvers. As part of the research project, novel computational methods and
software will be produced that in the future could be applied to a wide range of
both laboratory and astrophysical plasma problems. The software developed will
be made freely available on the web as part of the DoGPack software project.
