
* 1621111
* Development of high-order accurate numerical methods for the shallow-water equations and other hyperbolic conversation laws with source terms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,04/26/2016
* Yulong Xing,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Rosemary Renaut
* 07/31/2016
* USD 63,981.00

The objective of the proposed project is to provide a class of novel high-order
accurate and efficient well-balanced discontinuous Galerkin (DG) and Weighted
Essentially Non-Oscillatory (WENO) schemes for the shallow-water equations and
other hyperbolic conservation laws with source terms. The proposed activity
includes a comprehensive coverage of new algorithm development, theoretical
numerical analysis, numerical implementation issues and practical applications.
The investigator proposes to provide a detailed study of highly efficient high-
order well-balanced methods in the following directions: 1. Development of well-
balanced methods: Very accurate well-balanced numerical methods will be
developed for several equations arising in different areas; 2. Shallow-water
equations: Positivity-preserving well-balanced methods for the shallow-water
equations will be developed. Then, the investigator will investigate their
performance, including efficiency, scalability, etc., and study their potential
application in the coastal ocean modeling; 3. Euler equations under a
gravitational field: Hydrodynamical evolution in a gravitational field arises in
most astrophysical problems. The investigator will develop well-balanced methods
for such system; 4. Nonlinear water wave equations: Conservative DG methods will
be developed for nonlinear dispersive wave equations.

The proposed project will provide more efficient and accurate numerical
approaches to solve the shallow-water equations, and other conservation laws
with source term. It will have a direct impact in many application problems
arising from hydraulic engineering and atmospheric modeling, and is suitable for
other source-term problems in chemistry, biology, fluid dynamics, astrophysics,
and meteorology. Due to its multi-disciplinary nature, the proposed research
will initiate and serve as a solid foundation for collaborative research work
with applied mathematicians, hydraulic engineers and astrophysicists, and
promote interdisciplinary research between Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the
University of Tennessee. The proposed project will also provide training and
education opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students interested
in computational mathematics.
