
* 1632364
* International Conference on Computational Mathematics and Inverse Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2016,07/21/2016
* Jiguang Sun,MI,Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2017
* USD 24,700.00

The main goal of the International Conference on Computational Mathematics and
Inverse Problems is to bring together an international collection of established
specialists as well as junior researchers in the area of computational
mathematics and inverse problems. This type of scientific gathering and
interaction can have long-lasting impact on junior researchers and graduate
students. A significant broader impact will be to bring young researchers into
the field, and establish new connections between disparate groups. The
conference will also build a bridge between computational mathematics and
inverse problems. The exchange of ideas will be beneficial to researchers in
both areas. In addition, there will be a significant attendance of graduate
students. The conference is a great opportunity for them to access the cutting-
edge research, find interesting research topics, learn from world leading
researchers, and build the network/collaboration for future academic careers.
Geographically, Michigan Technological University is a little isolated from
major cities. The conference will provide a boost to the research activities and
give the department more visibility in the mathematical sciences community.

On the basis of current research trends and the wide spectrum of applications,
the conference focuses on the following topics: iterative methods for large
sparse eigenvalue problems with applications in big data sciences, finite
element methods for eigenvalue problems, computational electromagnetic, direct
techniques in inverse scattering theory, full wave inversion. The conference
will feature plenary talks given by international experts on the aforementioned
topics, invited talks from junior researchers, and contributed talks mainly from
graduate students. The topics of the conference involve rapidly developments at
the frontiers on today's research in computational mathematics and inverse
problems. On one hand, the demand of computational methods in inverse problems
is ever increasing. On the other hand, the computational mathematicians can find
interesting new problems in inverse problems. Applicability of the conference
topics extends to many real world applications including big data sciences, high
performance computing, medical imaging, non-destructive testing, underground
imaging and exploration.
