
* 1648171
* Innovative Weak Galerkin Finite Element Methods with Application in Fluorescence Tomography
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 05/16/2016,07/13/2016
* Chunmei Wang,TX,Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 63,998.00

Fluorescence tomography (FT) is an emerging three-dimensional optical imaging
modality that uses in vivo noninvasive depth-resolved localization and
quantification of fluorescent-tagged inclusions. FT techniques have been
extensively employed in early cancer detection, guidance of tumor resection, and
drug monitoring and discovery. This research project aims to develop new
numerical methods for computational problems arising in FT imaging. Besides
fluorescence tomography, the numerical methods can be applied to solve partial
differential equations that arise in various other disciplines. The models,
theory, and computational methods under development in this project will be of
great value in the fields of digital image processing, medical imaging, and
numerical analysis, with direct applications in broad areas such as digital
image and even construction industries. Students will be trained in this
project.

The goal of this research project is to develop and analyze efficient numerical
methods -- weak Galerkin (WG) finite element methods -- to address challenges
posed by fourth-order problems arising in fluorescence tomography theory. The
research will explore algorithmic advancements, new convergence theory, and
imaging technology improvement, by: (1) developing robust finite element methods
for a fourth order partial differential equation in the primal variable
formulation for which no existing method works; (2) establishing a stability and
convergence, including superconvergence, theory for the newly developed finite
element methods; (3) validating and verifying the methods through collaboration
with domain-specific researchers; (4) analyzing a new weak Galerkin mixed finite
element method for a fourth order partial differential equation; and (5)
developing application-oriented software packages, tested and validated with
collaborators in the area of FT.
