
* 1654152
* CAREER: Predictive Simulations of Complex Kinetic Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 09/01/2017,07/08/2021
* Jingwei Hu,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 11/30/2021
* USD 406,200.00

This project aims to build an integrated program of research and education
focused on advances in predictive simulations of complex kinetic systems. Such
systems are comprised of a large number of particles in random motion and are
best described by the Boltzmann and related kinetic equations. In practical
applications, there are many sources of uncertainties that can arise in kinetic
systems: imprecise measurements for initial and boundary conditions, incomplete
knowledge of the fundamental interaction mechanism between particles, and so on.
Understanding the impact of these uncertainties is critical to the simulations
of the complex kinetic systems, and will allow scientists and engineers to
obtain more reliable predictions and perform better risk assessment. Due to the
unique challenges arising in kinetic equations, such as multiple scales, high
dimensionality, and positivity, very few existing generic uncertainty
quantification (UQ) algorithms can be applied directly. To bridge this gap, the
research objective of this project is to develop highly efficient stochastic and
multiscale numerical methods for Boltzmann-like kinetic equations. A parallel
educational objective is to create innovative opportunities for students at all
levels to improve science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education and promote career interest in these disciplines, especially among
female students.

Specifically, we will pursue four research and educational aims: 1) develop
stochastic asymptotic-preserving methods for multiscale kinetic equations; 2)
construct high performance stochastic algorithms for the Boltzmann collision
operator; 3) design physics-preserving UQ algorithms for kinetic systems; and 4)
create education and outreach activities for students through undergraduate STEM
classroom innovation; graduate curriculum development in kinetic theory;
graduate and undergraduate mentoring; and organizing an after-school math
research program for high school girls and family math/science nights at middle
and elementary schools.
