
* 1654311
* CAREER: Large-Scale Bayesian Inverse Problems Governed by Differential and Differential-Algebraic Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,08/26/2021
* Noemi Petra,CA,University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Nontechnical explanation of the project's broader significance and importance:
Model-based projections of real life applications will play a central role in
prediction and decision-making, in environment and climate change applications,
for instance, to anticipate ice sheet contribution to sea level rise, or in the
context of energy applications, to predict faults and assess dynamic stability
in a power grid. However, models are typically subject to considerable
uncertainties stemming from uncertain inputs to the model (e.g., coefficient
fields, constitutive laws, source terms, geometries, and initial and/or boundary
conditions) as well as from noisy and limited observations. While many of these
input quantities cannot be directly observed or measured, they can be inferred
from observations, such as those of ice surface velocities in ice sheets. This
typically leads to an extremely challenging mathematical problem. This project
aims to enable the propagation of uncertainties from data/observations through
inference to prediction and increase predictability of complex physical systems.
The selected driving application (i.e., the ice sheet model) for research and
education activities, capture important general and complex algorithmic
challenges such as large-scale, nonlinearity, time-dependence, and ill-
posedness. The research will be, therefore, applicable to a broader spectrum of
problems. The algorithms, mathematical findings and open source codes will be
shared through peer reviewed journal papers, and presentations at conferences
and workshops. Technical description of the project: Bayesian inversion
facilitates the integration of data with complex physics-based models to
quantify and reduce uncertainties in model predictions. This opens the door to
more advanced capabilities for prediction and decision-making under uncertainty.
However, the algorithmic developments for Bayesian inversion are subject to
several challenges. For instance, characterizing the posterior distributions of
parameters or predictions inevitably requires repeated evaluations of (possibly)
large-scale and complex forward models governed by differential equations. In
addition, the posterior distribution has a complex structure stemming from the
presence of possibly nonlinear forward models and heterogeneous sources of data.
To overcome these computational challenges, it is essential to exploit problem
structure (e.g., derivatives and local sensitivity of the data with respect to
parameters). The objectives of this proposal is to conduct exploratory work in
addressing the mathematical and computational barriers in solving large-scale
Bayesian inverse problems governed by differential equations. Developing
mathematically rigorous and computationally efficient and robust methods in the
context of statistical inference has the potential of transformative research in
the field of modern computational inverse problems. In particular, the PI and
her student will work on the following vertically-integrated research areas: (i)
scalable algorithms for large-scale inverse problems (here the focus will be on
second derivative (i.e., Hessian) approximations for inverse problems and on
developing efficient preconditioners for inexact Newton-Krylov systems to
increase the computational efficiency of inverse solvers), and (ii) uncertainty
quantification in high dimensions (here the focus will be on building Hessian-
and reduced order model-based methods for efficient posterior exploration in
high dimensions). The proposed research requires an interdisciplinary
perspective, namely it brings together applied mathematics, scientific computing
and statistics.
