
* 1656459
* Efficient Algorithms for Uncertainty Quantification in High Dimensions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/16/2016,09/08/2016
* Dongbin Xiu,OH,Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 105,833.00

Uncertainty quantification (UQ) has become an integral part of today's
scientific computing, as it is essential to the understanding of the impacts of
various uncertain inputs (boundary and initial data, parameter values, geometry,
etc.) to numerical predictions. UQ is thus critical to many important practical
problems such as climate modeling, weather prediction, ocean dynamics, bio-
chemical reactions, etc. One of the biggest challenges in UQ computations is the
simulation cost, as UQ makes the traditional computations in much higher
dimensional parameter spaces. For large and complex systems, the standard
baseline deterministic simulations can be very time consuming, and conducing UQ
simulations will further increase the simulation cost and can be prohibitively
expensive. This is precisely the core issue this project intends to address and
study. A novel set of highly efficient UQ algorithms will be developed to make
UQ simulations amenable for large and complex systems. The new algorithms will
significantly advance the current state-of-the-art of UQ methods. One prominent
feature of the new algorithms is that they are designed to produce
mathematically optimal UQ simulation results based on given affordable
simulation capacity. While the traditional UQ methods seek to provide the
smallest cost at fixed accuracy, the new methods will provide the best results
at fixed affordable cost. This new feature thus makes the new algorithms ideally
suited for practical UQ simulations of large and complex systems, and will have
a profound impacts in various multidisciplinary fields where UQ is critical.

The core group of the new algorithms will be based on stochastic collation (SC).
In order to provide optimal prediction under given and limited simulation
capacity, this project is to develop a set of novel and efficient stochastic
collocation methods, with a focus on high dimensional problems using very few
number of samples. An important and fundamental assumption is made: the number
of the sample runs and the location of the samples are arbitrary and given by
practitioners. The goal is then to seek the best approximation in the
potentially very high dimensional parameter space, based on the given samples.
The proposed research consists of three major approaches: (1) arbitrary
interpolation type SC; (2) sparse regression type SC; and (3) multi-fidelity SC.
In all cases, the number of high-fidelity simulations is assumed to be limited
and given by the available simulation capacity, and methods are constructed to
produce the best possible UQ simulations. All methods will be mathematically
rigorous, as their constructions rely heavily on approximation theories in high
dimensions; and also easy to implement, as they are the non-intrusive SC
methods.
