
* 1707658
* Workshop on Quantification of Uncertainty: Improving Efficiency and Technology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Hydrologic Sciences
* 03/01/2017,06/21/2017
* Max Gunzburger,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 22,760.00

The workshop "Quantification of Uncertainty: Improving Efficiency and
Technology" will be held on July 18-21, 2017 at the International School for
Advanced Studies in Trieste, Italy, https://indico.sissa.it/event/8/. This NSF
award exclusively supports the participation costs of junior US-based attendees
at the workshop who will benefit from engaging with leading experts.
Internationally recognized experts will present recent progress and discuss
future directions of algorithmic and mathematical research in the quantification
of uncertainties in the outputs of complex systems that are subject to random
uncertainties in their inputs. Because such systems are ubiquitous, the workshop
will impact the scientific, engineering, social, financial, economic,
environmental, and commercial milieus. The structure of the workshop is designed
to maximize its short- and long-term impact. The scientific focus of the
workshop is on three very promising algorithmic areas for which near-term
improvements would have an immediate and lasting impact on all the settings
mentioned above. An important feature of the workshop is several discussion
sessions at which participants can use the information gathered from the
lectures to agree on the best possible research directions for each algorithmic
area. To maximize their impact, the results of the discussions will be widely
disseminated via a web site and through the publication of articles in
professional society news magazines. Finally, the long-term impact of the
workshop will be greatly enhanced by having a substantial majority of the
participants be junior researchers. The workshop lectures and discussion
sessions will greatly help those participants to form cutting-edge, long-term
research programs.

The workshop will address complex systems modeled by partial differential
equations and probabilistic descriptions of uncertainties. Reductions in the
cost while maintaining a desired fidelity for uncertainty quantification for
this setting can be realized in two ways: one can reduce the cost of obtaining
approximate solutions of the partial differential equation and/or one can reduce
the number of times the partial differential equation has to be solved. For the
former, the workshop will focus on two approaches. First is the development of
more efficient solvers for the large discrete systems that arise from, e.g.,
finite element discretizations. The second is the development of improved
reduced-order models that result in much smaller, and thus much cheaper to
solve, discretizations of the partial differential equation. Reductions in the
number of times the partial differential equation has to be solved will be
addressed through the development of improved methods for approximating the
dependence of solutions on the random parameters, especially when a large number
of parameters is involved. Recent advances in high-dimensional approximation
theory will play a prominent role.
