
* 1708602
* Statistical Learning for High-Dimensional Stochastic Dynamical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2016,08/22/2017
* Mauro Maggioni,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

High-dimensional stochastic dynamical systems arise in a wide variety of
scientific fields and applications, including models for the dynamics of
molecules, of multi-agent systems (such as cars or animals), of activity of
neurons, etc. The high-dimensionality of these systems corresponds to the large
number of variables (atoms, agents, neurons, respectively, in the preceding
examples) and typically makes these systems very expensive to simulate and hard
to understand even when simulations are possible. This research project aims to
develop novel ideas and algorithms for the model reduction of such systems. The
investigator will develop automatic learning algorithms that, by collecting a
number of short simulations in parallel, output a much lower-dimensional model
of the original system that yields faster simulations, with provable accuracy,
in a much reduced number of variables. This will make the simulations less
expensive, allowing one to perform more and longer simulations, and make the
extraction of useful information from simulated data easier. He will apply these
constructions to molecular dynamics simulations, expecting to significantly
reduce the computational time needed to simulate small biomolecules.

Large data sets in high dimensional spaces appear in a wide variety of
scientific fields and applications. The PI focuses here on data sets that
originate from the simulation of high-dimensional stochastic systems that arise
in a wide variety of applications (e.g. molecular dynamics), with the goal of
producing a much lower dimensional stochastic system with similar statistical
properties as the full system, at least at a certain time scale. This is
possible for a wide variety of dynamical systems with separation of time scales
when the structure of the forces acting on the system and the stochastic
perturbations are such that the trajectories of the system accumulate, in state
or phase space, around low-dimensional sets (at the appropriate time scale and
accuracy). The approach only requires access to a simulator S for the original
system that, given initial conditions and the shortest time scale of interest as
inputs, produces as output a (stochastic) path of the system starting at that
initial condition and stops at the specified time. A call to S is typically
expensive, but after a small number of carefully designed calls that yield a
relatively small number of short paths, the algorithm learns and outputs a low-
dimensional representation of the system, that is, a low-dimensional stochastic
system whose trajectories are (in a suitable statistical sense), at the
requested time scale, close to those of the original system. This construction
may be performed in an online setting, as new regions of state space are
explored, and in a multiscale fashion, where the time scale at which the system
is reduced varies. These techniques will be adaptive to the assumed low
intrinsic dimension of the simulated data, the timescale of interest, and the
accuracy, leading to a new generation of results and algorithms for learning and
approximating high-dimensional stochastic systems. While the techniques to be
developed are applicable to a large family of stochastic systems, the main
application considered in this project is Molecular Dynamics (MD). These
techniques are expected to dramatically speed up the exploration of the state
space of these molecules and of MD simulations as a whole. At the same time,
they are general enough that they are applicable to a wide variety of stochastic
systems, and the framework sets the stage for a novel approach to automatic
learning of dynamical systems that is amenable to further generalizations.
