
* 1714973
* Collaborative Research: A New Multiscale Methodology and Application to Tumor Growth modeling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 06/15/2017,06/28/2019
* John Lowengrub,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 242,863.00

The complexity of tumor growth, which involves interactions within cells, among
cells, and between cells and their environment, calls for development of
mathematical and computational models that can connect processes from the cell,
and sub-cell scales, to tissue level scales. These methods are needed to help
tumor biologists gain further insight into the underlying mechanisms of the
processes (e.g., proliferation, differentiation, and migration) involved in
tumor development, at the scales which influence their behavior. Because of this
complexity, it has been challenging to functionally link cell and tissue scale
processes, the knowledge of which is key to development of predictive multiscale
tumor models. However, current models typically use ad-hoc rules to bridge
between scales, which limits their predictive capability. This project will
address this challenge by developing a new multiscale method where directly
measurable quantities at the cell-scale inform the model parameters at the
continuum tissue scale through rigorous, mathematical upscaling techniques. The
multiscale model will be tested and validated by comparing simulation results
against experimentally obtained information about the overall growth rates and
spatiotemporal behaviors of the different cells and tumors. The new multiscale
method will be used to study pancreatic tumors to elucidate the transition of
pancreatic lesions into invasive pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). By
integrating patient data analysis with quantitative tumor modeling, the project
will develop reliable methods that can predict the likelihood of pancreatic cyst
progression to PDAC using relatively non-invasive approaches.

The project team will develop a new class of multiscale models that bridge these
scales non-phenomenologically through application of rigorous upscaling
techniques in order to close the continuum equations at the tissue scale and
provide an accurate description of the processes across both cell and tissue
scales. Specifically, stochastic agent-based models at the cell-scale and
continuum partial differential equation models at the tissue-scale will be
developed. Consistent functional relationships between the variables at the
tissue-scale and measurements at the cell-scale will be found by upscaling the
discrete models by using and extending the framework of dynamic density
functional theory (DDFT) to obtain multi-cell scale continuum equations that
account for correlations among cells as well as biological processes such cell
birth and death. Further upscaling to the tissue scale will be done by
identifying and deriving equations for slowly varying variables. The consistency
of the different models in domains where the scales overlap will be tested and
validated. The new multiscale method will be applied to model the progression of
pancreatic neoplasms into invasive carcinomas in order to estimate the
probability of this progression. Large-scale human patient datasets of
pancreatic lesions, provided by our consultants through a separately funded
project, will be used to validate and refine the models. The project will
enhance the cross disciplinary training of students.
