
* 1719818
* Bernstein-Bezier Techniques for High Order Time-Domain Discontinuous Galerkin Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,07/24/2017
* Jesse Chan,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Simulations of wave propagation are the backbone of numerous applications in a
diverse set of areas, such as medical imaging, predictive seismology, and
engineering design. Many applications require repeated high resolution
simulations of waves in domains with complex boundaries or features. For
example, brain imaging methods require dealing with wave propagation through
changing media within the human body, such as transitions between different
types of tissue or transitions from tissue to bone. The target application areas
require numerical simulations which are reliable, accurate, and efficient.
However, incorporating accurate approximations of complex media and geometries
typically sacrifices one or more of these properties, resulting in simulations
which are accurate but slow, fast but inaccurate, or unstable outside of
specific settings. The proposed project aims to develop reliable, provably
stable methods for wave propagation in complex media and geometries which retain
accuracy and efficiency.

The project will study numerical wave propagation using high order discontinuous
Galerkin (DG) methods, and consists of two main tasks. The first task will
leverage high performance architectures such as Graphics Processing Units
(GPUs), as well as the recently developed weight-adjusted and Bernstein-Bezier
DG methods. Weight-adjusted DG methods achieve provable stability and high order
accuracy in the presence of variable media, but have a high computational
complexity with respect to the order of approximation. Bernstein-Bezier DG
methods achieve an optimal computational complexity with respect to the order,
but require low-resolution models of media and geometry in order to do so. The
first task will combine these two approaches to construct methods for wave
propagation in varying media which are stable, high order accurate, and have low
computational complexity. The second task will be to improve the reliability of
modeling complex boundaries using curvilinear unstructured meshes. Typical
methods for producing curvilinear meshes can result in elements unsuitable for
numerical simulation. The second task will seek robust methods for constructing
high order approximations of geometry by leveraging Bernstein-Bezier
representations of polynomials, which are closely related to shape properties of
the underlying function.
