
* 1719699
* Numerical Analysis of Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics Type Methods via Nonlocal Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,07/20/2017
* Qiang Du,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Computational fluid dynamics is an important research field that plays a crucial
role in the understanding of fluid flows appearing in many mechanical,
hydrodynamic and biophysical processes. It occupies a central place in the
development of computational science. The proposed research intends to help
designing effective numerical algorithms, particularly those related to the so-
called smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH), for modeling complex fluids and
interfacial phenomena. The overall research objective is consistent with the
long term vision of predictive and reliable computational science, and in the
near term, it serves to complement ongoing research on SPH related methods and
their applications currently being carried out by various academic institutions
and national laboratories. The PI will not only work to facilitate the research
effort but also to strengthen the training and education of young students and
junior researchers. He will team up with collaborators to ensure the timely
translation and integration of new theoretical findings into enhanced simulation
capability for a variety of applications such as those involving heterogeneous
transport in underground, atmospheric and biophysical systems, energy and high-
strength materials, which are highly relevant to important national and societal
interests. Particle based computational methods such as the Smoothed Particle
Hydrodynamics (SPH) and related methods offer great flexibility in numerical
simulations and are becoming widely used in various scientific and engineering
applications. As these techniques get populated into major simulation codes to
be used by a large computational science and engineering community, it is
imperative to carry out a more quantitative assessment and mathematical analysis
as part of the rigorous validation and verification process. Assessing SPH based
simulations is challenging since these methods have been historically applied to
solve complex problems where either traditional methods do not work well or the
formal accuracy is of secondary concern. Studies based on conventional numerical
analysis techniques may not always produce mathematical findings that are
strongly relevant in practice. Our proposed research is to improve the
theoretical understanding of SPH and related methods. A novelty of our approach
draws on the recently developed nonlocal models and their numerical
approximations by the PI's group. It leads to new avenues to analyze SPH type
methods by both distinguishing and relating the different roles of integral
kernel representations/approximations of the locally defined spatial derivatives
and numerical discretization of the resulting nonlocal operators. Indeed,
inappropriate nonlocal relaxations of differential operators on the continuum
level may be the root cause of some problematic issues inherent to particle
based simulations. Incompatible discretization can also contribute to the loss
of fidelity and stability. By taking nonlocal integral operators and nonlocal
continuum formulations as bridges connecting continuum PDE models and particle
like discrete approximations, our approach represents a significant departure
from conventional numerical analysis that compares the discrete schemes with the
underlying continuum PDEs directly. The focus on algorithm robustness is
particularly relevant to SPH like methods given their intended application to
complex systems involving multiple scales and extreme operating conditions.
Specific objectives for the next few years include: developing continuum
reformulations of SPH like methods with nonlocal/integral operators; and
studying SPH type methods using discretization of nonlocal models as a bridge.
In carrying out the proposed work, we use an integrated analytical and
computational approach to provide both mathematical infrastructure needed for
theoretical analyses and practical insight for code development. We pay close
attention to techniques that work for solutions lacking regularity or exhibiting
strong variations and for particle distributions and boundary conditions that
are frequently encountered in practical implementations.
