
* 1719849
* Regularized Adaptive Methods for Classes of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,07/20/2018
* Sara Pollock,OH,Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 75,798.00

Nonlinear diffusion equations appear often in simulations of physical processes
such as heat conduction, groundwater flow, and flow in porous media. Such
equations appear in environmentally relevant modeling problems describing the
distribution of subsurface contaminants. In these nonlinear problems, the
diffusion coefficient is dependent on the solution and possibly its coordinates;
as such, a numerical solution to the model cannot be determined by direct means.
Generally, solutions can only be found by solving a sequence of simpler
approximate problems, and making successive improvements to the solution.
Convergence of the scheme may fail however if this is carried out in a standard
way, and current numerical simulations can be limited by the failure of these
standard iterative techniques. The focus of this work is on the mathematically
rigorous development of stable and convergent iterative numerical algorithms to
efficiently solve nonlinear diffusion equations, addressing a substantial
problem in scientific computing for realistic physical modeling.

The technical goal of this project is to develop efficient and robust simulation
technology for classes of nonlinear diffusion equations. Finite element
solutions for nonlinear diffusion problems are known to have good approximation
properties in the asymptotic regime, but a sound methodology to compute those
discrete solutions has yet to be developed. Regularized adaptive methods will be
developed within the framework of adaptive finite element methods, for which (1)
the iterates converge to discrete solutions; and (2) the discrete solutions
converge to the solution of the partial differential equation, as the mesh is
selectively refined. One of the aims of this work is to develop guiding
principles for the regularization of the induced discrete problems in concert
with error indicators to determine the mesh refinement. The combination of the
regularization and error indicators should both allow the computation of a
discrete solution, and guarantee the convergence to a correct solution from a
theoretical standpoint. Computational methods backed up by sound mathematical
theory will be developed for representative classes of model problems, and the
developed methods will be extended to larger, computationally-demanding
simulations, for example to model the distribution of C02 injected into the
earth's subsurface as a potential means for long-term storage. It is expected
that the technical advances made in the course of this project will advance the
realization of efficient and accurate numerical simulation tools that allow the
practical modeling of problems with realistic physical attributes.
