
* 1719829
* Finite Element Methods for Incompressible Flow Yielding Divergence-Free Approximations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2017,06/20/2017
* Michael Neilan,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 157,487.00

This research project aims to develop practical, structure-preserving
computational methods to simulate incompressible flow. Systems with
incompressible flow are ubiquitous in computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and
arise in several engineering and biological models such as those used in
aircraft design, weather prediction, and lipid membrane modeling. The main focus
of the project is to identify compatible computational methods that inherit at
the discrete level the intrinsic structure and invariants of the systems under
study. Such discretizations produce numerical schemes with enhanced stability
and conservation properties, resulting in physically relevant and accurate
approximations. It is anticipated that the results of the project will directly
benefit researchers and practitioners in CFD and be useful in applications that
require faithful approximations. In addition to the construction of these
numerical schemes and algorithms, the project will analyze the stability and
convergence of the methods; the theoretical analysis will provide insight for
future development of numerical schemes with improved efficiency, accuracy, and
fidelity.

The project is centered on developing finite element methods for the
incompressible Stokes and Navier-Stokes equations that enforce the divergence-
free constraint exactly. Such schemes have several desirable properties,
including improved error estimates, enhanced long-time stability and accuracy of
time-stepping schemes, explicit characterizations and local bases of divergence-
free subspaces, and coupled-method accuracy when combined with projection
methods. Specific objectives of this project include (i) developing stable
finite element pairs for Navier-Stokes equations in three dimensions that
strongly enforce exact conservation of mass; (ii) applying simplicial Bernstein-
Bezier theory, a powerful analytical tool for polynomial splines, to the mixed
finite element framework; (iii) constructing robust and computationally
attractive methods for axisymmetric fluid models; and (iv) developing stable
mixed finite element pairs on surfaces by incorporating fluid flow models in a
finite element exterior calculus framework.
