
* 1719582
* Computing Optimal Alignments of Surfaces
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2017,07/19/2017
* Joel Hass,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,038.00

Almost everything we see in the world around us is a two-dimensional surface.
Whether with our eyes, with radar or with a laser scanner, we receive data about
the geometry of the surface that forms the outer boundary of an object. There is
a fundamental need to understand how to analyze this geometric data for purposes
of aligning and comparing pairs of surfaces. This project will develop and
implements new and rigorous mathematical methods to compare shapes, based on
techniques of low-dimensional topology. It will develop new mathematical results
and create new computational tools. Applications range from facial recognition
to brain mapping to protein classification. The underlying mathematical theory
of shape comparison will be extended, and new algorithms to implement the
resulting theory will be developed and software made available. Moreover this
software will be applied and tested on collections of biological shapes, such as
protein surfaces, databases of faces, collections of bones and teeth, and brain
cortices.

This project will develop new mathematical measures of the distortion based on a
variety of measures of the energy needed to stretch one surface over another.
Given two surfaces, or shapes, algorithms will be developed to produce an
optimal correspondence or alignment between them. The difference or similarity
of two shapes will be captured in new distance functions that capture aspects of
geometric similarity. The project builds on successful existing approaches used
in comparing surfaces that have the topology of a sphere. These methods will be
improved and extended to more general surfaces, allowing for comparing surfaces
with one, two, or more handles. Past methods based on conformal maps will be
extended to allow use of more general surface diffeomorphisms. The project will
also produce explicit alignments between partial surfaces, or surfaces with
boundary. This partial surface matching allows for matching surfaces when only
portions of each have been measured, with other parts obscured. It also allows
comparison between pairs of surfaces having different topologies, overcoming a
problem faced by current methods. The symmetric distortion energy recently
introduced will be extended to these more general contexts. Software
implementing these geometric algorithms will be developed and made available.
This software will be designed to be usable by scientists in a wide variety
disciplines and could lead to breakthroughs in biological and medical
understanding.
