
* 1719698
* Rigorous Development of an Efficient Reduced Collocation Approach for High-Dimensional Parametric Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,07/15/2021
* Yanlai Chen,MA,University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 179,414.00

Many physical phenomena depend on a range of parameters, and to understand the
phenomena many repeated simulations for different parameter values are required.
Such parameters may describe properties of a material, wave frequencies,
uncertainties in measured data, physical states at the boundaries, or domain
geometry, among others. These massively repeated simulations require significant
computer time, and are frequently computationally prohibitive. Reduced basis
methods were developed to resolve this issue by providing efficient and accurate
surrogate solutions for the large space of parameter values, based on a
relatively small number of carefully selected parameters and their related pre-
computed highly accurate "snapshot" solutions. Once these "snapshot" solutions
are pre-computed, computing the surrogate solutions for any parameter values is
quick and efficient. Moreover, their accuracy is certified by a mathematically
rigorous error bound. A variant of the reduced basis method, called the reduced
collocation method, was recently introduced by the PIs that is more efficient
for nonlinear problems. The goals of this project are to develop this new method
to be more efficient, both in precise identification of the "snapshot" solutions
and in computing the surrogate solutions once the "snapshot" solutions are
found, to integrate reduced basis and reduced collocation methods with
uncertainly quantification techniques to efficiently handle complex problems,
and to ensure that certain strong stability properties satisfied by the
underlying snapshot solutions are preserved by the reduced collocation methods.
These goals will enable an efficient and powerful reduced collocation method
that can be applied to a wide range of parameter-dependent phenomena.

Reduced basis methods were originally developed for use with a Galerkin
formulation of a partial differential equations, and recently extended by the
PIs for collocation formulations, which are frequently preferred for nonlinear
problems. In fact, this new reduced collocation method (RCM) is more efficient
than the typical reduced basis method (RBM) for a large class of partial
differential equations (PDEs). The goal of this project is to rigorously develop
the new RCM in order to: (1) improve the offline stage by introducing novel
approaches to building a more optimal reduced space faster; (2) make the online
stage of the RCM more robust and efficient for nonlinear problems through a
variety of mathematical approaches to selecting the collocation points,
developing pre-conditioners, and creating a co-prime multi-grid approach; (3)
integrate the RBM/RCM with uncertainty quantification approaches to efficiently
handle problems with high dimensional random spaces; and (4) enhance the RBM/RCM
approaches to guarantee that the surrogate solutions preserve the strong
stability properties satisfied by the underlying snapshot solutions. Rigorous
mathematical analysis and innovative and efficient algorithm design will be
combined to improve the reduced basis approaches thereby making them more
efficient and robust for large classes of problems. This project will transform
the RCM to make it efficient and robust, for linear as well as nonlinear
problems. Furthermore, this project will combine knowledge from the field of
reduced order modeling for linear and nonlinear PDEs and the field of
uncertainty quantification to create powerful new methods, hybrids of the
generalized polynomial chaos method and reduced basis methods. The resulting
algorithms will impact the field of uncertainty quantification by improving the
efficiency and robust handling of high parameter dimensions. Finally, the
RBM/RCM will be improved to guarantee the preservation of nonlinear properties
such as positivity. This novel development will resolve a major concern about
the quality of the surrogate solution.
