
* 1719410
* Algorithm Development, Analysis, and Application of High Order Schemes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,07/21/2017
* Chi-Wang Shu,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

In this project the PI will perform research in algorithm design and analysis of
high order accurate and efficient numerical methods for solving partial
differential equations. These algorithms are used to solve scientific and
engineering problems arising from diverse application fields such as aerospace
engineering, semi-conductor device design, astrophysics, and biological
problems. Even with today's fast computers, it is still essential to design
efficient and reliable algorithms which can be used to obtain accurate solutions
to these application problems. The broader impacts resulting from the proposed
activity will be a suite of powerful computational tools, suitable for various
applications mentioned above. These tools are expected to make positive
contributions to computer simulations of the complicated solution structure in
these applications.

The algorithms the PI plans to investigate include the finite difference and
finite volume weighted essentially non-oscillatory (WENO) schemes and
discontinuous Galerkin finite element methods, for solving hyperbolic and other
convection dominated partial differential equations (PDEs). While the emphasis
of this project is on algorithm design and analysis, close attention will be
paid to applications. Topics of proposed investigations will include the study
on an inverse Lax-Wendroff procedure for high order numerical boundary
conditions for finite difference schemes on Cartesian meshes solving problems in
general geometry, Lagrangian type finite volume schemes for multi-material
flows, a simple weighted essentially non-oscillatory limiter for discontinuous
Galerkin methods with strong shocks, high order stable conservative methods on
arbitrary point clouds, discontinuous Galerkin methods for weakly coupled
hyperbolic multi-domain and network problems, efficient time-stepping techniques
for discontinuous Galerkin schemes, high order accurate bound-preserving schemes
and applications, bound-preserving high order discontinuous Galerkin schemes for
radiative transfer equations, energy-conserving DG methods for Maxwell's
equations in Drude metamaterials, efficient discontinuous Galerkin method for
front propagation problems with obstacles, superconvergence analysis of
discontinuous Galerkin methods and its applications, multi-scale methods based
on the discontinuous Galerkin framework, and applications in areas including
traffic and pedestrian flow models and aggregation, coordinated movement and
cell proliferation in computational biology. Problems in applications will
motivate the design of new algorithms or new features in existing algorithms;
mathematics tools are used to analyze these algorithms to give guidelines for
their applicability and limitations; practical considerations including parallel
implementation issues are addressed to make the algorithms competitive in large
scale calculations; and collaborations with engineers and other applied
scientists enable the efficient application of these new algorithms or new
features in existing algorithms.
