
* 1719828
* Practical Large-Scale Sum-of-Squares Optimization
* DMS,OE Operations Engineering, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2017,06/03/2019
* David Papp,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 220,000.00

Polynomial optimization is a fundamental computational technique, with
applications in a wide variety of fields that include power systems engineering,
signal processing, statistics, geometry, and medicine. There are several
existing computational approaches for polynomial optimization; however, they all
share a few core ideas that limit both their efficiency and stability. As the
size and complexity of the models arising from modern applications continues to
increase, these existing approaches are increasingly limiting. This research
project is aimed toward the development of novel computational methods that are
simultaneously more reliable and more efficient than the existing techniques. To
assure the relevance of the research, the approaches will be implemented as
easily usable computational tools, which will be disseminated widely to the
scientific and engineering community.

One of the most common approaches to the solution of global polynomial
optimization problems utilizes semi-definite programming (SDP) hierarchies.
These arise from combining the algebraic theory of sum-of-squares polynomials
and the observation that sum-of-squares polynomials are semi-definite
representable. While theoretically satisfactory, the translation of sum-of-
squares optimization problems to SDPs is not always practical. First, the SDP
representation of sum-of-squares polynomials roughly squares the number of
optimization variables, increasing the time and memory complexity of the
solution algorithms by several orders of magnitude. The second problem is
numerical. In the common SDP formulation, the dual variables are semi-definite
matrices whose condition numbers grow exponentially with the degree of the
polynomials involved. This is detrimental for a floating-point implementation.
This project builds on recent results in non-symmetric conic optimization and
multivariate interpolation to derive the algorithmic theory and practical
computational tools needed to circumvent the need to use the standard SDP-based
approach to sum-of-squares optimization. The aim is to provide algorithms for
these problems that are both efficient and computationally effective. The
principal investigator will investigate the impact of the novel algorithm
developments for a diverse set of applications, including the design of optimal
radiotherapy treatments.
