
* 1719545
* Collaborative Research: Tractable Non-Convex Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2017,07/02/2019
* Afonso Bandeira,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 120,001.00

Practitioners in most fields of science and engineering invest a substantial
amount of time developing appropriate mathematical models for the complex
questions they set out to answer. A model is deemed appropriate for a given task
if it meets two potentially conflicting criteria simultaneously. On the one
hand, it must be sufficiently faithful to reality (and as such, sufficiently
complex) so as to capture the essential properties of the object of study. On
the other hand, the model must be simple enough that it can be practically used
to answer relevant questions. This second requirement is computational in
nature. In effect, the modeler aims to reduce a particular question to a
mathematical problem known to be practically solvable, or tractable. For the
most part, tractability ensures that the problem can be solved using known
algorithms, and as a result the status quo has been that problems that are not
tractable should be avoided for applications. Yet, scores of problems in science
and engineering are most naturally modeled within a framework that has been
previously determined to be non-tractable. This research project aims to develop
theory and algorithms to identify and solve non-convex optimization problems,
typically regarded as non-tractable. The goal is to provide practitioners with
an extended modeling toolbox, allowing them to capture key aspects of our
complex reality.

This project targets optimization problems that are tractable despite non-
convexity. This can come about in a number of ways. The non-convexity may be
structurally benign, in that the problem actually does not have local optima at
all. This project explores such structural effects in the context of Burer-
Monteiro relaxations. Alternatively, the problem may present numerous local
optima in some instances, yet present only good quality ones on instances of the
problem encountered in practice. This motivates the analysis of non-convex
optimization problems in a non-adversarial setting, in many cases more relevant
to practice than classical adversarial analyses. This project investigates some
model problems of this nature. Here too, salvation can come in different forms:
It is possible that when data is good enough (for example, if the signal to
noise ratio is sufficient), local optima cannot exist; or, it is possible to
initialize the algorithms close enough to the global optimum so that convergence
to it is assured; or, even local optima are satisfactory to answer the
underlying question. This project explores such situations through applications
in community detection in large networks and through phase synchronization, as
model problems for understanding challenges in a more general class of problems
including, but not limited to, electron cryomicroscopy from structural biology
and simultaneous localization and mapping in robotics. A common feature of many
tractable non-convex optimization is that they are naturally posed on smooth
nonlinear spaces called Riemannian manifolds. As a result, important algorithmic
aspects of this project involve developing theory, algorithms, and software for
optimization on Riemannian manifolds.
