
* 1719851
* OP: Scattering and Imaging of Subwavelength Nanostructures: Asymptotics and Algorithms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,07/22/2019
* Junshan Lin,AL,Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 236,004.00

Nano-optics refers to the study of the remarkable properties and phenomena
associated with nano-scale materials or devices when interacting with optical
light. It is a vigorously growing discipline that has opened up a broad range of
possibilities for modern science and technology. With the advent of innovative
patterning techniques allowing for the sculpting of materials with nanometer
precision, it is presently promising to fabricate optical devices that can
perform tasks at scales unattainable with conventional optics, and with great
speed and efficiency. This project is devoted to the optical scattering and
imaging of nano-structures. The outcome of the theoretical work will provide
advances in the understanding of new types of light-matter interactions in
subwavelength nano-structures. In addition, the computational frameworks will
provide inexpensive, fast, and accurate modeling of optical wave propagation in
such tiny structures and enhance near-field optical imaging techniques.
Furthermore, the fast implementations of forward modeling and inverse imaging
tools will also provide realistic guidance for the design of nano devices with
the desired properties in their interactions with the optical light.

The project focuses on examining fundamental mathematical issues and developing
computational methods for new and important classes of problems arising from the
optical wave scattering and imaging of nano-structures. This consists of
mathematical studies of extraordinary field enhancement in metallic nano-
structures and their super-resolution imaging via inverse scattering. The
technical focus of the model problems is on Maxwell's equations in complicated
and multi-scale media. New analytical tools based upon a combination of the
boundary integral equation approach and asymptotic analysis techniques will be
developed for rigorous studies of the tightly confined optical wave fields in
nano apertures/holes. Computationally, in order to address the significant
challenges brought by the extreme scale difference between the aperture size and
the wavelength of radiation, fast and high-order horizontal and vertical mode
matching numerical schemes will be designed for the simulation of wave
propagations in nano-structures. Finally, efficient numerical algorithms based
on the inverse scattering theory will be applied for imaging multi-scale
subwavelength structures and for breaking the diffraction limit.
