
* 1719658
* Automated, Secure Homotopy Continuation and Parameter Space Exploration
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2017,03/22/2019
* Daniel Bates,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 249,835.00

Systems of polynomial equations arise naturally in most scientific and
engineering fields. These systems describe the motion of robotic arms, the
steady states of biochemical reactions, the location of radio transmitters based
on sensor readings, and many other science and engineering scenarios that are
rooted in physical laws and geometry. The solution of polynomial systems was
nearly impossible until roughly fifty years ago, and efficient methods are still
being developed and analyzed. The first broad direction of this project seeks to
automate the tuning of some of these methods (so that non-experts can use them
readily) and to incorporate more certainty in the computations. The second broad
direction seeks to further develop methods that are particularly useful in
applications and to make progress on a few particular applications, namely,
biochemical reaction networks, geolocation, and population genetics. Three
graduate students will be involved in the project.

Homotopy continuation is a fundamental computational tool of numerical algebraic
geometry, on which virtually all advanced algorithms within the field depend.
While there has been much theoretical and algorithmic development on this topic
over the years, there are still at least three basic problems to be addressed.
First, ill-conditioning forces the use of expensive high-precision numerical
computations and sometimes path failure. Second, homotopy continuation depends
on a number of numerical tolerances that are highly problem-dependent and
difficult to adjust, especially for non-experts. Third, numerical methods are
inherently inexact, making them undesirable in some contexts. The three projects
of the first research direction seek to make progress on solving these problems.
Fundamental scientific and engineering questions frequently involve parameters,
and their solution depends on the ability to understand and move around
parameter spaces effectively. The three projects of the second direction aim to
further develop numerical homotopy methods for parameter space exploration. The
first project will advance our ability to collect useful data from Euclidean
parameter spaces, particularly when the goal is to find points in parameter
space at which a parameterized polynomial system has a special kind of solution
set. The second project aims to extend homotopy continuation to general
algebraic parameter spaces. The third project is an assortment of applications,
as mentioned.
