
* 1719727
* Computational Tools for Polycrystalline Materials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2017,04/19/2021
* Selim Esedoglu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 201,890.00

This project will develop new algorithms for computer simulation of how the
internal structure (called microstructure) of many technologically essential
materials, such as most metals and ceramics, change during common manufacturing
processes such as heat treatment. The microstructure of such materials is known
to have implications for the physical properties, such as conductivity or yield
strength, of the material. Although models describing how the microstructure
evolves, for example during heat treatment, have been available, their efficient
numerical simulation at scales large enough to be of practical interest to
materials scientists have remained a challenge. The project will address this
challenge. Understanding the evolution of microstructure holds the promise of
materials with more desirable characteristics. The project will also develop
machine learning and computer vision algorithms for automatically extracting
microstructure information from experimental measurements (microscopy images) of
such materials, so that predictions of the models to be simulated can be more
readily checked against experiments. One Ph.D. student's training and thesis
work will be an integral part of the research.

Continuum models of interfacial motion in polycrystalline materials often take
the form of a system of nonlinear partial differential equations describing the
geometric flow of a network of surfaces. For certain important interfacial
phenomena, such as grain boundary motion, the evolution is given by second order
differential equations describing motion by mean curvature of the network. For
that setting, a surprisingly simple, elegant, and efficient class of algorithms
known as threshold dynamics have been developed that makes large scale
simulation particularly feasible. Other phenomena, such as the motion of the
free surface of a thin polycrystalline film, or that of pores in a sintered
metal, are described by higher order geometric evolutions, such as motion by
surface diffusion, and are more challenging to simulate. This project will
develop efficient algorithms for such high order multi-phase geometric
evolutions. In particular, it will explore whether threshold dynamics or a
combination of it with phase field methods can be devised to simulate the motion
of networks of surfaces in which some of the interfaces evolve via motion by
mean curvature, and others via motion by surface diffusion, coupled along free
boundaries known as junctions along which appropriate boundary conditions are
satisfied. Some of these models describing the multi-phase geometric motion of
networks of interfaces also arise almost verbatim in the context of computer
vision and machine learning. By leveraging this mathematical connection, the
project will also develop new algorithms for automatically extracting grain
boundaries in microscopy images of real polycrystalline materials.
