
* 1720226
* Computational Methods for Heterogeneous Soft Living Materials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 07/01/2017,06/25/2019
* Andreas Aristotelous,PA,West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 100,115.00

Biofilms are present everywhere in the natural world and can have beneficial or
adverse health effects. Through this award the principal investigator will
provide a solid modeling platform and develop and analyze the computational
tools that are needed for better understanding the behavior of biofilm formation
and interaction with the microenvironment. For example, biofilms can be present
in water systems affecting pipes and filters, and they can also be found in
chronic wounds and infected prosthetic joints and heart valves, causing
resistance to antibiotic use and then requiring further surgical interventions
and prosthesis replacement. The computational methods developed in this research
will provide an additional inexpensive and powerful method that compliments the
work done by experimentalists. The computational algorithms and software tools
are sufficiently general that they may be applied to other problems in science
and engineering that present similar challenges. An interesting example is to
better understand how bacteriophage adhere to mucus as a way to provide a
nonhost-derived immunity. Improved insights provided through computational
modeling have the potential to lead to the creation of new kinds of antibiotics.

The principal investigator (PI) aims to develop numerical techniques for the
solutions of equations that model heterogeneous soft living materials arising in
biology. The focus is on biofilms and mucosal surfaces, and their interactions
with surrounding fluid and biological agents, e.g. bacteria and viruses.
Multiphase living materials are characterized by adhesive forces, they have
viscoelastic properties and can diffuse, grow, deform or shear. The PI plans to
focus on computational tools for solving the energy driven Cahn-Hilliard type
equations describing phase separation and sharp diffusive interfaces, coupled
with fluid flow equations. Interacting biological agents introduce
heterogeneities and discontinuities into multiphase systems, highlighting the
need for the design of a robust computational framework that couples continuous
and discrete models. The PI aims to develop integrated methods for addressing
challenges particular to heterogeneous biomaterials. He aims to combine high
order discontinuous Galerkin finite element discretizations, in conjunction with
time and spatial adaptivity, for analyzing the solution of the underlying
systems while accounting for discontinuities, nonlinearities and moving sharp
interior interfaces. Unconditionally energy stable and locally mass conservative
schemes will be used to model long time dynamics. The resulting ill-conditioned
nonlinear algebraic systems will be solved using efficient solvers based on
multigrid techniques that exploit the specific local structure stemming from the
choice of discretization. The development of computational tools that resolve
these issues can lead to a better understanding of the factors that impact the
evolution of soft biological systems. The efficient nonlinear and
spatiotemporally adaptive solvers proposed will apply to even more general
equations and will therefore advance the field of numerical nonlinear partial
differential equations.
