
* 1720341
* Collaborative Research: Selection Methods for Algebraic Design of Experiments
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2017,08/14/2017
* Elena Dimitrova,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Data science has emerged as an important field for making decisions based on
data collected from sectors as varied as healthcare and housing. Though data are
plentiful, thanks to phone apps, merchant loyalty cards, and social media
accounts, there is still a question of whether more data translates to more
knowledge. Furthermore collection and storage can be problematic especially when
data are sensitive, as it is often the case with clinical trials and genetic
experiments. The problem of selecting information-rich data becomes crucial for
creating models that can reliably predict the outcome of future experiments. Few
results have been published on the amount of necessary data, and currently there
are no guidelines for generating specific data sets which would unambiguously
identify a predictive model. As a first step towards developing a complete
theory, the PIs will focus on models described by finite-valued nonlinear
polynomial functions. (For example, the internal "function" in WedMD's Symptom
Checker returns medical conditions according to symptoms input by the user.)
They will construct the smallest data sets that have a single associated
polynomial model and study properties of such data sets. From these
computational experiments, they will build the appropriate theory, design
algorithms, and generate code that can be later developed into software complete
with a graphical user interface. Graduate students will participate at the
appropriate level of each component of the project. Such an experience will
provide them possible topics for an MS or PhD dissertation and will very likely
inspire a career-long involvement in the STEM disciplines. The theoretical
results will advance the fields of design of experiments, network inference, and
finite dynamical systems through the determination of criteria for selecting
data sets to uniquely identify models. The algorithms will serve as a guide for
experimentalists in determining the data that are needed to identify the
structure of a network of interest. Such knowledge has the potential to
drastically reduce wasted resources that arise from too much data with too
little information.

While this is the age of big data, there is still a question of whether more
data translates to more knowledge. Particularly when collecting data is
expensive or time consuming, as it is often the case with clinical trials and
biomolecular experiments, the problem of selecting information-rich data becomes
crucial for creating relevant models. Finite-state multivariate polynomial
functions have successfully been used to model complex networks from discretized
data; however, few results have been published on the amount of data necessary
for such models, with the majority applying to Boolean models only. It is still
unknown which data points explicitly identify such discrete models, and as a
consequence, there are no methods for generating the specific data sets which
would unambiguously identify the model. The PIs will address the issue of the
minimality and specificity of data to uniquely identify discrete polynomial
models by developing the appropriate theory, designing algorithms, and
generating code that can be later built into software. Graduate students will
participate at the appropriate level of each component of the project. This
project will resolve some important computational issues in network inference
and will improve experimental design and model selection by eliminating the
effect of computational artifacts that arise when working with nonlinear
multivariate polynomials. The theoretical results will advance the fields of
design of experiments and network inference through the establishment of
criteria to select data sets to uniquely identify models. The proposed work will
also increase the utility of polynomial dynamical systems as models of complex
networks by establishing the minimal amount of the data for unique model
identification. The algorithms will serve as a guide for experimentalists in
determining the data that are needed to identify the structure of a network of
interest. Such knowledge has the potential to drastically reduce the number of
experiments performed and to eliminate the generation of data with little
intrinsic value.
