
* 1720259
* Matrix Functions and Network Analysis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,08/21/2017
* Lothar Reichel,OH,Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Networks are important subjects of study in several fields, including biology,
social sciences, and security. Two important properties of networks that are
often overlooked are that they are dynamic (change over time), and have features
that are relevant at different scales. Thus, it is important to study networks
from a dynamic and multiscale point of view. A natural model is to assume that
we have not just one network, but a family of networks, indexed by one parameter
(or may be more). That parameter can track changes as time passes, or as one
change one's focus to different scales. In this project the PIs will develop
analysis tools and techniques that provide useful insights, but are also
efficiently computable for large networks, even when dealing with many values
for the parameter. They concentrate on several measures of interest in the
network analysis literature, like measures of centrality, hubs and authorities,
good broadcasters and good receivers. The study of these measures becomes more
difficult for larger networks.

Methods for discovering important features of a network are often based on
matrix functions. Two of them are the matrix exponential and the resolvent;
these can be heuristically justified as measuring connectivity between nodes by
weighted sums of paths connecting them, and modifications of these functions can
be easily devised to stress some features of the network over others. The PIs
have developed methods for approximate computation and error estimation that can
be applied to a wide class matrix functions. They will adapt and develop methods
of approximate computation, and determine error estimates for these methods, as
relevant to the project setting. Some quantifications of network features
involve matrix decompositions, like the eigenvalue or singular value
decompositions, while others involve only simple matrix summaries, like the
diagonal entries, or row and column sums. The PIs will devise approaches for
carrying out decompositions that take advantage of the closeness between the
matrices when the parameters are close, in order to reduce the computational
burden and to better keep track of the parts of the decomposition that rise or
fall in importance as the parameter changes.
