
* 1720405
* Collaborative Research: Efficient High-Order Algorithms for Nonequilibrium Microflows Over the Entire Range of Knudsen Number
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2017,06/20/2017
* Shidong Jiang,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 162,500.00

Nonequilibrium microflows are ubiquitous in sensors, microfluidics, and
microelectromechanical systems and have important applications in bio-medical
and environmental sciences, aerodynamic, chemical, and energy industries, and
space science. For example, vacuum pumps manipulate rarefied gases at very low
density and pressure, where approaches based on continuum theory, which is the
engineering model for gaseous flows at standard temperature and pressure, is no
longer valid. The extent of nonequilibrium of a gaseous flow is qualitatively
measured by the Knudsen number -- the ratio of mean free path to a macroscopic
length. Nonequilibrium flows may be modeled by the Boltzmann equation for the
single-particle velocity distribution function in phase space. Standard methods
for numerical solution may not be accurate enough, and their computational cost
may be prohibitively expensive due to the high-dimensionality of phase space,
especially for time-dependent problems. This project aims to create effective
and efficient simulation tools for nonequilibrium microflows. Graduate students
are involved in the research.

For low-speed microflows, reduced kinetic models, such as the linearized
Bhatnagar-Gross-Krook-Welander (BGKW) equation, coupled with the diffuse
reflection boundary condition, are reliable and capable of producing very
accurate results for microflows in the whole range of the Knudsen number. The
equation can be transformed into a system of linear integral equations for
macroscopic variables including the density of the gas, the flow velocity, and
the temperature, which leads to great dimension reduction, consequently drastic
enhancement of computational efficiency. The overarching goal of this research
project is to develop efficient high-order algorithms to solve a system of
integral equations pertaining to nonequilibrium gaseous flows in various
geometries over the entire range of Knudsen number, for applications to
microflows. The work consists of the following technical ingredients to overcome
the challenges encountered in simulation of microflows: (1) An accurate and
efficient algorithm to evaluate the Abramowitz function on the complex plane, as
required for time-dependent problems; (2) Theoretical analysis, especially on
the nullspace, of the integral equations; (3) Efficient and high-order
algorithms for the integral equations on smooth and nonsmooth convex domains in
two dimensions. The results of the project are anticipated to provide enabling
technologies for a broad range of engineering applications involving multiscale
multi-physics microflows.
