
* 1720425
* Topics of Immersed Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,07/17/2017
* Xu Zhang,MS,Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 125,042.00

Interface problems are ubiquitous. When simulations involve multiple materials
or multi-physics, interface problems arise. Many real-world problems in fluid
mechanics, material science, mechanical engineering, and biomedical engineering
are modeled by three-dimensional interface problems. The immersed finite element
methods (IFEM) are a class of numerical methods for solving interface problems
on interface-unfitted meshes. Two interrelated problems will be investigated in
this research project. The first problem aims to design a self-adaptive IFEM
based on the a posteriori error estimation. The second problem focuses on
development, implementation, and analysis of three-dimensional IFEM.

The first problem concerns the study of both residual-based and recovery-based
error estimation for various immersed finite element discretizations. These
include the immersed finite element approximation in conforming, nonconforming
and discontinuous Galerkin frameworks. Rigorous mathematical analysis will be
carried out for the reliability and efficiency error estimates of IFEM. The
second problem focuses on interface problems of three spatial dimensions. It
aims to develop an innovative approach to efficiently construct the three-
dimensional immersed finite element functions. These immersed finite element
functions will be implemented in various numerical schemes for three-dimensional
interface problems. Theoretically, both a priori and a posteriori error
estimates will be conducted for new IFEM schemes. Computationally, a three-
dimensional IFEM software package will be developed with the feature of adaptive
mesh refinement.
