
* 1720420
* Collaborative Research: Modeling and Computation of Three-Dimensional Multicomponent Vesicles in Complex Flow Domains
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,07/18/2017
* Shuwang Li,IL,Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 206,040.00

Vesicles have long been considered as model systems for studying fundamental
physics underlying complicated biological systems such as cells and
microcapsules. Additionally, vesicles are increasingly being used as carriers
for drug delivery or as biochemical micro-reactors operating in physiological
environments. This project aims to develop efficient computational models and
numerical tools for modeling of vesicle dynamics, which involves phase
separation, formation of compartments, and interactions among vesicles and their
aqueous environment. The results are expected to aid in the design of phase
domains on the surface of a vesicle such that specific proteins can anchor on
the membrane to initiate subsequent biological reactions. The project aims to
contribute to the forefront of research on constructing artificial cells with
multiple compartments. The research also advances numerical method development,
analytical theory, and integral equation formulations in the context of bio-
membrane mechanics and particulate flows. The project will create opportunities
for students to receive interdisciplinary training crossing the mathematical,
biological, and physical sciences.

This project addresses the challenges of mathematically modeling and numerically
simulating three-dimensional multi-component and multi-compartment vesicles in
complex flow domains using sharp interface methods. At the continuum level, the
mathematical description of vesicle dynamics is a highly nonlinear, nonlocal
moving boundary problem where the bilayer membrane serves as the moving
boundary. The fundamental mathematical feature is that this system effectively
couples surface phase dynamics, morphological evolution and compartment
formation, and fluid motion so that the model describes a more realistic
physical system than has been developed previously in the literature. The
investigators develop and apply state-of-the-art adaptive numerical methods,
perform analytical, numerical and modeling studies of important constituent
processes, and work with experimentalists to test the model predictions and to
help elucidate the underlying physical processes. The project will investigate
how the presence of surface phases and multiple compartments modifies the
classical motions and hydrodynamic interactions and may lead to novel dynamical
regimes. The project will also investigate the morphological stability of multi-
compartment vesicles in applied flows, and possible control strategies using
multiple surface phases for optimizing stability in complex flow domains.
