
* 1720452
* Multiscale Algorithms for the Geometric Analysis of Hyperspectral Data
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, EnvS-Environmtl Sustainability
* 10/01/2017,06/01/2017
* Demetrio Labate,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 09/30/2022
* USD 270,284.00

Hyperspectral imaging is a sensing technique that collects hundreds of
narrowband images from across the electromagnetic spectrum. By both going beyond
the visible spectrum and accurately discriminating wavelengths within the
visible range, this technology can be remarkably powerful for distinguishing
different materials when standard imagery is ineffective. As a result,
hyperspectral remote sensing offers unique capabilities for tasks that include
monitoring the development and health of crops, mapping oil spills and invasive
species, and detecting objects that may be camouflaged. With modern remote
sensing applications not being constrained to satellite images, however, the
image acquisition in many scenarios is no longer under controlled conditions,
because illumination, physical parameters, and viewing angles may change over
time and objects of interest may be partially occluded. This investigation
introduces a new generation of mathematical and algorithmic tools that are
designed to provide robust classification of hyperspectral data under such
realistic conditions. The project aims to develop a new class of analysis and
classification algorithms for hyperspectral data that are robust with respect to
changes of illumination, viewpoint, and physical conditions. The results are
intended to have direct application to the monitoring of environmental
conditions in coastal wetlands and to other observations of societal, economic,
and national security interest.

While hyperspectral imaging and image processing have been well developed within
the remote-sensing community, image acquisition in remote sensing may occur in
conditions where illumination, physical parameters, and viewing angle change
over time. This research program combines ideas from sparse representations,
multilayer convolutional networks, and machine learning to address the
challenges to imaging posed by such changing conditions. A novelty of the
approach is the adaptation of methods from sparse representations and shearlets,
an anisotropic multiscale system that is particularly effective at capturing the
directional content of multidimensional data. This approach provides the basis
for constructing a deep learning neural convolutional network tailored to
hyperspectral data and designed to generate stable and robust feature vectors.
This investigation aims to develop an efficient multiscale representation that
is customized to the specifics of hyperspectral data. The scattering transform
will be adapted in combination with shearlets by exploiting the covariance
properties of shearlets under affine transformations to build stable and
viewpoint-invariant features for hyperspectral data. A novel hierarchical scheme
for classification optimized for the specific structure of hyperspectral data
and sparsity-based inpainting methods to restore hyperspectral data corrupted by
occlusions will be developed. These new algorithms will be used for the analysis
of hyperspectral data to monitor environmental conditions of coastal wetlands, a
challenging case study of great social and economic importance.
