
* 1720257
* Algorithms for Large-Scale Nonlinear Eigenvalue Problems: Interpolation, Stability, Transient Dynamics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2017,05/10/2017
* Mark Embree,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 349,999.00

Dynamical systems are mathematical models of the changing world. To understand
such a model, one must describe how the system will evolve in time. Of interest
is whether the solution grows with time, and whether the short-term behavior of
the system is different from the behavior over a large-time window. This project
aims to develop tools to help scientists and engineers better analyze a
challenging class of models in which the system's current rate-of-change is
dictated by its configuration at some time in the recent past, models known as
"delay systems." Compelling examples come from biology, where this delay could
correspond to gestation in a population, the incubation of a disease, or the
time for a pill to dissolve. In many important scenarios, highly accurate models
require thousands or millions of variables. This project will design high-
performance computing algorithms to efficiently assess the behavior of such
systems.

The research team will develop a new class of algorithms that are derived from
interpolation techniques for model reduction of large-scale dynamical systems,
for solving important large-scale nonlinear eigenvalue problems. Nonlinear
eigenvalue problems play an increasingly important role in many applications,
including the stability analysis of delay differential equations. Such problems
pose a great challenge to computation: the number of eigenvalues is often
infinite, even when the dimension of the problem is finite. This project's
interpolation-based techniques hold the promise of accurately modeling nonlinear
operators over a broad region of the complex plane, resulting in algorithms that
are both more efficient and more robust than existing methods. Combining
interpolation with structure-preserving subspace projection has the potential to
approximate a much larger number of eigenvalues than possible with traditional
methods. To understand the performance of these new algorithms and to improve
their speed, the project will also address convergence theory; for greater
efficiency the project will explore inexact solution methods. Improved solvers
for the nonlinear eigenvalue problem will inform development of the other two
main aspects of this project: determination of critical stability transitions as
a function of parameters (such as the time delays) in differential equations,
and an enhanced understanding of the transient behavior of dynamical systems
associated with nonlinear eigenvalue problems. This project is expected to lead
to substantial improvements in algorithms and analysis for the nonlinear
eigenvalue problem and related stability questions.
