
* 1720433
* Collaborative Research: Tolerance-Enforced Simulation of Stochastic Processes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 09/01/2017,08/17/2017
* Jing Dong,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 89,428.00

High performance computing of continuous random structures arises in a large
body of scientific and engineering investigations. For example, these structures
are used in environmental models for floods in different geographical areas,
which are subject to random measurement errors. They are also used in the
prediction and mitigation planning of potential disasters. However, these random
structures are impossible to capture in a computer without incurring bias, due
to their continuous nature. This research project investigates a new framework
for the numerical analysis of continuous random structures. It achieves stronger
error control, compared to current state-of-the-art methods, at basically the
same computational cost. If successful, the framework and algorithms to be
investigated will facilitate analysis and performance evaluation of fundamental
random structures of interests to a broad community of scientists and engineers.
To enhance the broader impact, the Principal Investigators will train graduate
students through research and integrate the results from this research into new
graduate courses in scientific computing.

This project investigates a new Monte Carlo framework for continuous stochastic
structures (such as differential equations and random fields). The main
innovative feature of the framework is the ability to approximate a continuous
random object by a fully simulatable (typically piece-wise constant) object with
a uniform error bound in the path space with 100% certainty. The error bound is
user-specified and can be sequentially refined. Research projects involve
developing simulation algorithms for fundamental random structures of interests.
These include: Gaussian random fields, Levy processes, fractional Brownian
motion, max-stable fields, etc. The algorithms are scalable in the sense of
being easily extendable to more complex models by applying the continuous
mapping principle with quantifiable error analysis. An important aspect of the
methodology is the connection established between Monte Carlo simulation and the
theory of rough paths in the setting of stochastic analysis.
