
* 1720114
* Multilevel Methods for Numerical Modeling with Applications in Hydrogeology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2017,07/06/2017
* Ludmil Zikatanov,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 195,275.00

The project focuses on the development of new mathematical tools which improve
our understanding and application of advanced computational methods. The
research explores novel as well as established practical algorithms which are
then validated and verified in a variety of hydrogeological scenarios. One major
goal of computational mathematics research, in general, is to improve our
understanding of numerical algorithms and to make them more efficient and
accurate. However, the tasks of improving methods and then applying them are
often completed by distinct groups of researchers and have long transfer times
between development and application. Often, the theoretical findings and the
heuristic algorithms developed by practitioners follow different trajectories.
Indeed, many valuable numerical techniques have been proposed and used by
practitioners without much theoretical justification or for a narrow set of
problems. Concurrent improvements based on new mathematical insights are often
unrelated to practical problems. This research addresses the disparity between
the two disciplinary trajectories by reconnecting advanced and abstract
mathematical theories with practice. The project has the potential to impact a
wide range of applications, including for example the simulation of variably
saturated flow.

This project is concerned with the development and analysis of adaptive,
conservative and monotone discretizations that are extendable to any order for
the solution of nonlinear partial differential equations, such as Richards'
equation used to simulate variably saturated flow and Biot's model in
poroelasticity. Typically, such discretization methods result in large-scale,
ill-conditioned linear systems. The efficient solution of such systems,
generally non-symmetric and indefinite, is crucial for the performance of
overall numerical simulation as it consumes the larger part of the computing
resources. Part of this project includes the development of a class of efficient
and adaptive multilevel solvers capable of generating flexible hierarchies of
spaces. Such hierarchies are useful also in filtering and representing sparse
data sets, robust with respect to the structure and the type of data: smooth,
oscillatory or combinations of the two. In the targeted applications in
hydrogeology, the research will be on techniques which efficiently approximate
elevation, groundwater head, precipitation, and other relevant hydrogeological
spatial data.
