
* 1720495
* Construction, Analysis, Implementation and Application of New Time Integrators for Large Scale Complex Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,08/02/2017
* Mayya Tokman,CA,University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,291.00

Computer simulations are an essential tool of science and engineering. Relying
on computational models to design a car or predict movement of a hurricane is
commonplace practice that allows scientists and engineers to significantly
reduce time and resources required to accomplish these tasks. The complexity of
phenomena we are interested in simulating is constantly increasing. Demand for
predictive computer models of complex systems dynamics, such as folding of a
protein molecule or movement of a tsunami, is ever-growing and cannot be met
with advances in computational hardware alone. Advanced mathematical methods and
computational techniques are an integral component of improving fidelity and
efficiency of predictive computational models. In particular, numerical methods,
which enable simulation of the time evolution of a complex system, are needed to
create computer models that can accurately and efficiently predict the behavior
of the system over long periods of time. The proposed research focuses on
construction of advanced numerical techniques that enable simulating dynamics of
complex systems that evolve over a wide spectrum of temporal scales. The project
will include both development of theory of such methods as well as their
implementation and application to specific problems such as numerical weather
prediction and climate modeling. This work will make available software package
that can be utilized in a wide variety of scientific and engineering fields
ranging from biochemistry and geo-engineering to fluid dynamics and plasma
physics.

The proposed project will advance the state-of-the-art in time integration from
theoretical and practical perspectives. It has become increasingly clear that
fast high-order discretization methods to resolve spatial and temporal scales of
complex phenomena are essential to ensure that computational models are
sufficiently efficient and trustworthy. While extensive research efforts have
been dedicated to the development of high-order spatial discretization
approaches such as finite-element or spectral methods, research on construction
and application of advanced time integrators to large-scale complex problems
lags behind. The proposed research will focus on development of new time
integration algorithms that significantly improve the efficiency of currently
available methods. The project aims to construct, analyze and implement time
integration schemes that can simultaneously take advantage of explicit, implicit
and exponential integration approaches. Important theoretical questions such as
accuracy and convergence of these techniques will be addressed. General
integrators as well as classes of methods that can exploit particular problem
structure will be derived. In addition, custom-designed time integrators will be
created for weather and climate prediction problems to maximize the efficiency
of computational models routinely used in these fields. The most efficient time
integration schemes developed as a result of this project will be implemented as
part of a publicly available software package designed for serial and parallel
computational platforms. Outcomes of this research will also be integrated into
the core graduate curriculum of the applied mathematics program at UC Merced.
