
* 1720218
* New Simulation Methods for Levy Processes and Related Distributions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,08/01/2017
* Zhiyi Chi,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 201,273.00

In the age of high power computing, random simulation, or sampling, of Levy
processes and infinitely divisible distributions is key to finding numerical
solutions to many complicated problems in those fields. In addition to their
ubiquitous application in finance and insurance, Levy processes and infinitely
divisible distributions are extremely useful in a wide range of fields of
physical or social science, technology, engineering, and industry, such as
turbulence, laser cooling, internet traffic, communication or server queues,
equipment maintenance, health hazard monitoring, and clinical trial. The project
aims to make advances in Levy processes through development of novel approaches,
with emphasis on high dimensional situations. The results of the project will be
integrated into course material to attract students with diverse backgrounds to
research on random sampling and its applications in other fields.

The lack of closed-form distribution functions is one of the most serious
hurdles to the random sampling. This project proposes to build on the so-called
"embed-and-extract" approach developed by the PI to exact sampling of the first
exit event of a large class of univariate Levy processes and a so-called
"Poisson-gamma-normal" approximation for approximate sampling of univariate
infinitely divisible distributions. Based on these preliminary findings, the
goal of the project is twofold. The first goal is to develop new random sampling
methods for the multivariate processes. Second, the project will develop refined
or new ideas and methods to sample for the univariate processes. To achieve the
goal, the project will investigate the issue of random sampling from two
aspects. First, exact sampling methods will be developed for the first passage
event or first exit event of a Levy process. These random events play an
important role in applications as well as in theory, but at present, the
knowledge on their exact sampling is very limited, especially for multivariate
processes. Second, high-precision approximate sampling methods will be developed
for infinitely divisible random variables as well as Levy processes, with the
emphasis on easy implementation.
