
* 1720398
* OP: Collaborative Research: Novel Feature-Based, Randomized Methods for Large-Scale Inversion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,05/15/2017
* Arvind Saibaba,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 104,942.00

The desire to form an image of a region of space from externally collected data
arises in applications ranging from detecting and characterizing cancers in the
body, to quantifying the distribution of water, oil, or subsurface pollutants,
and to the timely accurate identification of explosives in crowded venues. The
physics associated with signal propagation and sensing in these problems creates
substantial computational challenges for transforming raw data into useful
information. The research team in this project aims to develop computational
methods that greatly reduce the cost of real time imaging by providing
improvements in statistical inverse theory, numerical inversion methods,
simulation models, and hybrid imaging models. The main thrusts of the project
will be tested on imaging applications in medical tomography, environmental
remediation, and airport security imaging. The techniques form the basis for
addressing analogous problems associated with inversion of optical signals
across a wide range of spatial and temporal scales. As part of the project, a
modular course will be developed to teach these new methods at the graduate
level. The course materials will be made available over the internet.

The large-scale imaging, or inverse, problems addressed by this collaborative
team require the minimization of a parameter-dependent function that expresses
the misfit of predicted measurements for a candidate image and actual
measurement data. The potentially large number of parameters must be minimized
over an ever-increasing huge number of measurements, while concurrently some
unknown set of the data may be redundant. Detailed images, however, are not
always needed for addressing relevant, practical questions and decision making.
A combination of computational techniques will be developed to make large-scale
parameter-dependent minimization computationally feasible. Furthermore, novel
efficient approaches for inferring critical image features will be developed,
obviating need for complete reconstruction of an image. The research builds on
recent methods that exploit randomization to compute accurate estimates of
solutions at greatly reduced computational cost, and on the efficient
construction of smaller, approximate, reduced order numerical models that are
accurate for relevant sets of parameters, and thus reduce the cost of full
simulation of the sensing physics. Probabilistic approaches for inference of
critical image features that guide image interpretation and decision making will
be developed. The mathematics associated with this approach requires these
methods to capitalize on other new tools also under development in this project.
