
* 1720473
* Collaborative Research: A Posteriori Error Analysis for Complex Models with Applications to Efficient Numerical Solution and Uncertainty Quantification
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 08/01/2017,07/23/2021
* Simon Tavener,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 211,902.00

Many scientific and engineering problems of importance to the nation's
infrastructure and defense are concerned with multi-physics systems in which
multiple physical processes interact in complex ways. An important example is
the flow of a liquid transporting reacting chemicals in which the reaction
affects the fluid properties of the liquid. Such reacting flows arise in
applications ranging from biological systems to combustion processes associated
with energy use. In general, the complexity of multi-physics systems prevents
direct experimental observation of crucial features. Thus their study depends
critically on computing approximate solutions of mathematical models describing
the processes and their interactions. However, such simulations strain the
computational capabilities of the most powerful computers and consequently,
computational errors in the approximations are always significant and may be
overwhelming. Over two decades, the project investigators have developed a
systematic approach for producing accurate computational estimates of the error
of approximate solutions of models of multi-physics systems. In this project,
the investigators explore the use of error estimates from this approach to guide
the efficient use of computational resources in order to maximize the fidelity
of approximate solutions of multi-physics systems. They also apply the error
estimates to accurately quantify the uncertainty in predictions of behavior of
multi-physics systems based on the approximate solutions of models. The results
of this project will enhance the ability of the nation's engineers and
scientists to investigate and predict the behavior of complex physical systems
important to the nation's security and infrastructure.

This project tackles critical problems associated with using sophisticated
cutting-edge multi-discretization numerical methods for multiscale, multiphysics
models to pursue scientific inference and engineering design. The research is
based on a posteriori error analysis for multi-physics, multi-discretization
problems that quantifies the effects of a wide variety of discretization steps
through the use of adjoint problems and computable residuals. The primary focus
of the project is twofold: (1) Developing and analyzing methods for using
accurate error estimates to guide discretization choices in order to achieve a
desired accuracy at roughly minimal computational cost; and (2) Investigating
how to extend accurate error estimation methods to address uncertainty
quantification for multiphysics systems, where 'discretization' includes the
sampling of a random process and the overall error is a combination of
discretization and sampling errors. The investigators pursue the development of
novel multi-stage approaches to the construction of efficient numerical
solutions and the extension of a posteriori error analysis to statistical
computations. The project also involves the extension of the theory of a
posteriori error analysis to hyperbolic problems and nonstandard quantities of
interest.
