
* 1720487
* Fine-Scale Singularity Detection in Multi-Dimensional Imaging with Regular, Orientable, Symmetric, Frame Atoms with Small Support
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, Modulation
* 07/15/2017,07/20/2017
* Emanuel Papadakis,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

One of life's essential characteristic is movement. Whether it is the
spectacular, delicate dance of the unblemished, white swan in Tchaikovsky's Swan
Lake, or the early attempts of a toddler to use his or her hands, the neurology
of movement is uniquely common for all animals and humans: learning a motor
skill, and the necessary muscle coordination. With practice the skill is
perfected. Finally, the retainment of this experience-based learning process is
the conclusion of this learning process. The ultimate goal of this project is to
provide new tools to neuroscientists who study the biological basis of learning
at the cell level using live animals. This function is facilitated by a number
of anatomical changes in the structure of the cytoplasm of neural cells, such as
the formation of lengthy branches known as axons and dendrites, and at a fine
scale of dendritic spines and axonal buttons. The latter are less anatomically
permanent structures arising on the surface of these cytoplasmic extensions.
Dendritic spines and axonal buttons form synapses, which are the communication
gateways between neurons. The research team will develop mathematical and
computational tools for automatizing the study of spine populations in live
neurons, and of their time-evolution during learning. The anticipated outcomes
will provide neuroscientists with a number of software tools which will
automatize the analysis of synaptic strength and its evolution with learning.
These findings will contributed to the better understanding the biological
mechanisms of autism and drug addictions.

The investigators on this project will develop algorithms for the 3D digital
segmentations of dendritic surfaces including spines from 3D images acquired
with a certain type of microscope, which uses laser light and works as a scanner
by exploiting the natural ability of neurons to fluoresce. They aim to generate
accurate binary reconstructions of a dendritic arbor including its spines. The
primary challenge in this project is that image acquisition of live neurons has
a resolution which provides limited detail of the spines. Often, images contain
noise which further complicates the extraction of accurate, binary 3D
reconstructions of dendritic surfaces showing spine details. Overcoming this
problem is a core goal of the project because spine volume estimation quantifies
synaptic strength. These unique challenges lead the investigators to the
development of novel mathematical tools for fine scale analysis. They will build
ensembles of short in size 3D imaging, 3D-orientation selective, frame-based
filters, suitable for sensing curves and surfaces in noisy images. These filters
will be designed to respond to local changes of image smoothness. Information
obtained from these filters at various scales, will be utilized as input for
multilayer, deep-learning inspired neural networks which will determine in an
image which voxels belong to spine surfaces. Further algorithmic tools will be
developed to track every spine of a dendrite individually over time. The same
filtering tools will be used in a different application domain, the generation
of illumination neutral images, in real-time. This will help the fast, high
throughput removal of the effects of uneven illumination in images inhibiting
the detection, by software or the naked eye of contours associated with shapes
or textures in a scene. The investigators will develop the mathematical theory
of illumination neutralization using concepts from fractal and microlocal
analysis. The illumination neutralization algorithm is envisioned to work for
real-time video analysis and in conjunction with face verification algorithms
with the potential to be used in face recognition, laser microscopy and remote
sensing applications.
