
* 1720002
* Multiscale Modeling and Computation of Nano-Optics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,08/03/2017
* Di Liu,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 147,994.00

The main objective of the proposed research is to study robust, efficient and
accurate numerical methods for multiscale and multiphysical models of nanoscale
optical devices. Nanoscale experimental and manufacturing technologies have
proved huge successes and potentials in biomedical engineering and new
materials. Quantitative modeling and simulation will not only help to understand
the mechanism of these nano devices but also greatly reduce the cost by
minimizing trial errors and optimizing the performance. The PI will collaborate
with chemists and material scientists on photon driven nano devices and
attosciences. Methods developed for nano-optics will shed light on a wide
variety of nanoscale problems. The mathematical analysis of the self-consistent
multiscale methods will bring new insights into the field of multiscale modeling
and computation. Junior collaborators and graduate students will receive cross
disciplinary training on new frontiers of applied mathematics, and will be
better prepared to solve realistic problems with a combination of modeling,
analytical and computational skills.

To fully understand photon driven nano and micro devices, the PI will derive
multiscale models for interactions between the electromagnetic field, electronic
excitations and molecular motions by combining classical electrodynamics, time
dependent current density functional theory and Ehrenfest molecular dynamics in
the linear response regime. The self-consistent multiscale scheme will be
adopted to solve the system efficiently. Metal enhancement will also be
investigated. To accurately simulate long time propagations of strong field
processes involving nonlinear higher order interactions, the PI will adopt
adaptive numerical strategies. Multiscale schemes will be designed for the
concurrent simulation of electrodynamics and quantum mechanical processes on the
time domain. The PI will also conduct a thorough analysis of the algorithms in
terms of convergence and stability.
