
* 1720369
* Topics in Mathematical Theory of Adaptive Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,06/06/2017
* Alan Demlow,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 180,193.00

Finite element methods (FEM) are widely used to approximately solve partial
differential equations in simulations of physical phenomena arising in
engineering and the physical sciences. Such simulations are an indispensable
tool in the development and testing of new technologies. Adaptive variants of
finite element methods are designed to increase the efficiency and accuracy with
which simulations can be carried out by making better use of computational
resources and to increase confidence in the accuracy of simulations by providing
researchers with a computable measure of the errors that arise in approximation
techniques. This research project aims to develop new variants of adaptive
finite element methods and increase mathematical understanding of their
underpinnings. The project has two main foci. The first is adaptive FEM for
partial differential equations defined on surfaces, which arise for example in
describing fluid flows with multiple components (such as oil and water). The
second is development and analysis of adaptive FEM for controlling various
measures of the error, especially maximum errors.

In the first project the investigator will construct and analyze adaptive
variants of surface finite element methods with two main goals in mind. First,
while surface FEM are an established finite element methodology with many useful
variants defined, adaptive versions of some important variants are missing. This
project aims to fill that gap. Secondly, the project will explore the
interaction between adaptive surface FEM, the way a given surface is represented
in a finite element code, and the smoothness or regularity of the surface. The
result will be more robust adaptive surface codes that give users greater
flexibility in representing surfaces while also making the best possible use of
available information about the surface. The second main project will lead to
proof of convergence of adaptive algorithms for controlling maximum errors, and
will also provide new adaptive algorithms for controlling maximum errors in a
class of singularly perturbed elliptic problems.
