
* 1720366
* Parallel Nonlinear Preconditioning Algorithms and Applications in Biomechanics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 06/01/2017,05/17/2017
* Xiao-Chuan Cai,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 240,000.00

Computer simulation of fluid-structure interaction problems has many
applications in science and engineering, such as the vibration analysis of
aircraft, automobiles, and suspension bridges. More recently, the technique has
been extended to diagnosing and treatment planning of certain medical problems
such as congenital and acquired cardiovascular diseases, and to the design and
optimization of medical devices. Solving the fluid-structure interaction
problems on supercomputers with a large number of processor cores is challenging
because the mathematical model consists of a coupled complicated nonlinear
system, and most existing algorithms and software for the solution of problems
of this kind do not scale well beyond a few hundred processor cores. The
principal investigator will develop highly scalable algorithms and software that
are suitable for large scale supercomputers and applicable for different models
of blood flows and material parameters for the arterial wall. Mature
technologies are available for solving many types of linear problems, but for
coupled, highly nonlinear multi-physics problems, robust and scalable techniques
are badly needed, especially for implementation on large scale parallel
computers. The technical focus of this project is a class of non-linearly
preconditioned Newton methods that combines a nonlinear elimination technique
with multilevel domain decomposition for parallelization. Through this research
the principal investigator will solve non-linear difficult problems modeling a
wide range of physical models with different levels of non-linearities.
Algorithms that provide a high degree of parallelism will be designed so that
large scale parallel computers can be used efficiently. The target application
is a family of fluid-structure interaction problems in biomechanics. For the
fluid model, both Newtonian and non-Newtonian models will be studied. For solid
models, linear elasticity will be considered for small deformations, geometric
nonlinear elasticity will be considered for large deformations, and hyper-
elasticity will be considered for materially nonlinear problems. Two- and many-
level versions of the algorithms will be investigated to obtain high scalability
on parallel computers with a large number of processor cores. This research will
have a great impact in areas of computational science and engineering where non-
linear difficult problems need to be solved. The research is rich in
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students interested in
applications in biomechanics, parallel computing, and general computational
science and engineering.
