
* 1723005
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Approximations for the Solution and Uncertainty Analysis of Data-Intensive Inverse Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 09/01/2017,06/13/2017
* Matthias Chung,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

In scientific fields ranging from geophysics and atmospheric science to medical
imaging and network communication, data are being generated at remarkable rates.
Such data are typically indirectly related to quantities of interest and the
data sets are in many cases dynamically growing. Extracting desired information
from these data then requires the solution of very large data-intensive inverse
problems, perhaps repeatedly and in real time. The computational challenges of
obtaining such a solution are compounded by the demands of validation and
uncertainty analysis, which can easily become computationally prohibitive. This
project will develop mathematical/statistical methods and computational tools
for the solution of data-intensive inverse problems. The core of this approach
is a stochastic reformulation of such problems that aims to significantly reduce
the computational costs while adapting to modern hardware architectures.

A framework will be developed to address the challenges arising at the interface
between big data, inverse problems, data analysis, and uncertainty
quantification. First, randomized methods for the solution of linear and
nonlinear inverse problems will be introduced, so that efficient stochastic
optimization methods can be used to overcome the hardware limitations of current
algorithms and to generate solutions and uncertainty assessments in near-real
time. New theory and scalable methods will be developed within the stochastic
framework, thereby ensuring solution accuracy, reliability, and robustness.
Second, advanced tools will be developed for model validation, error analysis,
and uncertainty quantification. By partnering with application scientists (e.g.,
in atmospheric remote sensing), methods developed in this project will be of
immediate practical utility for scientists and engineers.
