
* 1745654
* RTG: Randomized Numerical Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/15/2018,08/22/2022
* Pierre Gremaud,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,140,000.00

Classical methods from scientific computing were designed with the natural goal
of finding exact answers to exact questions. Such methods cannot address most of
today's large and complex computational models. This research training group
focuses on the development of methods which aim instead at providing approximate
answers to approximate questions thereby opening up the door for new generations
of numerical tools well adapted to 21st century problems. The program provides
training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
participants who benefit from their integration in vertically structured working
groups. It is important for Science, Technology Engineering and Math (STEM)
students to have professional skills extending beyond technical expertise; they
must be able to communicate their results to non-technical audiences in clear,
compelling and engaging ways. Through its emphasis on multi-layered working
groups, the program offers a prime training ground for its participants to gain
the communication skills necessary to bridge disciplinary divides, as is
required for work addressing most of society's grand challenges. The program
also involves the development of new course material, both online and on campus,
that reflects and addresses challenges in present-day scientific computing.

The paradigm of numerical analysis as the study of algorithms for the problems
of continuous mathematics needs to be updated. An increasing number of data
intensive applications are better described through discrete mathematics in
terms of graphs or networks rather than through the smooth manifolds of
continuous mathematics. Additionally, current computational models are often
neither well-posed nor well-conditioned; new approaches are needed. The program
addresses this pressing need by using randomization as the key scientific tool.
The research is organized around three complementary thrusts in numerical linear
algebra, nonlinear solvers and global sensitivity analysis. By analyzing the
effect on numerical solutions of perturbations caused by randomization, or
corrupted data, the first two thrusts fill a critical gap in the theoretical
foundation to numerical analysis under large perturbations and low accuracy:
even the notion of numerical solution has to be revisited. The third thrust aims
at reducing model complexity through novel sensitivity analysis methods and the
use of surrogate models; this thrust both capitalizes on and contributes to the
previous two.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
