
* 1752202
* CAREER: Variational and Geometric Methods for Data Analysis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Division Co-Funding: CAREER
* 07/01/2018,07/05/2022
* Braxton Osting,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,002.00

This project will use tools from applied mathematics to develop and analyze
scalable methods for large-scale data analysis, especially for the problems of
clustering, geometry processing, image analysis, and analyzing high-order
interactions in data. One specific end-goal is to use N-direction fields to
create quad meshes, which are provably high-quality, and have immediate
applications in finite element simulations for engineering. The PI plans to
attract, involve, and educate students at both the undergraduate and graduate
levels at the University of Utah through research seminars and student programs.
Students will benefit from exposure to this interdisciplinary field and be an
integral part of the research, participating at regular group meetings and
discussions, and given the opportunity to present their research findings at
conferences. The proposed education plan includes the development of two
courses, Introduction to Optimization and Introduction to Data Science, which
will serve students throughout the University of Utah's Schools of Science and
Engineering. A new course on Data analysis as part of the University of Utah's
ACCESS program, a seven-week intensive summer program for incoming female
undergraduates, will foster study of STEM disciplines for this underrepresented
group.

This project will develop and analyze new computational methods based on
geometry, variational principles, and partial differential equations for data
analysis. Due to associated variational characterizations and stochastic
processes, these methods are geometrically and/or physically interpretable and
have provable properties, complementing and extending traditional data analytic
methods from statistics and computer science. The proposed research plan has
three primary goals. The first goal is to study foundational questions related
to the Cheeger formulation of the graph partitioning problem and connections to
graph curvature and Merriman-Bence-Osher (MBO) diffusion generated motion. In
particular, a new probabilistic interpretation of the MBO method will lead to
efficient algorithms that systematically balance partition components. The
second goal is to use a generalization of vector fields, called N-direction
fields or cross fields when N=4, for a variety of tasks in geometry processing
and image analysis. This work is well-motivated by recent progress of the PI and
his graduate student on the generation of boundary-aligned quadrilateral meshes
based on the Ginzburg-Landau theory. In part, this will involve the extension of
the MBO algorithm and associated Lyapunov function to approximate harmonic maps
with image in generalized sets. The third goal is to develop efficient methods
for analyzing simplicial complexes, generalizing and extending methods for
analyzing graphs. To overcome the inherent computational costs due to the non-
local and multi-scale nature of simplicial complexes, the PI will develop
efficient sparsification algorithms based on preserving the spectrum of
associated generalized Laplacian operators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
