
* 1812693
* Direct and Inverse Electromagnetic Scattering Problems for Complex Periodic Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/20/2018
* Dinh-Liem Nguyen,KS,Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 130,000.00

The interaction and scattering of light by periodic structures at the nanoscale
is a topic of great significance in the area of nanophotonics and metamaterials
technology. With the current rapid development of this enabling technology,
there is a high demand on new mathematical theories and computational algorithms
for both direct and inverse problems of the light scattering by periodic complex
media or periodic metamaterials. This project aims to develop such theories and
algorithms. Results from this project will advance knowledge, understanding and
imaging techniques in the technology of nanophotonics and metamaterials. For
instance, the mathematical theories and the computational algorithms developed
for the direct problems are extremely useful for the simulation, fabrication and
maintaining of optical devices. The imaging techniques developed for the inverse
problems can be potentially of practical use for non-destructive tests, which
help to detect and characterize discrete flaws in optical components and
devices.

The project contains two main areas of study: the mathematical and numerical
analysis for direct scattering problems, and the development of efficient
inversion algorithms for inverse scattering problems. More precisely, for the
direct problem, the PI and his colleagues will work on the following topics: 1)
develop volume integral equation formulations for direct scattering problems for
periodic complex media; 2) develop fast integral equation-based numerical
solvers for the direct scattering problems; 3) study interior transmission
eigenvalues for periodic complex media; 4) study well-posedness of the
scattering by chiral metamaterials. The proposed research for the inverse
problem includes the topics: 1) develop sampling methods for imaging of periodic
complex media; 2) develop sampling methods for the detection of local defects in
photonic crystals; 3) develop globally convergent methods for the identification
of material parameters for photonic crystals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
