
* 1817542
* Accurate Prediction of Fluid Motion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,05/23/2018
* William Layton,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 319,497.00

Accurate prediction of fluid motion and materials thereby transported is
essential for many critical engineering and scientific applications. As two
examples, flow predictions are key to limiting damage of hurricanes to human
life and to the economy (the latter estimated to be hundreds of billions of
dollars in 2017) and to energy efficiency optimization (85% of US energy is
generated by combustion for which accurate simulation of turbulent mixing is
critical). Unfortunately, fundamental barriers to accurate, efficient and
reliable prediction of fluid flow exist in these and other applications
addressed in the proposed research. Accurate prediction with uncertain data
requires reliable and efficient ensemble simulations. The cost of current
methods limits prediction accuracy by limiting ensemble sizes. Further
improvement requires new computational tools with a fundamental decrease in
simulation cost and memory requirements. Algorithms which address these needs
will be developed in this project.

Artificial compression methods are by far the most efficient per time step but
little used due to low time accuracy, restrictive time step conditions,
stability problems, ill-conditioning and nonphysical acoustic waves. Their
resolution will resurrect artificial compression methods into accurate, reliable
and efficient methods for the prediction of fluid motion, expanding ensemble
simulations and coupled flow prediction markedly beyond their current
limitations. Artificial compression methods exhibit parasitic pressure waves
that become resonant at higher Reynolds numbers. This research will develop a
method dependent Lighthill theory of flow generated sound and apply it to design
time filters to suppress parasitic acoustics. Time accuracy will be achieved by
development of a new family of variable step, variable order methods. Variable
step, variable order method have proven to be the most efficient, accurate and
reliable methods to solve smaller systems of ordinary differential equations.
However, previous variable step, variable order methods have limited penetration
into computational fluid dynamics practice due partially to their implementation
complexity and increased cost per step. The new methods have (to leading order)
the same cognitive and computational complexity as the fully implicit method.
Uncoupling of velocity and pressure in artificial compression methods introduces
an extra grad-div term in the velocity solve, decreasing sparsity and increasing
ill conditioning. Thus, the efficiency of artificial compression methods is lost
with increased storage and solver cost per step. The research will develop a new
realization, modular Grad-Div, reducing storage and turnaround time by a factor
of 30 in preliminary tests. While each development has independent interest,
they will be integrated into an ensemble, artificial compression method and
tested on problems of compelling interest. The proposed research develops
expertise of PhD students in analysis, numerical analysis and application areas
while working on compelling mathematics problems of broad impact advancing the
accurate prediction of fluid motion. It is carefully integrated with the
development of the PI's PhD students and undergraduate researchers. Within the
project, each PhD student can develop their own research agenda and collaborate
at the points of contact among the research problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
