
* 1818998
* Multiscale and Hybridizable Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Dispersive Equations and Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,06/01/2018
* Bo Dong,MA,University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 269,185.00

This project concentrates on the development of novel computational methods for
efficiently solving dispersive equations and systems, including the time-
independent Schrodinger equations and Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) type equations in
multidimensional spaces and systems. Schrodinger equations play a central role
in the study of quantum mechanical systems and are widely used in the simulation
of quantum transport in nanoscale semiconductor devices. The proposed multiscale
method for Schrodinger equations will have a positive impact in the study of
quantum mechanics and great potential in applications to ultrafast, low
consumption and high functionality nanoscale semiconductor devices. KdV type
equations and systems have wide applications in various fields such as fluid
mechanics, nonlinear optics, acoustics, plasma physics, and Bose-Einstein
condensates. The proposed method for KdV type equations and systems will help
understand theoretically unresolved issues and provide accurate and efficient
numerical tools for simulation of nonlinear waves in applications. The proposed
research includes the following topics, (1) development and analysis of
multiscale discontinuous Galerkin (DG) methods for Schrodinger equations in 1D,
system, and 2D for the simulation of nanoscale semiconductor structures on
coarse meshes, (2) design and error analysis of hybridizable discontinuous
Galerkin (HDG) methods for solving multidimensional KdV type equations and KdV
type systems, and (3) design of IMEX HDG-DG schemes for efficiently solving KdV
type nonlinear equations and systems. To efficiently resolve highly oscillatory
solutions of Schrodinger equations on coarse meshes, the multiscale DG methods
will incorporate the oscillatory nature of the solutions and thus the multiple
scales into the non-polynomial basis functions. For KdV type equations in multi-
dimensions and systems, the PI will devise new HDG methods, study their
convergence and conservation properties, and combine them with other DG methods
in IMEX scheme to achieve high-order solutions both in time and in space and
avoid overly small time-step sizes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
