
* 1818926
* High-Order Accurate Partitioned Algorithms for Fluid-Structure Interactions and Conjugate-Heat Transfer
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,06/25/2018
* William Henshaw,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 384,035.00

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems are important in many areas of
engineering and applied science, such as modeling of blood flow, flow-induced
vibrations of structures, and wave energy devices, among others, and there is
significant interest in numerical simulation tools for such problems. Conjugate
heat transfer (CHT) also plays an important role in many FSI simulations, such
as the cooling of turbine blades, heat exchangers, nuclear reactors,
semiconductor devices, and more. In this project the PIs aim to build upon their
recent achievements to develop stable partitioned algorithms for new classes of
FSI problems that also include CHT effects. The PIs will address the development
of high-order accurate schemes for these FSI-CHT problems. High-order schemes
are especially useful for wave-dominated regimes such as high-Reynolds number
turbulent flows and propagation of elastic waves. At the same time, achieving
high-order accurate interface coupling approaches for partitioned schemes
presents numerous intellectual and numerical challenges.

The proposed research is concerned with the development and analysis of new
high-order accurate algorithms for a wide range of complex and challenging FSI-
CHT problems, such as those involving incompressible or compressible flows, with
possible free surfaces, coupled to rigid bodies and deforming bulk solids with
heat transfer. These new partitioned algorithms will use novel interface
coupling conditions to treat both the FSI and CHT interface conditions. The FSI
interface conditions will be based on principles we have developed for our
Added-Mass Partitioned (AMP)schemes. The CHT domain coupling will extend the
recently devised CHAMP interface conditions that combine ideas from optimized
Schwarz iterations for domain-decomposition with compatibility interface
conditions. The resulting interface couplings will provide schemes that remain
provably stable for a wide range of material parameters (e.g. for light solids
when added-mass effects are large). A primary focus will be on algorithms for
incompressible flows and incompressible solids. New high-order accurate
fractional-step solvers will be developed for both incompressible elastic solids
and the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. Complex moving and deforming
geometry will be handled with deforming composite grids. Fast, efficient and
scalable multigrid algorithms and automatic mesh generation algorithms will be
developed as key components of the FSI-CHT solvers. The new high-order accurate
and stable AMP algorithms will complement the ones already developed by the PIs
and collaborators for FSI problems, and together they will provide a suite of
solvers readily available in open-source software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
