
* 1818842
* Algorithm Development and Analysis for Non-Newtonian Fluids Interacting with Elastic and Poroelastic Structures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,05/23/2018
* Hyesuk Lee,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 233,348.00

This research concerns the development and rigorous analysis of stable and
efficient numerical schemes for non-Newtonian fluid - structure interactions
(FSI). The study will be focused on partitioning schemes of an implicit type for
the coupled model systems that allow each subproblem to be solved independently
using existing local solvers in a fixed/moving domain setting. Stability and
accuracy properties of numerical methods will be investigated using non-
Newtonian fluid and poroelastic/elastic structure models. The theoretical
investigation will provide a solid foundation and guidance to the further
development of numerical algorithms. Because of the many important biological
and engineering processes involving non-Newtonian fluid flows, there is a great
demand for mathematical support in these applications. This research will
provide an underlying mathematical foundation for non-Newtonian flows in a
multiphysical setting. The technical goal of this project is to develop
algorithms and analyze numerical schemes for two coupled systems: (a) quasi-
Newtoinan fluid - poroelastic structure and (b) viscoelastic fluid - elastic
structure. For system (a) the PI will focus on the development and analysis of a
nonlinear operator, where a solution to the operator equation yields subsystem
solutions satisfying interface conditions of the whole coupled system.
Advantages of this approach over the previously developed optimization approach
are the flexibility to choose a nonlinear solver and that no extra coding effort
is needed as the adjoint system is no longer involved in a solution process.
Since it is expected that the linearized operator is not self-adjoint, the
linear operator equation should be solved by an iterative solver for a non-self-
adjoint problem. When a partitioned scheme is considered for simulating
viscoelastic FSI, extra difficulty is encountered due to the lack of information
on the stress along the moving boundary and movement of inlet and outlet
boundaries along the interface of two subsystems. The PI will investigate
various choices for a stress boundary value and their effect on a solution of
FSI. Another issue with the viscoelastic FSI is the size of the fluid problem to
be solved in each time step (or in each internal iteration), which may require
an operator splitting based on a temporal discretization scheme such as a
fractional time step method. To tackle this, the PI will investigate various
time stepping schemes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
