
* 1818775
* Advanced Discretizations and Domain Decomposition Algorithms for Multiphysics Couplings of Fluid Flows and Solid Mechanics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2018,08/14/2019
* Ivan Yotov,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

A computational framework will be developed for modeling coupled physical
processes. It will be applied to geoscience and biomedical problems of societal
importance. The research will investigate coupled subsurface and surface flows
to model interactions between contaminated aquifers, rivers, lakes, and
wetlands. The project will model flows in fractured and deformable reservoirs to
provide predictive simulations of hydraulic fracturing and carbon sequestration,
including surface subsidence, wellbore collapse, and fault activation. The
project will further model flow in arteries, accounting for flow within the
arterial wall. This has an effect on the blood velocity in the lumen and the
speed of the pressure wave, as well as low density lipoproteins (LDL) transport
and drugs filtered into the tissue. The research will lead to the development of
simulation tools that advance drug delivery as well prevention, detection, and
therapy of cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis.

The objective of this project is mathematical and computational modeling of
multiphysics systems of coupled flow and mechanics problems with multiscale
input parameters. The simulation domain is decomposed into a union of
subdomains, each one associated with a physical, mathematical, and numerical
model. Physically meaningful interface conditions are imposed on the discrete
level via mortar finite elements or penalty methods. The formulation provides
great flexibility for multiphysics and multinumerics couplings. Furthermore,
when combined with coarse scale mortar elements, it provides a multiscale
approximation and an efficient way to solve the coarse grid problem in parallel.
The project will develop 1) Mathematically rigorous and physically meaningful
multiphysics models; 2) Robust, accurate and efficient multiscale discretization
techniques; 3) Efficient parallel domain decomposition solvers and
preconditioners; 4) Efficient non-iterative time-partitioned algorithms. Two
main components of the proposed research are A) mixed elasticity formulations
and discretizations, and their coupling with mixed flow discretizations in the
multiphysics framework; B) space-time multidomain variational formulations and
discretizations allowing for different time stepping in different subdomains. A
computational framework will be developed and applied to geoscience and
biomedical problems. The research will develop variational formulations of
Partial differential Equations systems coupling free and porous media fluid
flows with deformations of the porous solids. Free fluid models such as Stokes,
Brinkman, or Navier-Stokes equations will be coupled through physically
meaningful interface conditions with Darcy flow. Regions with Darcy flow through
deformable porous media will be modeled by the Biot system of poroelasticity.
Nonlinear models for non Newtonian fluids, as well as reduced-dimension fracture
models will also be investigated. An emphasis will be placed on mixed elasticity
formulations coupled with mixed Stokes and Darcy formulations. The PI will study
well-posedness of the variational formulations and will develop stable and
accurate discretizations. Novel cell-centered mixed finite element methods for
elasticity and poroelasticity will be investigated. The essential-type interface
conditions will be imposed on a coarse scale via mortar finite elements. The PI
will carry out stability and a priori multiscale error analysis. the PI will
develop efficient parallel non-overlapping domain decomposition algorithms for
the solution of the resulting algebraic systems by reducing the global problem
to a coarse scale interface problem. The PI will analyze the condition number of
the interface operator and will develop efficient preconditioners for speeding
up the interface iteration. The PI will also study penalty methods, such as the
Nitsche's coupling method, to impose interface conditions, resulting in loosely
coupled formulations amendable to efficient non-iterative time-partitioned
algorithms. The PI will study the stability and accuracy of the methods, as well
as their properties as preconditioners for monolithic schemes. The PI will
further develop multidomain space-time variational formulations and
discretizations for the multiphysics models, coupling spatial non-overlapping
domain decomposition methods with Galerkin-type approximations in time, allowing
for different time steps associated with different regions and different types
of physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
