
* 1818748
* A Novel Computational Method for Diffuse Interface Models of Implicit Solvation of Biomolecules
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2018,08/05/2020
* Zhan Chen,GA,Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 112,109.00

In the past two decades, implicit solvent models are of tremendous importance to
the biomolecular modeling community with thousands of exemplary applications in
the literature due to their low computational cost and relatively high accuracy.
The accuracy of implicit solvent models depends on the geometric description of
the solute-solvent interface and the solvent dielectric profile that is defined
near the molecules. Successful implementations of the proposed model in this
project with realistically generated solute-solvent smooth boundaries will
greatly improve the accuracy and efficiency of these implicit solvent models.
This investigation will be directly integrated into existing implicit solvent
software and visualization packages to ensure extensive usages by an established
user community of researchers in chemistry, physics, and biology. Moreover, the
proposed work will present an unconventional computational method for diffuse
interface models applied to spatial multiscale modeling in mathematical biology.
Successful development of the proposed work will become a valuable computational
tool for studying the transition between regions described by discrete and
continuum models. The outcome will have potential impacts across a wide range of
scientific fields such as multiscale modeling in cancer research and drug
design.

The goal of this project is to develop a novel computational method for diffuse
interface models of implicit solvation of biomolecules. The computational
approach will be mathematically rigorous and computationally efficient to
generate physically realistic solute-solvent smooth boundaries by free energy
minimization. To this end, an innovative construction is proposed to transform a
variational problem subject to bounded admissible functions into an equivalent
unconstrained problem so that the traditional Euler-Lagrange Equation can be
applied directly. This new computational formulation will be implemented with
advanced computational algorithms to ensure their accuracy, stability, and
efficiency, and it will be validated by several common biomolecular modeling
tasks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
