
* 1818438
* Study on Localized Exponential Time Differencing Methods for Evolution Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,06/06/2018
* Lili Ju,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Many important physical phenomena are modeled by semilinear or fully nonlinear
evolution partial differential equations. The overall goal of the project is to
enhance the efficiency and scalability of exponential integrator-based methods
for solving these equations by designing and analyzing highly scalable localized
exponential time differencing methods and to apply them to numerically simulate
and investigate a wide range of related application problems in science and
engineering. The proposed work is of practical interest with significant
influences as the developed methods are highly scalable on modern supercomputer
systems, and can serve as an efficient, accurate and stable computational tool
for simulations of these stiff problems. Direct and transformative innovations
resulting from the project will greatly improve modeling and computational
capabilities for many fields, such as design of new materials and oil recovery
from fractured oil reservoirs. In addition, this project will also offer a
unique educational opportunity for graduate students with interests in
computational and applied mathematics by having them participate in an
interdisciplinary research environment.

Direct parallelization of global exponential time differencing methods is often
very hard to be scalable on massively distributed systems due to the intensive
data communications needed by fast Fourier transform or by Krylov subspace-based
calculations for products of matrix exponentials and vectors. On the other hand,
domain decomposition approaches have been well established for many classic time
integration methods, but not enough attention and work have been devoted to
exponential integrators. This project involves a thorough study on the
development and analysis of iterative and noniterative localized exponential
time differencing methods based on domain decomposition, with a family of time-
dependent scalar diffusion equations as the prototype problem. The PI will also
apply the developed methods to study some phase field models for multi-component
and multi-phase systems arising from materials science and petroleum
engineering. This project would offer new insights through numerical
investigations to the understanding of the macroscopic properties and
reliability of alloys and the physical phenomena (such as liquid droplets, gas
bubbles, and capillary pressure) of hydrocarbon fluids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
