
* 1818833
* Fast Algorithms for Simulating the Collective Swimming of Microorganisms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/18/2018
* Minghao Rostami,NY,Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 176,045.00

Hydrodynamic interactions play a crucial role in the collective dynamics of
microorganisms. The main goal of this project is to explore and develop
efficient algorithms for simulating the collective swimming of a large group of
microorganisms in a three-dimensional viscous fluid. The computational methods
resulting from this project will provide new tools to understand how micro-
swimmers such as sperm and cilia collectively perform various physiological
functions inside the human body. They will also help shed new light on how and
why microorganisms such as bacteria and algae aggregate and form colonies.
Microorganisms often have to navigate through elastic structures such as mucus
and polymers; their motility in a non-Newtonian fluid has attracted significant
interest in recent years. The proposed methods can be extended to study the
collective swimming of microorganisms inside a viscoelastic network. Besides
hydrodynamic interactions, steric and chemical interactions also have profound
impacts on the collective behaviors of microorganisms. This project lays a
foundation for the development of more comprehensive mathematical models for
collective dynamics that incorporate a variety of interactions.

At high enough density, micro-swimmers, such as bacteria, cilia, sperm and
algae, exhibit remarkable collective motions which bear significant biological
implications. For example, sperm swim both competitively and collaboratively to
reach the egg, and cilia in the airways beat collectively to propel mucus and
foreign particles out of the lung. These phenomena can be modeled by several
methods, all of which entail solving equations of fluid-structure interaction.
Among them, the method of regularized Stokeslets and the Rotne-Prager-Yamakawa
tensor have the advantage of not requiring a 3D Eulerian grid and using the
fundamental solutions to the underlying equations instead. However, the
computations required by both methods entail the use of dense matrices, and they
tend to be large and very costly to work with for practical models in which the
number of micro-swimmers is large. In addition, patterns can take a long time to
emerge and develop in swimming microorganisms, making the simulation even more
challenging. The project has the following three objectives: 1.Develop fast
algorithms for computing matrix-vector products and for solving linear systems
with the aforementioned large, dense matrices; 2.Employ these algorithms to
investigate (a) the collective swimming of a large group of sperm confined by a
surface, (b) the flow field induced by a dense mat of beating cilia, and (c) the
flow field induced by a large number of free micro-swimmers; 3.Accelerate the
time-dependent simulation of collective swimming by implementing parallel-in-
time methods; and compare the efficiency of spatial and temporal parallelization
when hundreds of computer cores are used.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
