
* 1818772
* Partial Differential Equation Constrained Optimization: Algorithms, Numerics, and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/26/2018
* Harbir Antil,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,999.00

The state of the art in modeling of the physical processes in science and
engineering confronts us with solving increasingly complex optimization problems
in the presence of constraints. Think of designing the wing of an aircraft where
it is essential that it can withstand a tremendous amount of pressure. This is
just one of the example of an optimization problem with constrains. Such
problems are inherently nonlinear due to constraints. This makes the development
and analysis of algorithms and numerical techniques for the solution of these
problems extremely challenging but rewarding. This project will create new
optimization algorithms that allows us to incorporate constraints in a
systematic and robust fashion. The targeted applications range from next
generation micro- and nano-scale lab-on-chip devices to novel material and
structural designs. Open source software will be created so that the research
can be easily used by scientists working in other research areas. The
applications under consideration can be modeled using partial differential
equations (PDEs). These PDEs are nonlocal (fractional); nonsmooth (contact
problems); geometric, nonlinear, multiscale with an unknown domain, i.e. free
boundary problems (FBPs). This project focuses on optimization problems with
such PDE constraints - the so-called PDE constrained optimization problems. It
aims to create new optimization schemes that will enable the solution of
currently intractable optimization problems with nonsmooth features, including:
optimization problems with nonlinear inequality constraints, contact problems,
and risk-averse PDE constrained optimization. The resulting optimization
algorithms will provide new insights into nonconvex nonsmooth problems.
Optimization problems with surface tension is a new research field with great
potential to enhance our understanding at the micro and nano-scales where
surface effects dominate bulk effects. This will impact the design of next
generation lab-on-chip, forensics and liquid lenses in astronomical telescopes.
Open source software will be developed, which will not only benefit scientists
in optimization, FBPs, and nonlocal problems but also scientists in nonlinear
PDEs and data driven optimization problems. The results will be disseminated via
two special topics courses on (i) PDE constrained optimization under
uncertainty; (ii) Deep learning and PDE constrained optimization. One female
student will get her PhD.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
