
* 1818747
* Advances in Numerical Methods for Wave Propagation in Inhomogeneous Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,05/23/2018
* Lise-Marie Imbert-Gerard,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 268,940.00

The scientific thrust of this project is devoted to the creation of methods for
the numerical simulation of wave propagation in complicated materials with
variable material properties. Generalized Plane Wave functions, introduced by
the PI during her PhD, have already been proven to lead to be efficient tools
for simple problems. Analyzing the corresponding methods will be a central focus
of our work, with application to noise reduction in turboreactors. The proposed
work is expected to enable noticeable improvements in the numerical methods used
to study acoustic effects in an air flow around a turboreactor. As recently
reported by the Washington Post, airplanes have a huge impact on noise
pollution. Taking into account noise reduction in the design of future aircrafts
is very challenging, and will impact public health and policy.

Although GPW-based schemes represent a very promising numerical tool, little is
known analytically about their performance. Sharper and more detailed estimates
are necessary, however, to increase their impact on the community. This proposal
focuses on the numerical simulation of wave propagation problems in
inhomogeneous media, modeled by variable coefficients, in two and three
dimensions. The principal application targeted is wave propagation in
aeroacoustics in collaboration with Airbus SAS, where the source of
inhomogeneity is the non-uniform flow, but the methods considered in this
project will also apply to other variable material properties such as
permittivity or sound speed. Novel mathematical and computational challenges
need to be addressed in order to avoid the numerical error introduced a priori
by a piece-wise constant approximation of the coefficients. Trefftz methods
rely, in broad terms, on the idea of approximating solutions to PDEs using basis
functions which are exact solutions, making explicit use of information about
the ambient medium. This project is concerned with the design, mathematical
analysis and computer implementation of numerical methods adapted to variable
coefficients via Generalized Plane Wave (GPW) basis functions. The following
research directions are proposed: (1) construction of GPWs for the convected
Helmholtz equation, (2) h-version of convergence analysis, corresponding to
refining the mesh, (3) p-version of convergence analysis, corresponding to
increasing the number of basis functions with a fixed mesh, (4) implementation
of a prototype GPW-Trefftz code for performance comparison with other methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
