
* 1818751
* Analysis and Recovery of High-Dimensional Data with Low-Dimensional Structures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2018,06/26/2020
* Wenjing Liao,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2021
* USD 215,385.00

Nowadays massive, high dimensional data sets arise in many fields of
contemporary science and introduce new challenges. In machine learning, the
well-known curse of dimensionality implies that, in order to achieve a fixed
accuracy in prediction, a large number of training data is required. In image
and signal recovery, a large number of measurements are needed to recover a
high-dimensional vector, unless further assumptions are made. Fortunately, many
real-world data sets exhibit low-dimensional geometric structures due to rich
local regularities, global symmetries, repetitive patterns, or redundant
sampling. The PI will explore low-dimensional geometric structures in data sets
for feature extraction, data prediction and signal recovery. Dimension reduction
and function approximation given a set of training data are of central interest
in machine learning and data science. When data are concentrated near a low-
dimensional set or the function has low complexity, the PI will develop new and
fast machine learning algorithms whose performance depends on the complexity of
the data or the function, instead of the dimension of the data sets. In image
and signal recovery, an interesting problem is to recover a high-dimensional,
sparse vector from a small number of structured measurements. This problem is
challenging since sensing matrices arising from imaging and signal processing
are often deterministic, structured and highly coherent (some columns are highly
correlated), which does not allow one to apply standard theory and algorithms.
The PI will utilize the structures of sensing matrices, develop efficient
algorithms, and prove performance guarantees. The theory and fast algorithms
developed in this project can be applied to a wide range of problems in data
compression, image analysis, computer vision, and signal recovery. High
dimensional data arise in many fields of contemporary science and introduce new
challenges. Fortunately, many real-world data sets exhibit low-dimensional
geometric structures. This project focuses on exploiting these low-dimensional
geometric structures of the data sets, and developing novel methods for
dimension reduction, function approximation, and signal recovery. The PI will
work on two sets of problems. In the first one, a data set is modeled as point
clouds in a D-dimensional space but concentrating near a d-dimensional manifold,
where d is much smaller than D. She plans to exploit the geometric structures of
the data sets to build low-dimensional representations of data and approximate
functions on data. Function approximations in Euclidean spaces have been well
studied; however, classical estimators converge to the true function extremely
slowly in high dimensions. When data are concentrated near a d-dimensional
manifold, or the function has low complexity, the PI aims at constructing
estimators that converge to the true function at a faster rate depending on the
intrinsic dimension d. The proposed approach is based on the PI's recent work on
adaptive geometric approximations for intrinsically low-dimensional data, where
a data-driven, fast and robust scheme was developed to construct low-dimensional
geometric approximations of data. The second set of problems arise from imaging
and signal processing where the goal is to recover a high-dimensional, sparse
vector from its noisy low-frequency Fourier coefficients. It is related with
super-resolution in imaging, as the missing high-frequency Fourier coefficients
correspond to the high-resolution components of the vector. Many existing
methods fail since some columns in the sensing matrix are highly correlated. The
PI will utilize the structure of the sensing matrix, develop efficient
algorithms and prove performance guarantees. A mathematical theory will be
developed to explain the fundamental difficulty of super-resolution, as well as
the resolution limit of superior subspace methods, such as MUSIC, ESPRIT, and
the matrix pencil method.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
