
* 1818948
* Numerical Spectral Study of Elliptic Operators
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2018,06/04/2018
* Chiu-Yen Kao,CA,Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 86,150.00

Since Lord Rayleigh conjectured more than a century ago that the disk should
minimize the first Laplace-Dirichlet eigenvalue among all shapes of equal area,
spectral study of elliptic operators has been an active research topic with
applications including mechanical vibration, optical resonators, photonic
crystals, and population dynamics. In mechanical vibration, for example, it is
interesting to explore what shapes or what density distributions can generate
minimal fundamental frequency; in photonic crystals, one seeks to design
semiconductor structures with a periodic variation of refractive index to
maximize photonic bandgap in which the propagation of light is forbidden. This
project aims to advance numerical approaches to these kinds of questions for
classes of eigenvalue problems that arise in design of containers to minimize
fluid sloshing and in vibration control. Researchers have turned their attention
to these questions with a renewed interest due to surprising recent discoveries,
which include symmetry structure found in the optimizer of Steklov eigenvalue
problems, optimal density arrangements in thin plates, and localization of
vibration induced by interior clamped points. The project will explore a range
of related open questions and aims to develop numerical approaches to solve
them. The project also provides opportunities for mentoring students and
engaging interested scientists, including those from underrepresented groups.
Results are expected to have important potential application in systems that
reduce liquid sloshing in missiles and other vessels, in noise and vibration
control, and in medical and geophysical imaging. This project aims to develop
numerical approaches to solve Steklov and biharmonic eigenvalue problems and
study their related shape and topology optimization problems. The forward
solvers for this project are based on boundary integral methods, finite element
methods, and spectral methods. The optimization solvers are based on
shape/topology derivatives and rearrangement methods. The investigator will
study a wide range of problems arising from applications in liquid sloshing and
plate vibrations, including (1) computation of the k-th Steklov eigenvalue
problem and its optimization among star-shaped domains in three dimensions, (2)
computation of principal eigenvalue of mixed Steklov eigenvalue problems and its
related shape optimization, (3) Steklov eigenvalue problems on general
manifolds, (4) spectral study of buckled plate eigenvalue problems, (5)
localization of eigenfunctions induced by clamped points, and (6) multiphase
shape optimization problems involving biharmonic operators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
