
* 1818374
* Graph-Based Regularization Techniques and Their Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,06/12/2018
* Jing Qin,MT,Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 186,006.00

The rapid development of science and technology ushers in a new era of big data
that requires developing specialized algorithms to process a large amount of
data. Signal processing and other related techniques aim to recover signals of
interest or some of their properties; this goal can be reduced to an
optimization question. Due to physical limitations of hardware, the size of the
acquired data is in general much smaller than that of the underlying signal,
resulting in an ill-posed problem for signal recovery with infinitely many
solutions. Regularization techniques have been developed to address this
inherent ill-posedness. Despite being widely applied in low-dimensional signal
processing, regularization has seen limited use in processing high-dimensional
data sets, especially those best represented by graphs, that is, networks with
sophisticated connections. This project aims to further develop graph-based
regularization techniques, with potential to revolutionize imaging and data
analysis technologies in many areas of data science.

This project aims to develop a useful graph-based regularization framework for
various signal processing problems, to address major theoretical and
computational challenges for its applications, to provide new interpretations of
low-dimensional regularization techniques, and to demonstrate its capability for
handling large-scale data sets. The research has three objectives: (1) Develop
novel graph-based regularization techniques along with rigorous theoretical
guarantees to handle the more challenging signal processing problems and related
inverse problems; (2) Develop efficient numerical algorithms to solve the
corresponding optimization problems; and (3) Conduct numerical experiments in
imaging applications to demonstrate the advantages of the proposed approaches in
terms of accuracy and efficiency. The research aims to improve data processing
techniques and to infuse new insights into mathematical signal and image
processing, with a variety of applications such as medical imaging and remote
sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
