
* 1819257
* Parallel, Adaptive Cartesian Grid Algorithms for Natural Hazards Modeling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,06/25/2018
* Donna Calhoun,ID,Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2023
* USD 315,587.00

Geophysical hazards such as flooding, tsunamis, debris flows, landslides, storm
surges and potential dam failures threaten communities across the United States
and globally. This project develops computational tools that can efficiently
simulate these hazards, enabling a diverse group of researchers and emergency
planners to develop hazard maps of areas most likely to be impacted by these
disasters. For efficiency, the computational framework uses adaptive, "depth-
averaged" mathematical models that only require two dimensional planar grids,
rather than fully three dimensional meshes. A primary goal of the project is to
correct our depth-averaged model to capture localized waves that may spill over
flood barriers or overtop harbor breakwaters. These correction terms will give
current users of the computational framework critical additional capabilities
for modeling shallow geophysical hazards and allow them to create more robust
hazard maps. The computational tools can also take full advantage of emerging
hardware trends available on desktop workstations, moderate sized compute
clusters, as well as massively parallel computing facilities available at NSF
funded supercomputing sites. The project also provides users with tools for
visualizing results using open source software such as the Google Earth browser.
Ultimately, computational modeling can aid responders in predicting how to
distribute emergency resources in the event of unavoidable hazards and serve to
inform developers, legislative representatives, and citizenry of potential risks
in their communities.

The research will focus on the implementation of a direct solver for variable
coefficient elliptic problems on adaptively refined quad-tree meshes. The
targeted solver is the Hierarchical Poincare Steklov (HPS) solver, developed by
A. Gillman and P. Martinsson. Satisfying four crucial properties, this solver
(1) has the ease of use of matrix-free methods, (2) can solve nearby systems
quickly, (3) has optimal O(N) efficiency, and (4) provides parameters that can
be tuned to reduce computational cost in proportion to accuracy requirements.
Furthermore, the method uses low rank approximations to compress dense matrices
and accelerate matrix computations. In the proposed work, the PI will modify the
original HPS solver for use with second order, finite volume schemes and
implement the solver in ForestClaw, the parallel, patch-based Cartesian adaptive
quad-tree code. The PI will also report on the scalability and parallel
efficiency of the implementation of the HPS method. Two technical challenges
that will arise are to develop effective procedures for merging Dirichlet-to-
Neumann maps across processor boundaries and incrementally updating the solver
factorization for dynamically evolving meshes. The targeted application is the
solution to the Serre-Green Naghdi equations for modeling dispersive corrections
to the shallow water wave equations. These corrections will be included in the
GeoClaw extension of ForestClaw. GeoClaw (D. George, R. J. LeVeque, M. J.
Berger) is a widely used software package for solving depth-averaged flow
equations. The addition of these correction terms to the GeoClaw extension will
provide GeoClaw users with critical capabilities for modeling tsunamis,
flooding, debris flows, storm surges and other shallow geophysical flows.
Ultimately, the proposed solver can be used within the ForestClaw framework as a
general purpose elliptic solver for a variety of physical flow phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
