
* 1819131
* A General and Efficient Framework for Computational Shape Analysis Through Geometric Distributions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,06/06/2018
* Nicolas Charon,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 10/31/2020
* USD 215,032.00

The analysis of shapes and their variability has become an increasingly central
problem in multiple areas of data science. In the field of computer vision,
shape recognition and classification is often a crucial component of machine
learning systems such as self-driving cars. In natural sciences, the recent
development of computational anatomy, that is the automatic analysis of
anatomical structures by numerical algorithms, provides a fruitful approach in
understanding and diagnosing a wide range of pathologies and disorders. Along
these different scientific questions, the amount and variety of available data
has never ceased to grow. As a result, the concept of shape itself has
considerably expanded and may refer to various types of geometric objects, which
poses the important challenge of constructing and computing relevant similarity
metrics between shapes across all these different modalities. The purpose of
this research project is to develop an integrated mathematical model and
associated numerical pipeline that allows for morphological analysis of
geometric structures in a flexible and efficient way, and explore its possible
applications to computational anatomy and computer vision. It will also include
a substantial educational component with the training of a graduate student,
support for presentations in conferences and workshops, and dissemination of an
open-source code to the scientific community.

The primal challenge of statistical shape analysis is the rather non-standard
and disparate mathematical spaces in which objects belong, whether the shapes in
question are raw images, manually or automatically extracted landmarks, curves,
surfaces, vector fields or multi-modal objects. While the seminal model proposed
by Grenander introduced the idea of comparing any two shapes through the
estimation of an optimal deformation (measured by a metric on a certain
diffeomorphism group), this model's generality falls short in many real
applications where a certain amount of residual dissimilarity is necessary to
account for other sources of variability (like noise). This project intends to
fill this current gap by introducing a flexible approach to quantify shape
similarity which relies on a unified embedding of shape spaces as generalized
distributions, following the principles of geometric measure theory. Beyond the
past success of these representations for curve and surface registration
problems, the objective will be to demonstrate on a mathematical and
computational level how it extends to a much wider class of geometric data
structures and allows for cross-modality analysis, while pushing the scope of
applications to other problems like clustering, classification and sparse
representations on shapes. Fast numerical methods for this new framework is also
an important aspect of the project, with the objective of making implementations
scalable to the current dimensionality of datasets e.g. in medical imaging.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
