
* 1819041
* Novel Finite Element Methods for Three-Dimensional Anisotropic Singular Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,06/14/2018
* Hengguang Li,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 198,991.00

Elliptic partial differential equations can possess singular solutions in
various practical models. The efficacy of numerical simulation highly depends on
smoothness and can severely deteriorate in the presence of singularities. The
development of effective finite element methods (FEMs) for singular partial
differential equations has been a central focus in computational mathematics;
however, most of the established methods are for two-dimensional problems. The
design of effective three-dimensional (3D) methods is more technically involved
and less explored, largely due to the constraints imposed by the 3D geometry and
by anisotropic structure in singularities. Existing 3D algorithms are usually
tetrahedron-based and sensitive to the domain geometry and to the degree of
polynomials, which limits their applications in practical computing. This
project aims to develop a novel mesh algorithm that is well-structured, flexible
with different 3D elements, and simple in implementation. The new algorithm is
expected to significantly improve the effectiveness of 3D numerical simulations
in areas where anisotropic solutions frequently occur, including mathematical
models in aerospace engineering (e.g., aircraft design), in mechanical
engineering (e.g., crack propagation in civil infrastructure), in fluid
mechanics, and in electromagnetism.

This research project has two main components. (1) Innovative numerical
algorithms. The investigator plans to develop a new family of anisotropic meshes
that facilitate optimal FEMs approximating 3D anisotropic singular solutions.
The mesh construction follows a simple, explicit, and unified approach and
applies to four basic 3D elements: the tetrahedron, hexahedron, wedge, and
pyramid. With unconventional but implementation-friendly features, these
algorithms have shown effectiveness in early numerical tests. (2) Rigorous
theoretical investigations and applications. The investigator plans to devise
new analytical tools to justify and broaden the applications of the new FEMs,
especially when the mesh is anisotropic. This includes (i) optimal error
analysis; (ii) new regularity estimates for 3D anisotropic problems; (iii) fast
numerical solvers for linear systems from anisotropic meshes; and (iv) efficient
implementations in high-performance computing environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
