
* 1819115
* Reduced-Order and Low-Rank Methods for Parameter-Dependent Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/16/2018
* Howard Elman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 01/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this study is to develop new computer algorithms to be used to
simulate engineering models and physical phenomena, with the aim of predicting
behavior of systems in the physical world. Examples of the use of these
techniques include modeling of the flow of pollutants in groundwater, assessing
the stability of structures such as airplane wings in the face of stresses such
as high temperatures or pressures, and simulating the effects of magnetic fields
on performance of semiconductors or reactions in nuclear fusion. Such algorithms
help engineers and scientists to make good decisions about construction and use
of new technology, but they are only practically useful if demonstrated to be
efficient (that is, use modest amounts of computer time and memory) and
accurate. The aim of this work is to advance the development of efficient
algorithms of this type and to demonstrate their utility for models of transient
phenomena such as fluid flows and stability of physical structures.

The technical goals of the project are to study solution algorithms for
parameter-dependent partial differential equations by constructing approximate
solutions of low-rank structure. Parameterized problems of this type arise when
underlying terms figuring in the differential operators of the system depend on
a set of unknown or random parameters. Examples include unknown permeabilities
in models of diffusion or velocity fields that are affected by temperatures. In
this scenario, the solutions sought also depend on parameters, but they can
often be approximated well in a space of low dimension, i.e., solutions for all
parameter values can be represented as a linear combination of a small finite
set of functions. Such a reduced representation offers the prospect of
significant reduction of costs required to compute solutions. The project will
explore the utility this approach for two types of problems: (i) dynamical
systems, for which the dependence on time requires new methods to develop
reduced-order models that are accurate over long time periods, and (ii)
eigenvalue problems, with emphasis on techniques for stability analysis of
dynamical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
