
* 1819101
* The Discontinuous Petrov Galerkin Method with Optimal Test Functions for Compressible Flows and Ductile-to-Brittle Phase Transitions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2018,07/12/2018
* Leszek Demkowicz,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The project aims at a further development of the Discontinuous Petrov Galerkin
(DPG) Finite Element (FE) method with optimal test functions introduced by Jay
Gopalakrishnan and Leszek Demkowicz in 2009. The DPG methodology represents a
breakthrough in the Finite Element simulations of challenging Engineering and
Science processes. The proposed research directions are: the solution of 2D and
3D compressible flow problems, the modeling of ductile to brittle phase
transitions using Phase Fields theories. The method will have a lasting impact
on the construction of software for difficult applications requiring high
accuracy. Application areas targeted in this project include aerospace
(transonic flows) and high energy density electrical motors (insulation
failure), building on collaborations with Boeing and the Navy.

The DPG method minimizes residuals in the dual norm corresponding to a specified
test norm. Computation of the residual requires inversion of the Riesz operator
in the test space. With the use of broken test spaces and localizable test
norms, the inversion can be done element-wise using standard Galerkin and
"enriched" spaces. With the error of inverting the Riesz operator controlled
locally, i.e. on the element level, the method automatically guarantees discrete
stability for any well-posed linear problem in a Hilbert setting, in the sense
of the classic theory of closed operators. The methodology leads to uniform
stability for singular perturbation problems and, being a minimization method,
does not suffer from any preasymptotic instabilities. The residual is computed
rather than estimated and provides a basis for automatic adaptivity. Optimality
in the L2-norms does not preclude the Gibbs phenomenon and this project aims at
extending the DPG technology to Banach spaces. The first focus area deals with a
difficult classical subject, namely compressible Navier-Stokes equations with
applications to flow around a three-dimensional wing model and its simplified
model, the full potential equation. The second line of research aims at modeling
ductile-to-brittle phase transitions in polymers using Phase Field theories,
with applications to understanding damage and crack initiation in polymer
insulation. In both application areas above, solutions experience strong
boundary or/and internal layers. The proposed work includes both analysis and
software development in a joint computational effort with Cracow University of
Technology, Boeing, and collaborators at the University of Texas at Austin.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
