
* 1819059
* Energetic Phase-Field Methods and Biological Cell Modeling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2018,08/01/2018
* Xiaoqiang Wang,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,999.00

The phase field concept has recently been popularized by many researchers and is
well on its way to becoming one of the methods of choice for studying many
scientific and engineering problems. The specific settings the investigator
focuses on in this project are its applications in cell biology, e.g., cell
blebbing and cytokinesis, epithelial morphogenesis. The modeling, analytical,
and computational issues are very complex and challenging. The investigator's
prior research experience in studying phase field methods and its applications
in biology makes him very well prepared to conduct the project. The proposed
investigation will offer new insights into a number of outstanding theoretical
issues leading to innovation in computational algorithms for many important
applications and a better understanding of a number of fundamental biological
processes. This project will offer a unique educational opportunity for both
graduate and undergraduate students with interests in applied/computational
mathematics, biology, and engineering by having them participate in an
interdisciplinary research program that combines mathematics, biology, computer
science and engineering. The investigator will provide research experience for
underrepresented undergraduate students through "FSU Teach" and "Directed
Individual Studies" programs. Each undergraduate will participate in each and
every aspect of the research project. Because they will be teaching students at
the high- and middle-school levels, involving them in the proposed project will
produce a broader impact on training scientists of the next generation. The
investigator will actively disseminate his research results and software not
only to researchers in the area but also to a much broader community through
publications, attending meetings, maintaining an informative web-site. The
investigator will make electronic projection slides and movies from the
numerical simulations to present in local elementary and middle schools to
stimulate interest in science among younger students.

During recent years, the energetic phase field approach has emerged as a
successful modeling and simulation method having many advantages in the study of
micro structure evolution, including but not limited to solidification, grain
growth and coarsening, thin film micro structure, crack propagation, crystal
growth, dislocation-solute interactions, dislocation dynamics, and
electromigration. The idea of phase field methods is to introduce a set of phase
field variables to implicitly track the moving surfaces of micro structures,
which can be very complex and nonlinear. In the past few years, the investigator
and his collaborators have successfully applied phase field methods to study
biological micro structures, especially cell membranes. These studies also
extended the theory of phase field methods. A series of efforts have been
carried out on modeling, numerical methods and theoretical analysis. The
proposed project is mainly concerned with further studies on phase field methods
and the broadening of applications for the cell biology; phase field methods and
related concepts can be used as a basis for more convenient and/or efficient
treatments. In the next few years, the investigator will investigate some
theoretical and algorithmic problems on phase field methods that still remained
unsolved or are partly unsolved today. Those new algorithms have the potential
to dramatically lower the computational cost and thus make phase field method a
state-of-art technique for solving complex biology problems. The investigator
will also perform phase field modeling on membrane interaction with membrane
proteins, acto-myosin driven cell blebbing, cell cytokinesis during mitosis, and
epithelial morphogenesis. Those are very challenging problems. Phase field
methods have the advantages in handling those problems compared to surface
tracking or surface evolving methods, especially for cells with complex shape
changes. The investigator's numerical simulations together with his
collaborator's lab experiments will help us gain insight into the principles
behind various biological phenomena.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
