
* 1819193
* Collaborative Research: Improved Boundary Element Methods for Electrostatics of Interacting Proteins in Solvent
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2018,07/12/2018
* Weihua Geng,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 155,000.00

Protein molecules are basic components in all forms of life, and electrostatic
effects play a key role in determining protein structure and function. However
studying these effects experimentally is difficult, and there is great interest
in using computer simulations to advance this area of biochemical research. This
project will contribute by developing new mathematical algorithms to improve the
accuracy and efficiency of these simulations. Potential biomedical applications
include (1) protein-ligand binding, which is important for synthetic drug
design, and (2) protein folding, which is important for understanding how
misfolding causes disease. The investigators will collaborate with
bioscientists, and the software developed in the project will be made available
in open source format for use by the scientific community. The project results
will be disseminated through conference and seminar presentations, and
publications in scientific journals. The project will develop the national
workforce in computational mathematics by training junior personnel at the
postdoctoral, graduate student, and undergraduate student levels. Biochemical
simulations of charged particle systems are often limited by the cost of
computing long- range electrostatic interactions. To address this issue the PIs
have developed a treecode-accelerated boundary integral (TABI) method to solve
the Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) equation for the electrostatic potential of a
solvated protein. In this project the PIs will extend the TABI solver to the
challenging case of interacting proteins in solvent, focusing on subtle
dielectric and ionic structural effects. The work entails advances in modeling,
improvements in treecode and boundary element methods, and applications in
molecular biochemistry including the following topics: (1) The TABI code will be
extended to compute the binding energy of a solvated protein-protein complex.
(2) The treecode will be adapted to accelerate computations of the total
correlation function in the Reference Interaction Site Model (RISM) which
provides a physically accurate description of the water structure near the
solute/solvent interface. (3) Explicit ion simulations will be carried out to
validate the PB and RISM simulations, and to investigate the effect of finite
ion size on the interfacial charge structure. (4) The treecode will be improved
by implementing a more effective multipole acceptance criterion, and parallel
CPU and GPU implementations of the treecode will be developed. (5) A new method
for computing electrostatic PB forces will be tested for application in
molecular dynamics simulations of interacting proteins in solvent. (6) Efficient
computation of pH-dependent effects in solvated proteins will be demonstrated
using TABI.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
