
* 1819252
* Developing Efficient and Accessible Computational Tools for Poroelasticity Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/26/2018
* Jiangguo Liu,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,941.00

Poroelasticity problems arise from a broad range of real world problems, in
which fluid flows through a porous medium that can deform due to the fluid
pressure. For example, convection-enhanced drug delivery to tumor sites,
functioning of knee meniscus, and CO2 sequestration all involve this type of
interaction between solid (displacement) and fluid (pressure). Mathematical
modeling and computer simulations will provide valuable tools to enhance our
ability in understanding, predicting, and controlling these complicated physical
processes. This research project aims at developing a family of novel accurate,
efficient, and robust numerical methods for poroelasticity problems. The focus
of this project is on design, analysis, implementation, and applications of a
family of novel finite element methods for poroelasticity problems. Based on the
displacement-pressure two-field formulation, weak Galerkin finite element
methods will be developed for approximating both solid displacement and fluid
pressure. Conditions for stable coupling of these sub-problem solvers will be
investigated. The new methods will be applied to an engineering problem on knee
meniscus. These new methods will also be implemented as Matlab and C++ code
modules (on deal.II platform) that are openly accessible to the scientific
computing community. The efficient and robust computational tools developed in
this project can be applied to many real world problems that involve
poroelasticity such as drug delivery to tumor sites, food processing, reservoir
engineering, and tissue engineering. These will have further economic impact on
better use of natural resources or cures for diseases. The methodology developed
in this project can be applied to a large class of scientific computing tasks
that deal with multiple physical processes. This project will also provide
hands-on training opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
