
* 1819251
* Extraction of Information from Scientific Simulations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/09/2020
* Stephen Becker,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,993.00

Numerical simulations are a cornerstone of the modern scientific process, and
considerable expense and energy, both literally and figuratively, is put into
simulations. The two objectives of this project are to (1) shorten simulation
time, and (2) ask new questions of the data given the output of an existing
simulation (but not its full history) in order to avoid running a new
simulation. To shorten simulation time, a naive approach leads to less accurate
estimates of certain variables that are used for both prediction of new material
properties and for validation of numerical models against known properties. This
program investigates super-resolution methods that do not suffer this loss of
accuracy. The second objective records appropriate randomized snapshots or
"sketches" from simulations. Because it may not be known in advance which
variables should be directly calculated, this program develops techniques to use
the sketches to estimate variables that were not originally calculated. The
technique is designed to "future-proof" simulations, and gives datasets a second
chance at being useful without requiring a new simulation to be run. Achieving
either or both objectives in this project will lead to fewer unnecessary
computer simulations, saving energy and reducing impact on the environment.

This project brings together ideas from physical chemistry, high-performance
computing, optimization, machine learning, digital signal processing, and time-
series statistics. More specifically, the first objective is to estimate
spectral variables from a shortened simulation. Shortening the time range
usually has the effect of broadening the spectral lines. Under appropriate
assumptions on the spectra, recent advances in harmonic analysis show that by
solving a semi-definite program, one can super-resolve the spectral lines. These
advances have been limited to signal-processing applications, and with
appropriate modification, they will have a great impact on spectral estimation
from simulations. The project will develop efficient algorithms to tackle this
problem, as well as show how it can be adapted to the situation of scientific
computing, and theoretically extended to correctly handle uncertainty. The
second objective is compressive parameter estimation, which has only recently
been explored and mainly in the context of digital signal processing. The
project will develop particular estimators for given statistics, as well as
explore a general approach to apply to a broad class of statistics. The approach
for storing snapshots of data will be applied primarily to magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) simulations of solar convection, a field of great importance due to the
effect of the sun's weather on cosmic rays and photons incident on Earth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
