
* 1819002
* Polyhedral Techniques for Fast Sparse Nonlinear Optimization and their Application to Nonsmooth Optimal Control
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2018
* William Hager,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

New computational algorithms are developed for solving sparse optimization
problems. These are large, complex problems that arise in science, engineering,
and industry where the goal is to operate a large interconnected system in an
efficient way. Applications range from power grids to air traffic control
systems to the fabrication of computer chips. A target area in the project is
optimal control, a technology which has a wide array of uses that include space
flight maneuvers, the optimal design of aerodynamic shapes, the optimal design
of manufacturing processes, and biotechnology; for example, the development of
effective vaccination and treatment plans for a disease. The optimization
algorithms are targeted to sparse problems which often arise when a dynamic
process which evolves continuously in time, such as the motion of a robot's arm,
is replaced by discrete movements that are computationally tractable. The
algorithms are faster and achieve greater accuracy than was previously possible.
The research has impact on the development of human resources through the
training of students with both gender and ethnic diversity. To maximize the
impact of the research, high-quality software will be developed and made widely
available.

A new framework will be developed for solving large-scale sparse constrained
nonlinear optimization problems based on a new fast robust accurate solver for
polyhedral constrained problems. At the same time that the new optimization
framework is developed, it will be used in a new approach for solving optimal
control problems based on hp-orthogonal collocation. The optimization research
will focus on the extension of techniques for solving polyhedral constrained
optimization problems to the treatment of general nonlinear constraints. The
solver will require only first-order information and will be built around a new
tight bound for the error in a solution to an optimization problem in terms of
the violation in the first-order optimality conditions. Sparsity in the
constraints will be exploited throughout the solution process. Phase one of the
solver seeks to identify active constraints, while phase two strives for
superlinear convergence using a gradient-based method such as the conjugate
gradient method. The switch between the two phases is controlled by the error
estimator. The new optimization framework will be used to continue the
development of hp-orthogonal collocation techniques for solving optimal control
problems. In particular, the fast and accurate optimization scheme is
instrumental in the hp-techniques since better estimates for the error in the
discrete approximation to the control problem yield a better choice for the
mesh, and a much faster solution of the control problem. Mesh placement
techniques, as opposed to mesh refinement techniques, will be used to further
improve the mesh.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
