
* 1819166
* Fast and Reliable Hierarchical Structured Methods for More General Matrix Computations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,06/21/2018
* Jianlin Xia,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,148.00

Large matrix computations play a critical role in modern scientific computing
tasks and engineering simulations. Realistic computations usually involve
enormous amounts of data due to large dense matrices or dense intermediate
matrix blocks, which makes classical matrix methods impractical. Hierarchical
structured methods provide an effective and reliable way to compress and process
large matrix data. In such methods, dense matrix blocks are approximated by
compact structured forms that are convenient to handle. This research project
aims to develop theoretical foundations for understanding multiple hierarchical
structured techniques and for designing new hierarchical structured algorithms.
These algorithms are expected to be applicable to more general matrix
computations and challenging applications where usual structured methods are not
suitable or effective.

Hierarchical structured methods exploit inherent structures in matrix
computations to gain high efficiency while ensuring superior stability. This
project is concerned with the design, analysis, and application of fast and
reliable hierarchical structured methods for broad classes of challenging
computations. A unified framework will be provided to understand multiple types
of hierarchical structured methods, design new hierarchical methods with
enhanced applicability, and analyze their accuracy and stability. State-of-the-
art fast and stable solvers will be developed for tackling challenges such as
large data sizes, ill conditioning, high frequencies, and multiple frequencies.
The new solvers will be applicable to a wide range of matrix computations. Based
on data sparsity and enhanced stability, the solvers will significantly improve
the efficiency and reliability of many computations in PDE solution, large data
analysis, network, machine learning, imaging, seismic modeling,
electromagnetics, etc. The research will also make fast and stable structured
solvers widely accessible to broader fields and industries. The data will be
included in data repositories for unrestricted access. Open-source packages and
educational/tutorial materials will be freely available. The multidisciplinary
project will provide excellent opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds to closely interact and to learn critical
computational and mathematical skills from multiple fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
