
* 1821211
* Data-Driven Stochastic Model Reduction and Its Applications in Data Assimilation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 07/01/2018,06/29/2020
* Fei Lu,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2021
* USD 160,142.00

With data routinely available, many applications in science and engineering call
for timely and accurate predictions that are constantly updated. In data
assimilation, such predictions are made by combining data with mathematical
dynamical models. To quantify the uncertainty in predictions, the dynamical
models need to be repeatedly solved for many initial conditions in a timely
manner. This rules out the use of first-principles dynamical models that are
computationally expensive and time-consuming to solve, and prompts the need to
construct effective statistical-dynamical reduced models. This project will
address this issue by developing data-informed stochastic reduced models based
on theories and tools in statistical inference, stochastic processes, dynamical
systems, and partial differential equations. The research lies at the foundation
of data-informed computational modeling and simulation, and aims at developing
new mathematical and statistical theories and tools to address the challenges in
data-informed predictive modeling of complex systems. The research plan is
complemented by educational objectives to prepare and train students through
interdisciplinary research.

The goal of this project is to develop and analyze efficient algorithms to
construct statistically-dynamically effective stochastic reduced models from
data for complex systems, and to obtain timely predictions through data
assimilation using these reduced models. The investigator plans to infer
discrete-time non-Markovian reduced models from data by (i) parametrizing
projections of invariant manifolds of dissipative systems, and (ii)
approximating the effects of the unresolved variables on the resolved variables
by nonparametric inference methods for general unknown systems. The investigator
also plans to develop novel data assimilation methods for these non-Markovian
reduced models and apply these methods to address the grand challenge of model
reduction from noisy partial data. The work is expected to have applications in
climate modeling, geophysics, fluid mechanics, and other data-informed
computational modeling problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
