
* 1822316
* Recent Advances in Numerical Wave Propagation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,08/02/2018
* Yassine Boubendir,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2019
* USD 19,999.00

FACM 2018 represents the fifteen meeting in a series on "Frontiers in Applied
and Computational Mathematics" at the New Jersey Institute of Technology and
will focus on "Recent Advances in Numerical Wave Propagation". Wave scattering
problems are important in a variety of engineering and industrial applications
such as the design of antennas and stealth aircraft; imaging and tomography;
electromagnetic compatibility; and many others in particular in the aeronautic
industry. This workshop is a great occasion for researchers in this field to
present their most recent and effective work on industrial applications. The
diversity of the methods presented in this meeting and its medium size will
provide a unique opportunity to discuss limitations and advantages of each
technique. It is therefore expected that the proposed 2018 conference will
permit the development of new collaborations in order to efficiently deal with
difficult wave propagation problems. Substantial funds will be devoted to
support the participation of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, beginning
faculty, and under-represented minorities. For students and postdocs in
particular, FACM 2018 conference will provide a major learning and networking
experience that will help them to develop their research and career paths. All
plenary talks will be open to the public; see https://m.njit.edu/Events/FACM18/

The FACM 2018 conference will be a two and a half day single-track session
comprised of plenary lectures and standard workshop presentations in the field
of numerical wave propagation problems. Experts mainly on finite and boundary
elements methods, high frequency techniques, and domain decomposition algorithms
will present their most recent contributions. The plenary presentations in the
workshop will overview the state-of-the-art of the numerical techniques
currently used to deal with wave propagation problems. This is an ideal occasion
for the participants to develop new methodologies for the ongoing challenging
high-frequency problems in complex media, as well as new algorithms that couple
numerical techniques using iterative solvers and high performance computing
tools. In addition, graduate students, postdocs, and junior researchers will be
introduced to difficult problems motivated by industrial applications, and to
the most widely used numerical solvers for wave propagation problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
