
* 1833601
* SIAM TX-LA Section Meeting
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2018,08/08/2018
* Robert Lipton,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Basic and engineering science can deliver game changing advances in the way we
live and the disciplines of computational and applied mathematics are
increasingly central to these developments. The Texas and Louisiana SIAM Section
spans a geographical region including 13 Universities and several Medical and
Industrial Research Centers. Motivated by this exciting synergy the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics Texas-Louisiana Section Meeting will be held
from 10/5/2018 through 10/7/2018 at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge
Louisiana. The Meeting offers a special opportunity for increasing diversity and
breadth of participation by actively engaging a much broader base of younger
applied mathematicians than in more standard symposium formats. This symposium
format allows undergraduate students, graduate students and young investigators
to directly interact with the greater research community on interdisciplinary
problems coming from the frontiers of science and applied mathematics. This
feature increases diversity and full participation of women, persons with
disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. It exposes
undergraduate students, graduate students, and early career applied
mathematicians to contemporary and fundamental theoretical problems challenging
science; enabling future breakthroughs through interdisciplinary collaboration.
One of the outcomes of this Meeting to provide a unique and valuable experience
in the research education of next the generation of investigators and educators.
This Meeting is intended to foster collaboration and synergy between the applied
mathematics community and the basic and engineering science community and to
facilitate interaction and collaboration between the Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics (SIAM) and the Universities and Research Centers in the
Texas - Louisiana region.

The scientific goals of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
Texas-Louisiana Section Meeting are: To foster new scientific collaborations
between applied and computational mathematicians and researchers in the basic
and engineering sciences in order to address contemporary problems at the
frontiers of science. Mini symposia include Mathematics in Gulf of Mexico
offshore oil and gas production, Modeling, analysis, and computation in
mathematical biology, Computational methods for waves in complex media, High-
order accurate numerical methods for multi-physics problems, Numerical PDE/ODE
and high performance computing applications, Mathematics in oil and gas
exploration and production, Spectral theory of differential operators,
Multiscale methods and uncertainty quantification for porous media, Numerical
approximation of fractional differential equations, Mathematical and
computational aspects of fracture, Nonlinear partial differential equations and
applications, Numerical Geometric PDE, and Nonlinear modeling of disease
dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
