
* 1834756
* 2018 Gene Golub SIAM Summer School: Inverse Problems: Systematic Integration of Data with Models under Uncertainty
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2018,06/19/2018
* Noemi Petra,CA,University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* miao-jung ou
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports the participation of US-based PhD students in the 2018 Gene
Golub Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) Summer School
entitled "Inverse Problems: Systematic Integration of Data with Models under
Uncertainty," taking place June 17-30, 2018 in Breckenridge, Colorado. The
fundamental question addressed by this two-week summer school is: How do we
optimally learn from data through the lens of models? And how do we do so when
the data and models are uncertain (as they usually are)? These questions have
become central with the massive explosion of data volumes across all areas of
science, engineering, technology, medicine, and the social sciences. The summer
school aims to introduce graduate students to the mathematical and computational
aspects of such inverse problems, particularly modern developments that
emphasize the quantification of uncertainty in the inverse solution within the
framework of Bayesian inference.

The summer school brings graduate students together with experts in foundational
areas of Bayesian inverse problems. The lectures feature an integrated format
that begins with ill-posedness and regularization, develops the ideas and tools
for deterministic inversion via numerical optimization, and elaborates
formulations and solution methods for the modern Bayesian perspective, building
on several of the deterministic tools. The focus throughout the lectures is on
methods that can scale to inverse problems governed by complex forward models,
such as partial differential equations. Morning lectures are complemented by
afternoon hands-on laboratory sessions using open-source software (hippylib and
MUQ) that implements state-of-the-art deterministic and Bayesian inversion
methods, and the school concludes with student project presentations. The summer
school aims to augment existing academic curricula with instruction in Bayesian
inverse problems that reflects the relatively recent emergence of the
mathematical and computational foundations of the field, the need to integrate
concepts from inverse theory, partial differential equations, optimization,
probability, statistics, and computing, and the need to develop supporting
software. This perspective is critical to maximizing the information gained from
data when interpreted via models.

More information can be found at https://www.siam.org/students/g2s3/index.php

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
