
* 1840260
* RTG: Modeling and Computations for Complex Systems at Southern Methodist University
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/01/2019,07/30/2022
* Alejandro Aceves,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,776,026.00

Mathematical modeling and computation are of critical importance in addressing
contemporary scientific and engineering challenges. By providing to junior
scholars the opportunity to work in interdisciplinary teams of mathematicians,
engineers, chemists and neuro-scientists studying complex, large scale systems,
the Southern Methodist University Research Training Group (SMU-RTG) will develop
the trainees skills in modeling and computation. In addition, the SMU-RTG will
increase the number of US citizens and permanent residents undertaking advanced
studies in computational and applied mathematics and pursuing careers both in
and out of academia. The SMU-RTG will pursue this goal through the formation of
three vertically-integrated research training groups, each of which will partner
SMU mathematicians with scientists in other disciplines. Moreover, by partnering
on a summer undergraduate research program with the University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley (UTRGV - a Hispanic-serving institution), more students from
underrepresented groups will be encourage to undertake graduate studies in STEM
fields.

The research groups involved in the SMU-RTG will address challenging problems in
emerging scientific fields: data-driven models in neuroscience, the nonlinear
dynamics of the electric power grid and other large-scale networks, and the
fabrication and modeling of nanoscale structures. The research activities will
create opportunities for the trainees through strategic partnerships with both
academic and non-academic institutions: UT Southwestern Medical Center, DOE
laboratories, and SMU Engineering. A centerpiece of the year-round activities
will be a 10-week summer undergraduate research program with participants from
both SMU and UTRGV. Each group will begin its program with a 2-week summer
school, which will introduce undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs to
fundamental concepts and techniques used by one of the research groups. This
activity will provide exciting and substantive research experiences to students
of all backgrounds. The Department of Mathematics at SMU is well-positioned to
execute both the research and educational goals of this project, building on its
core strengths in modeling and scientific computing and its ongoing success in
placing graduates in a range of careers, from industry to national laboratories.
The research themes reflect both the department's existing strengths and
pressing societal needs, carrying out research that will contribute to improved
understanding of the human brain in both health and disease, the reliability of
crucial infrastructure, and novel devices with applications in medicine and
beyond.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
