
* 1845856
* CAREER: Understanding Invariant Convolutional Neural Networks through Many Particle Physics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,12/12/2022
* Matthew Hirn,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 311,850.00

Large scale computing in engineering and the physical sciences, in addition to
new experimental methods, are generating massive amounts of high dimensional
distributed data, and interpreting, analyzing, and using this data is a
fundamental problem facing science. Machine learning algorithms extract,
interpolate, and extrapolate information from these data sets. However, the
complexity of modern data requires new algorithmic paradigms that are capable of
parsing intricate and subtle patterns across numerous scales. This CAREER award
will make significant strides in developing these new machine learning
paradigms, focusing on multiscale systems of interacting bodies that are used to
model molecules, materials, and drugs, amongst others.

More specifically, this CAREER award will facilitate an integrated scientific
and educational program at the interface of mathematics, deep learning, many
particle physics and data science. Scientifically, it will develop a
mathematical theory of invariant convolutional neural networks based upon
(wavelet) scattering transforms, and seek to interpret the mathematical
properties of these scattering transforms through the lens of many particle
systems. The research will facilitate fast simulations of quantum many particle
systems, thus opening new research avenues in quantum chemistry, materials
science and drug discovery. Intertwined with these research efforts is a plan to
increase the participation of under-represented students in data science. The
centerpiece of this part of the project is a data science themed "alternate
spring break," meant to introduce undergraduate students to data science
research, which will be integrated with existing programs at Michigan State
University to maximize impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
