
* 1855853
* Spring School Series: Models and Data
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 03/15/2019,03/05/2019
* Wolfgang Dahmen,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 12/31/2020
* USD 24,930.00

Modern sensor and digital computing technology has been generating an enormous
wealth of data carrying information that is expected to have a transformative
impact on virtually all branches of science, technology and society as a whole.
The need to extract quantifiable information from such data sets has stimulated,
in particular, a vibrant development of diverse mathematical methodologies.
Despite the size of available data sites, often referred to as "Big Data", they
nevertheless often fall short of providing enough information about a complex
process to come up with reliable predictions, a must for any technological
design. The physical laws that govern such processes can often be formulated in
terms of mathematical models with excellent predictive capabilities. The more
detailed information is sought on complex processes the more complex the models
become with ensuing consequences for their mathematical and numerical treatment.
Moreover, the identification of proper models in the classical sense may become
increasingly limited. Therefore, a proper integration or synthesis of
information provided by data as well as by models will be of paramount lasting
importance. The central objective of the Spring School is to support young
researchers in developing the necessary conceptual orientation. The project
helps accelerating and fostering a broad based expertise in most topical
research areas with high impact on technology and society. Internationally
renowned experts, representing the relevant areas, will deliver six two-hour
block lectures. These lectures aim, in particular, at unveiling important
conceptual interconnections between different areas that are often not obvious.
The lectures will be interlaced with break out sessions and opportunities for
the participants to actively engage.

This covers forward and inverse tasks in Uncertainty Quantification, parameter
and state estimation, data assimilation, machine learning, structural imaging in
material science, and modeling. The goal is to pair these topics with recent
methodological developments, in particular, those that are able to cope with the
challenge of spatial high-dimensionality shared by all the above topics.
Examples, to name a few, are sparse high-dimensional polynomial expansions, deep
neural networks, low-rank and tensor methods, certifiable model order reduction
concepts, sparsity promoting regularization concepts, and greedy strategies. The
target attendance of about 30 young researchers is to warrant a most effective
interaction with the lecturers. An internet platform and a common repository
will be maintained to collect and share relevant information during periods
between the workshops and to initiate future collaboration.

More details are available at http://people.math.sc.edu/imi/dasiv/SpringSchool/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
