
* 1902214
* Mathematics - Opportunities in Research and Education (MORE)
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Combinatorics
* 08/01/2019,01/20/2023
* Gretchen Matthews,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 29,320.00

The participation of underrepresented students in mathematical sciences doctoral
programs is an issue of national concern. MORE: Mathematics - Opportunities in
Research and Education is a new, annual workshop designed to increase the number
of these students who pursue graduate degrees in mathematics; develop a peer
network for support in continuing education and career goals; and equip
participants with strategies to increase retention among those who enter
graduate programs in the mathematical sciences. This is achieved through a
unique active workshop format engaging students in highly relevant mathematics
tied to applications that address societal needs. MORE specifically targets and
prioritizes the participation of female, minoritized, and/or first-generation
college students, involves them mathematics via experiential learning in a
collaborative setting, establishes a peer/mentor community, and provides them
with insight on and support for mathematical graduate experiences. The MORE
workshop gives participants strength in numbers in ways that mobile their
collective promise in mathematics, thus leading to a better qualified and more
diverse workforce.

The MORE: Mathematics - Opportunities in Research and Education conference
serves as an early professional development and community-building opportunity
for undergraduate mathematical sciences majors. The target audience for the
workshop includes women, first-generation college students, and students
traditionally under-represented in the mathematical sciences. In addition to
helping students build a peer mentoring network, the workshop will introduce
students to current research questions introduced by two topical plenary
speakers. These presentations will be followed by working group sessions, where
students advance the research question through guided discussion and exploration
led by graduate students. Topics are selected for their timeliness and
accessibility. Panels and other activities are arranged to demystify the
graduate school experience. Graduate students assisting in cooperative breakout
sessions will receive mentor training, providing them with translational skills.
MORE also provides materials to a larger audience through its Get MORE page,
which highlights upcoming opportunities of interest, and the SEGS: Success and
Enrichment in Graduate School page, which focuses on topics that are tied to
documented barriers to success for the target group of participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
