
* 1906664
* Conference on Modern Challenges in Imaging in the Footsteps of Allan Cormack
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Eric Todd Quinto,MA,Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2023
* USD 39,386.00

This award will support participants in the conference "Modern Challenges in
Imaging in the Footsteps of Allan Cormack" at Tufts University, August 5-9,
2019. Tufts professor Allan Cormack provided the mathematical foundations of
X-ray computed tomography, winning the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in
1979 for this work. This international conference will honor his achievements
and expand on his legacy by gathering top international researchers in
mathematics, engineering, science, and medicine to communicate current research
challenges and to inspire new lines of inquiry. Image reconstruction plays a
crucial role in many aspects of human life such as healthcare, national
security, non-destructive testing, and geophysical exploration - all of which
will be represented at this conference. Image reconstruction involves the
determination of features of an object based on some measured or observed data
from the exterior of the object. The measurements are acquired using data from
X-rays, pressure waves, sound waves, electric current, etc. The recovery of the
object from this data is known as an inverse problem, which is solved using
either analytic reconstruction formulas or iterative methods. The conference is
structured to provide cross-fertilization between fields and to provide
opportunities for senior and junior researchers to interact. This will be
promoted at several levels: between subject areas; between prominent and younger
researchers; and with a very strong emphasis on discussions between graduate
students and established researchers. Graduate students and those new to the
field will be encouraged to participate in a poster session in which they will
present their research. Diverse groups of faculty and students will be recruited
through broad advertising. Results are planned to be disseminated in a special
issue of one of the premier journals in the field of inverse problems and, when
possible, talks will be posted on the conference website
https://math.tufts.edu/faculty/equinto/Cormack2019/.

A large portion of the conference will involve the following topics: X-ray,
optical, photo-acoustic, multi-energy, Compton, and multi-spectral tomography.
The conference will also include dynamic tomography and limited data problems.
Conference themes include the mathematics and algorithms behind tomographic
reconstruction, including machine learning, data diversity, sparse sampling,
regularization, dictionary learning, and related approaches. Along with this,
lectures will be given on the theoretical underpinnings of tomography including
integral geometry and microlocal reconstruction. Finally, the conference will
deal with applications including those in medical, security, and industrial
domains. These topics are highly interrelated and the conference will serve as
an avenue for researchers to share their insights and results among the
different specializations. Researchers from pure, applied, and computational
mathematics and computer science, as well as from science, industry, and
medicine will participate in the conference. This will facilitate new
collaborations among participants from the different areas to target
opportunities for synergy across disciplines to catalyze new research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
