
* 1907412
* East Coast Optimization Meeting (ECOM) 2019
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2019,07/20/2021
* Harbir Antil,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 17,680.00

The award provides participant support to the East Coast Optimization Meeting
(ECOM) to be held at George Mason University, Fairfax, VA. Date: April 4-5,
2019. The goal of ECOM is to introduce students and early-career researchers to
current trends in optimization as well as to provide a strong networking
environment between academia, industry, and the national laboratories. The focus
of first meeting is Stochastic Optimization. Stochastic optimization problems
arise in virtually all science and engineering fields. Common examples of
stochastic optimization problems are: (i) determining an allocation of financial
assets that minimize the potential for loss subject to market variability; (ii)
controlling injection wells in second-stage oil recovery to maximize the net
present value of a reservoir in which the subsurface rock properties are
unknown; and (iii) designing a photonic meta-material to maximize light
absorption subject to uncertain operating environments. For each of these
problems, a decision maker must choose an allocation/control/design prior to
observing the uncertain outcome (i.e., decisions are deterministic). As a
result, one must properly quantify the risks associated with each decision in
order to control the outcome variability. This need has led to the modern theory
of stochastic and in particular risk-averse optimization. The meeting will
provide a unique opportunity for graduate students, postdocs and other early
career scientists to take courses from two of the best researchers in stochastic
optimization and thus help train next generation of scientists. In addition,
there will be four invited talks from the experts in the field and the students
and postdocs will have an opportunity to share their work via contributed
presentations. The knowledge gained during the meeting will be of relevance to
fields such as finance, physics, biology, data science, machine (deep learning),
and engineering. The meeting has an affiliation from Association of Women in
Mathematics (AWM). Accurately representing the uncertainty when solving
stochastic optimization problems often requires an enormous number of samples,
which traditionally resulted in intractable nonlinear optimization problem.
However, owing to the recent advances in high-performance computing,
computational simulation and numerical optimization, the numerical solution of
such problems has become computationally feasible. Additionally, this past year,
four stochastic optimization researchers received prestigious awards including
two Dantzig Award winners (one of our keynote speaker was among the two), a
Khachiyan Prize winner and a Farkas Prize winner. For these reasons, the topic
of stochastic optimization is very timely for the inaugural East Coast
Optimization Meeting. The proposed meeting has the potential to advance
knowledge and understanding in modeling, optimization, numerical analysis,
implementation and software development. Stochastic optimization encompasses
numerous aspects from statistics, probability theory, optimization and
variational analysis, convex analysis, and applied mathematics. The meeting will
stimulate new developments in these important areas of mathematics. The
tutorials and invited talks will focus on real life problems and will discuss
new optimization solvers to handle these problems. Thus the attendees can tackle
new set of challenging problems. The variety of topics discussed in the meeting,
stochastic optimization, modeling, partial differential equations, risk averse
optimization is of much wider interest. For instance, these are relevant in
finance, physics, biology, data science, and engineering. Participation from all
these fields is expected. The ideas created in the meeting will be actively
disseminated. We will upload the lecture notes on the conference website. These
resources will help create new graduate courses. More details about the meeting
are available at http://math.gmu.edu/~hantil/ECOM/2019/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
