
* 1911325
* Collaborative Research: High-Fidelity Modeling of Poromechanics with Strong Discontinuities
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2019,09/14/2020
* Ruijie Liu,TX,University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 36,288.00

Poromechanics with strong discontinuities has numerous important applications
such as simulating fluid flow in natural static and hydraulic dynamic fractures,
fracture analysis of aging bones, multiple-network poroelastic theory arising in
dementia and Alzheimer's disease, and evaluation of accelerated degradation of
ceramic matrix composites in aerospace shuttles. Here mathematical modeling is
challenging because it involves not only coupled chemical reactions, diffusion,
and deformation but also initiation, propagation, and branching of cracks in the
bulk matrix as well as fluid flowing through cracks. To address these
challenges, high fidelity numerical schemes and multiphysics models must be
coupled in order to simulate these processes and their interactions accurately
and efficiently. This project will benefit public and decision makers including
energy producers, health providers, aerodynamicists, and hydrogeologists.

The objective of this project is to study the following fundamental
relationships linking flow, chemistry, and mechanics: stability, a priori, and a
posteriori error estimation of dynamic discontinuous Galerkin discretizations,
physically consistent material models for the deformation and failure of the
media, efficient and accurate material solution techniques, and scaling
characteristics of mechanical properties. This knowledge will be used in the
design of locally conservative finite element methods coupling porous media
flow, reactive transport, and mechanics that run efficiently on high-performance
computing platforms. The team will investigate: (1) Development of fundamental
understanding of poromechanics with strong discontinuities in the setting of
chemo-mechanical coupled models; (2) Formulation and analyses of flow,
mechanical, and reactive transport models solved using high-fidelity numerical
algorithms; (3) Developing error estimates for iterative coupling solution
techniques; (4) Verifying and validating fluid structure interactions using
published data from target data sets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
