
* 1912048
* Advances in Robust Multilevel Preconditioning Methods for Sparse Linear Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,06/05/2019
* Yousef Saad,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Solving linear systems of equations is at the heart of many large scale
numerical simulations in sciences and engineering. These systems can have tens
or hundreds of millions simulations in the aerodynamic design of airplanes and
equilibrium models in macro-economics. In most common situations, the equations
encountered in these applications are 'sparse' in the sense that each equation
involves a small number of unknowns or parameters. This project is about the
effective solution of such systems by a class of methods that are termed
'iterative'. An iterative method does not attempt to compute an exact solution
by the age-old method of elimination. Instead, it generates a sequence of
approximations that gradually approaches the solution. However, in spite of the
numerous advances made in past decades in iterative solution methods for linear
systems, practitioners still face difficulties when applying these methods to
certain types of problems. The proposal aims at advancing the state-of-the art
in a specific class called Preconditioning Krylov subspace methods. In essence,
the techniques proposed combine preconditioners (making the problem easier to
solve by exploiting approximate elimination), with good acceleration methods
(combining successive iterates to accelerate convergence) and Domain
Decomposition ideas (decomposing the problem into parts so as to exploit
parallel treatment of each part).

This project focuses on the class of Preconditioned Krylov Subspace Methods
(PKSMs) for solving linear systems of equations. These methods try to reach a
compromise between generality and efficiency by combining an accelerator (e.g.,
GMRES) and a preconditioner (e.g., Incomplete LU or Algebraic Multi-Grid). It is
now well-known that the preconditioner holds the key to the success of this
combination. The primary goal of this project is to address the two most
important weaknesses of these methods. Their first weakness is their lack
robustness in some situations, e.g., when the linear system at hand is highly
indefinite or ill-conditioned. In the past researchers have often limited their
attention to diagonally dominant systems that arise from discretizing Poisson-
like equations. However, the more realistic problems addressed by engineers and
scientists have become much harder to solve, leading to a demand for new types
of preconditioners. The second weakness of iterative methods is that
preconditioners have traditionally been developed with sequential environments
in mind, and therefore they often perform poorly in parallel environments. An
effort must be made to develop better, more scalable, parallel methods by
adopting a view-point that is based on domain-decomposition from the start. To
improve the parallel efficiency of preconditioners it is vital to incorporate
ideas that exploit a multilevel paradigm. A second avenue to be explored in this
project aims primarily at improving robustness by a class of methods that will
extend and optimize a strategy based on the Cauchy integral formula for
developing preconditioners. The starting point of the project is to expand the
PI's research on Multi-Level Low-Rank (MLR) approximation techniques, focusing
on a parallel Domain Decomposition framework. MLR techniques have shown a great
potential in addressing the issues raised above. First, they rely on an
approximate inverse viewpoint and as such these methods tend to be far more
robust than their Incomplete LU (ILU) counterparts. They can handle highly
indefinite linear systems, such as those arising from wave scattering
simulations, more effectively than existing methods. Second, MLRs do not require
factorizations and are excellent candidates for high-performance computers,
e.g., ones equipped with Graphical Processing Units (GPUs). Finally, they are
easy to update in that it is inexpensive to augment or refine them in order to
improve their accuracy in the situation when their observed performance is not
satisfactory. Different ways to define low-rank approximations will be explored
which are all rooted in the Domain-Decomposition framework and Schur complement
techniques. The second part of the planned work is to consider extensions of the
idea of incorporating complex shifts when solving linear systems. The techniques
to be developed here will aim specifically at highly indefinite systems such as
those that arise from wave propagation phenomena (Helmholtz, Maxwell). The
broader impacts of this project include the free distribution of general purpose
codes developed by the PI's research team, and the training of graduate and
undergraduate students at a time where demand for specialists in computational
mathematics is strong. Among other training activities, the PI will continue the
practice of freely disseminating books (two books currently available), lecture
notes (three courses currently posted), and MATLAB scripts for educational
purposes, as these can play a major role in promoting knowledge and know-how in
the theory and application of numerical linear algebra.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
