
* 1912705
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Fluid-Structure Interaction Material Point Method with applications to Large Deformation Problems in Hemodynamics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/18/2019
* Max Gunzburger,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 100,432.00

Heart valve associated issues in the human organism are the cause of cardiac
arrest and heart failure, which may have devastating consequences on a person's
health and even lead to death. While not necessarily fatal, pathologies
associated with leg vein valves can nevertheless cause severe distress to the
people affected and have a negative impact on their life with possibly major
complications. For the treatment of valve associated diseases, the most common
practice nowadays is the replacement of the malfunctioning valve with a
prosthetic device. Unfortunately, prosthetic valves have issues with long term
durability and post-implantation complications. Given the necessity of improving
the design and selection of existing prosthetic valves, computational
methodologies are becoming a valuable tool. The nature of blood flow inside a
human valve renders the modeling problem considerably challenging from the
mathematical and computational standpoints, as multiple physical phenomena
mutually interact. Specifically, the major challenges are the large structural
displacements experienced by the valve leaflets, while preserving accurate
description of the hydrodynamic force at the fluid-solid interface. The focus of
this project is on developing new fluid-structure interaction methodologies with
specific interest in the case of large deformations. The important insight
provided in this project will enable future valve design optimization while
avoiding costly empirical design iterations. In addition to the obvious
potential impact on society, the proposed project will be useful to many other
applications in science and engineering, and also have beneficial impact on the
training, education, and careers of junior researchers in an important,
exciting, and mathematically, computationally, and societally impactful area of
research. This project will support 2 graduate students per year for each year
of the three year project.

This project is about the development, analysis, and implementation of novel
computational techniques for the coupling of finite element methods (FEMs) to
material point methods (MPMs) in fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems. The
use of different discretization techniques for the study of multiscale and
multiphysics problems is a powerful tool for computational simulations. For
instance, one-dimensional models are coupled with multi-dimensional models for
computational cost reduction, or FEMs are coupled with finite volume methods to
exploit the advantages of the algorithmic and mathematical features of these two
methods. With the same idea, the coupling of FEM with MPM represents a promising
combination, if different deformation regimes occur within the dynamical regime
of a physical model. As a matter of fact, the FEM reaches its best accuracy for
small deformations whereas the MPM mixed Eulerian-Lagrangian formulation becomes
beneficial when large deformations occur. FEM-MPM coupling has, in fact, been
studied only by very few authors, including the PIs, and the coupling of an FSI
framework with an MPM approach is yet to be explored. The use of the material
point methodology would avoid the mesh entanglement issues that plague many
existing FSI methods. To design the desired coupling approach, preliminary work
is needed. First, the coupling between an MPM solid body immersed in an FEM
fluid will be addressed, using benchmark problems from the FSI literature. At
the same time, the mechanical properties of a solid body discretized with the
mixed FSI-MPM approach will be studied and the accuracy of the method will be
investigated using the Taylor bar test in which a cylinder impacts a rigid wall.
Then, the knowledge gained from the preparatory work will be used to realize an
FSI-MPM coupling methodology for biological valves, with the valve leaflets
modeled with the MPM and the blood vessel and blood flow described in an FEM-FSI
framework. Appropriate solvers and preconditioners will also be selected and
studied because the discretized nonlinear and linear systems will likely be
large and highly coupled. Lastly, the FSI-MPM coupling approach will also be
applied for the simulations of stented arteries, with the stent described using
the MPM. In this way, complex meshing procedure for the stent can be avoided,
while capturing its dynamical behavior. The computational techniques developed
within the proposed research will be applicable and prove to be invaluable tools
for a broad spectrum of applications such as human valve fluid and structural
dynamics, aerospace and civil engineering problems, dam breaking, and airfoil
design, to name a few. All our findings will be implemented in FEMuS, an open
source library written in C++ language, freely downloadable online. Our effort
will hopefully contribute to the standardization of novel computational
techniques that are currently available only in research software. Nevertheless,
researchers from all over the world can potentially access our findings and join
us in this effort, with a substantial speed up in the standardization procedure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
