
* 1912654
* Solving Multiscale Problems and Data Classification with Subsampled Data by Integrating Partial Differential Equation Analysis with Data Science
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,07/25/2019
* Thomas Hou,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

In many practical applications, one often needs to provide solutions to
quantities of interest to a large-scale problem but with only subsampled data
and partial information of the physical model. Existing computational solvers
cannot be used directly for this purpose. On the other hand, many powerful
techniques have been developed in data science to represent and compress data
for useful information with extreme efficiency and low computational
complexities. A crucial factor for the success of these methods is to exploit
some special features in these high-dimensional data. The purpose of this
project is to integrate physical models with data science to develop a new
generation of computational methods that can solve large-scale physical or data
science problems using only subsampled data and partial knowledge of the
physical model. The mathematical analysis will help reveal certain important
solution structures so that one can use techniques from data science to give
accurate approximations for those quantities of interest. Without identifying
these special solution structures and using the physical model as a constraint,
the current techniques from data science cannot be used directly to achieve PI's
goal. This project can have a substantial impact for the computational science
and data science communities, for national technology and society. Additional
impact will be the involvement of graduate students. This research provides a
solid training in mathematical analysis, physical modeling, and data science.
The interdisciplinary training they receive in this project will be very
important for their future careers in mathematics and science. The recent
advances in data science offer tremendous opportunities for computational
sciences. A key to the success in data science is to exploit some special
features in the high-dimensional data. Traditional PDE solvers have not taken
full advantage of the special solution structures. PDE analysis and data science
complement each other. PDE analysis can identify some important solution
structures that can help the PI to design a more effective deep generative
network to solve the physical problem. Without the guidance from the PDE
analysis, naive application of current machine learning algorithms to multiscale
problems would fail. The solution of the nonconvex optimization problem can
easily get stuck in local minimum and may converge to the wrong solution. The PI
will identify some key ingredients that would make such integration successful,
investigate what type of PDEs can be compressed and what algorithms can be used
to approximate quantities of interest with a small percentage of subsampled data
and partial knowledge of the physical model. This research will also provide
valuable theoretical understanding of some deep learning methods for solving
multiscale problems. The PI will consider both inverse and forward problems. For
the forward problem, he will develop a novel multiscale method based on
subsampled data to reconstruct the solution with guaranteed accuracy. For the
inverse problem, the PI will post it as a Bayesian inverse problem and use Deep
Generative Networks. An essential ingredient in this approach is to introduce a
novel multiscale invertible flow to approximate the transport map, which enables
the PI to develop an efficient sampling algorithm to capture the multiple modes
in the posterior distribution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
