
* 1912866
* Non-convex Variational Image Processing: Boosting Classical Methods with Machine Learning
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/29/2019
* Thomas Goldstein,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 198,152.00

Recent advances in machine learning and AI, particularly those based on
artificial neural networks, have enabled us to build systems that solve
difficult information processing problems with human-like accuracy. For example,
neural networks can recognize objects, predict how proteins fold, automate
manufacturing processing, and use computer vision to navigate a vehicle or
analyze satellite imagery. Unfortunately, these advanced AI systems come with
their own unique problems. Like humans, neural networks can behave erratically,
sometimes making strange and unexplainable decisions when asked to perform tasks
that differ even a little from their training. For this reason, classifical
image and signal processing methods are still the go-to solution when
reliability, interpretability, and computational speed at needed. The goal of
this research project is to mash up the performance and power of neural networks
with the speed and reliability and classical algorithms. This research project
also features an integrated teaching plan involving graduate students and
undergraduate interns. To achieve this goal, we consider three interrelated
research thrusts. First, we consider ways that deep networks can help to
automate and improve classical algorithms. For example, networks can be used to
automate the selection of hyper-parameters, choose objective functions to
minimize, identify noise types and levels that are present in data, and make
other decisions that are needed to optimally tune the performance of classical
imaging system. Second, we consider ways that neural networks can be 'plugged
in' to classical variational imaging methods. For example, classical image
priors (such as wavelet sparsity or total variation), can be replaced with more
sophisticated priors defined by neural networks. Third, we consider efficient
algorithms for solving minimization problems that arise when complex neural
networks are used as components in classical optimization problems. Better
algorithms will allow us to solve these complex problems efficiently, and
without human oversight. This new suite of approaches has the potential to
improve that state of the art for a range of important practical problems that
have been studied by the PI. This includes enhancing deblurring problems of the
type used for microscopy of new materials, boosting segmentation algorithms used
to identify faults in semiconductor manufacturing, and solving complex resource
allocation problems for medical applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
