
* 1912716
* High Order Numerical Methods for Gravitational Wave Computations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,06/20/2019
* Scott Field,MA,University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The research area of black hole astrophysics has experienced a major
transformation as a result of multiple recent breakthroughs -- a Nobel Prize-
winning discovery of gravitational waves from black hole and neutron star binary
systems by the US LIGO detectors, and the first-ever image of the horizon of a
black hole by the Event Horizon Telescope. Gravitational waves were predicted by
Einstein himself a century ago and had never been directly observed before.
Ongoing observations of these waves from compact binary systems will be used to
obtain additional information about exotic astrophysical objects in the universe
like black holes and neutron stars. LIGO has also generated significant spin-off
technologies and strongly drawn public attention towards STEM disciplines. This
proposed project aids in the development of advanced computational models that
will play a very critical role in the future success of LIGO and upcoming space-
borne missions like LISA. The main objective of the proposed project is to
develop new computational techniques to meet the high-accuracy and high-
efficiency requirements set by the LIGO and LISA data-analysis effort. This
project includes support for students (including women and minorities) and
therefore directly contributes to student mentorship, traineeship, and retention
in an important STEM area. The computational skills that the students develop
are broadly applicable, and therefore would allow them access to a variety of
career options, including in areas of great national need. Previous research
projects by the PIs have been discussed in the general media, and this work also
has great potential at being successful for outreach to the general public.

The proposed work addresses the "Windows on the Universe" challenge by
developing and adapting spatial and time-evolution methods for use in
gravitational wave simulations. Specifically, Aim 1 will develop a one
dimensional discontinuous Galerkin method to solve the Teukolsky equations. This
method tracks the particle and keeps it at the domain interfaces while computing
the derivatives of the Dirac delta functions as matching conditions at the
boundary of the domain. This approach simulates the in-spiral phase to extremely
high accuracy. However, for an accurate simulation of the plunge and ring-down
phase we require a shock capturing scheme that can handle derivatives of the
Dirac delta function and provide highly efficient and accurate multi-dimensional
numerical results. For this, Aim 2 will develop a very high order WENO solver
that will include the ability to handle up to third derivatives of the Dirac
delta function and be made highly efficient in the regions away from the
discontinuity. Finally, efficient and accurate time evolution approaches must be
tailored to the spatial schemes in Aims 1 and 2. For this, Aim 3 will develop
stable and efficient time-discretizations tailored for the spatial schemes in
Aims 1 and 2. For each spatial discretization, time-discretization approaches
such as Runge-Kutta and multi-step Runge-Kutta methods will be tailored such
that the methods are low storage, computationally efficient, have small
dispersion errors, small error constants, and stability regions that are
tailored to the spatial discretization, and (for WENO) optimal SSP time-steps.
The proposed developments in both spatial and temporal discretizations will lead
to more efficient methods that can accurately and efficiently handle long time-
integration and the presence of Dirac delta functions and its derivatives.
Furthermore, the development of an accurate, efficient numerical solver capable
of generating waveforms over sizable portions of the parameter space is a major
advance in the computation of gravitational waves, and will thus have a major
impact on the field of gravitational wave science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
