
* 1912854
* Design and Analysis of Structure Preserving Discretizations to Simulate Pattern Formation in Liquid Crystals and Ferrofluids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Franziska Weber,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,915.00

Complex fluids are mixtures that have a coexistence between two phases. Some
examples include shaving cream, blood, and the liquid crystals used in displays
(LCD displays) like the one you are probably using right now to read this
abstract. On a microscopic scale, the molecules of complex fluids have a special
structure, which at a macroscopic scale affects the mechanical response to
stress and strain. For instance, the molecules of liquid crystals react to
electric fields on a microscopic scale, which on a macroscopic scale changes the
polarization of the light passing through the material. Monitors take advantage
of this property to allow a certain amount of red, green, or blue light through
each pixel. We have barely scratched the surface of what is possible to achieve
with complex fluids. Medical researchers hope to exploit the microscopic
properties of ferrofluids for magnetic drug targeting, to control with precision
the parts of the human body the drug is able to interact with. Materials
engineers hope to use complex fluids to assemble nano-structures such as the
silicon circuits in CPUs. Mathematical models and computer simulations can be
used to describe the dynamics of these fluids. The goal of this research project
is to design and analyze new computational algorithms that simulate the behavior
of liquid crystals and ferrofluids. The algorithms will be used in simulations
which may complement and ultimately replace expensive physical experiments. This
research activity may also contribute to our general understanding of pattern
formation in complex materials.

Mathematical models for ferrofluids and liquid crystals consist of systems of
partial differential equations. Due to the inherent fine scale structure of the
fluids under consideration, these partial differential equations are highly
nonlinear and coupled. Preserving discrete versions of energy balances, length
and other constraints of the solutions of these nonlinear partial differential
equations is crucial for obtaining fast and stable numerical schemes that
capture realistic scenarios of their dynamics. The aim of this research project
is to develop efficient and convergent finite volume and discontinuous Galerkin
methods for the Rosensweig model of ferrohydrodynamics, multi-phase flow models
of ferrofluids, and models of liquid crystal flows, that mimic the intrinsic
structure of the underlying partial differential equations at the discrete
level. The resulting algorithms will be implemented and used for extensive
simulations to compare to physical observations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
