
* 1912626
* Global-in-Time Domain Decomposition Methods for Evolution Partial Differential Equations with Applications to Flow and Transport in Fractured Porous Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,05/30/2019
* Thi Thao Phuong Hoang,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,660.00

Mathematical modeling and numerical simulation of multiscale and multiphysics
processes are essentially involved in a large number of scientific and
engineering problems. Particularly in many applications in environmental
sciences and geosciences, one is concerned with the modeling of flow and
transport in porous media containing fractures and faults. There the spatial and
temporal scales associated with various geological layers and fractures or
different physical processes may vary with several orders of magnitude. The goal
of this project is to enhance the efficiency of numerical techniques for
fractured porous medium applications by designing and analyzing novel
computational methods based on parallel global-in-time domain decomposition.
These methods facilitate the coupling of different models and enable the use of
different time step sizes and spatial mesh sizes in different regions of the
computational domain. Thus the proposed methods can be used as an efficient and
accurate computational tool for solving large-scale, strongly heterogeneous,
coupled evolution partial differential equations arising from diverse
application fields such as groundwater flow and contaminant transport, hydraulic
fracture, geological disposal of nuclear waste and geological carbon
sequestration. The numerical simulations carried out in this project would also
provide new insights to the understanding of the long-term behavior and
performance of geological nuclear waste repositories. Graduate students will be
involved in this project and will be offered a great opportunity to participate
in an interdisciplinary research environment.

Although domain decomposition methods have been well studied for many scientific
and engineering problems, no enough attention and work have been devoted to
fractured porous medium applications with local time stepping. This project
focuses on the design and analysis of efficient global-in-time domain
decomposition methods for reduced fracture models, in which the fractures are
treated as manifolds of one dimension less than the medium. Three model problems
will be considered: the linear transport problem, the multiphysics flow and the
incompressible two-phase flow, respectively. The developed methods are based on
either physical transmission conditions or optimized transmission conditions on
the space-time interface fractures; the latter conditions involve more general
transmission operators, motivated by the physics of the underlying problem, with
some coefficients that can be optimized to improve the convergence rates of the
iterations. Importantly, the proposed methods make possible the use of different
time step sizes and spatial grids in the interface fractures and in the
surrounding medium. The PI will also study the application of the proposed
methods to numerical simulation and investigation of fluid flow and contaminant
transport in fractured porous media arising from the framework of geological
nuclear waste disposal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
