
* 1912735
* Implicit Weighted Essentially Non-Oscillatory (WENO) Schemes for Advection-Diffusion-Reaction Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,05/24/2019
* Todd Arbogast,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Computational modeling is used in science and engineering to simulate how
physical and biological systems work, so that we can better understand them and
how they may be modified for societal benefit. Many of these systems mix
advective (or transport), diffusive, and reactive processes. We have good
numerical techniques for simulating a single such process, but only a few of
these can handle multiple processes at once. This project concerns theoretical
and algorithmic development of an alternate category of numerical techniques for
simulation of systems of nonlinear advection-diffusion-reaction equations. These
new numerical techniques show great promise, and they are likely to lead to
better accuracy and computational efficiency. Applications to geoscience
problems important to energy production and environmental protection will be
pursued. Assessment, design, and monitoring of human activities involving
reservoirs and aquifers in the Earth's subsurface require large-scale simulation
of advective, diffusive, and reactive processes over long time periods. There is
a potential societal benefit in energy production and environmental protection.
The project may also have an impact on broad areas of science and engineering
that use models consisting of nonlinear, coupled advection-diffusion-reaction
equations. The project is expected to have an impact on the STEM workforce and
its diversity through the education and training of two Ph.D. graduate students
(both female, one a native citizen). Such students are in high demand in
industrial and governmental labs, as well as in academia.

The mathematical structure of physical or biological models governed by
nonlinear advection-diffusion-reaction partial differential equations is often
poorly understood, and solutions can develop shocks or very steep fronts. This
project concerns theoretical and algorithmic development of high order,
implicit, weighted essentially non-oscillatory (iWENO) schemes for numerical
approximation of systems of such equations, because this type of scheme has the
potential to handle all three processes well. The development will including
finite volume and finite difference schemes, Eulerian-Lagrangian approaches, and
a multi-moment variant. The objectives are to (1) develop a suitable smoothness
indicator and time integrator for the problem; (2) develop a general procedure
to handle possibly degenerate diffusive processes; (3) make advances on space
discretization and related issues, such as handling boundary conditions and
satisfying local maximum principles; (4) test the approach on applications to
porous media; and (5) educate and train students in an interdisciplinary
setting. The project will lead to a very general computational framework can
approximate all the necessary physics in a locally mass conservative way. It
will be simple to implement, handle general computational meshes in two and
three space dimensions, be high order accurate in both space and time, maintain
local mass conservation properties, be robust (i.e., unconditionally linearly
stable), and maximize mesh resolution. The schemes will be efficient on high
performance computers, which are memory bandwidth limited, because local
information that can fit in cache memory will dominate the computations, and the
global system of discrete equations will have about as small a number of degrees
of freedom as possible. The project is expected to have a broader impact on the
STEM workforce and its diversity, and on the geosciences through applications of
the schemes, and it may impact broad areas of science and engineering,
especially those that use models of complex, coupled problems for which the
mathematical structure of the application may not be well understood.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
