
* 1912653
* Collaborative Research: Transforming Serendipity Elements from Theory to Practice
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Robert Kirby,TX,Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 167,000.00

This project aims to significantly reduce the computation time and effort
required to carry out a wide variety of simulations used in modern scientific
and engineering applications. In settings as varied as magnetohydrodynamics
(used in studies of nuclear fusion) and electro-diffusion (used in studies of
cardiac arrhythmia), a technique called the "finite element method" is a
preferred computational procedure for designing and computing highly accurate
descriptions of the relevant physical phenomena. While finite element methods
have been in use for nearly half a century, recent mathematical insights have
indicated that certain kinds of methods could be implemented in such a way that
they would produce results of the same order of accuracy while requiring orders
of magnitude less computational work. Such techniques are known as "serendipity
methods" and serve as the focus of the proposed work. A key impact of the
research will be incorporation of these methods into a widely used, open source,
community-developed software package known as the Firedrake Project.

From high-level method analysis to specific computational tricks, the proposed
work will significantly expand understanding of the benefits and limitations of
serendipity finite element methodologies. For serendipity elements, the project
will make precise the common mantra of "same accuracy, less work" by
simultaneously exploring the expected computational benefits via algebraic and
analytical techniques, as well as actual computational benefits via
implementation and numerical simulations within the Firedrake software package.
On the theoretical side, the research will advance knowledge via investigation
of the algebraic structure of serendipity spaces and its exploitation to allow
new Helmholtz decompositions of the associated polynomial spaces, identification
of efficient "short injections" of serendipity bases into standard tensor
product bases, and development of sparse quadrature rules. The investigators
will combine expertise on element mapping and physically-defined basis elements
to create an order-preserving handling of non-affinely mapped square element
geometries, a key roadblock in prior attempts at implementation of serendipity
elements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
