
* 1913072
* High Order Methods for Kinetic Transport Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2019,06/14/2019
* Fengyan Li,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

Accurate, robust and efficient simulations of kinetic transport models are of
fundamental importance to many applications in physics and engineering, such as
rarefied gas dynamics, plasma physics, nuclear and biomedical engineering, and
network dynamics. While fluid models often provide lower dimensional
approximations, they are valid only when the systems are closed to their
equilibria, and therefore kinetic transport models are necessary to account for
a wider range of phenomena, including those displaying multiple scales in space
and/or time or those involving particles from multiple energy groups. This
project aims at advancing computational tools of high order accuracy for time-
dependent multi-scale kinetic transport models, both algorithmically and
mathematically.

Kinetic transport equations are mathematical descriptions of the transport of
particles such as neutrons, photons, molecules as well as their interaction with
a host medium or among themselves, and they arise in a broad range of
applications. The numerical challenges lie in the high dimensionality of the
phase space, small scales, multiple scales in space (and even in time),
nonlinear interactions, collision operators with multi-fold integrals, as well
as the conservation or positivity property of the solutions. The objective of
this project is therefore to take important steps in the understanding and
simulations of the time-dependent multi-scale kinetic transport models, with the
aim of: 1) providing accurate deterministic simulation tools with excellent
stability to the kinetic transport community, and 2) developing novel analytical
and numerical techniques to address some challenges related to accurate multi-
scale kinetic transport simulations. The longer term goal is to develop
algorithms robustly simulating more realistic kinetic models with high
resolution and good efficiency.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
