
* 1913129
* An Optimal Transport Based Multiscale Method for Inverse Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,06/21/2019
* Yunan Yang,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 176,332.00

Since the advent of computing powers, the application of inverse problem theory
has extended to almost all fields of science and engineering that use
mathematical methods. Examples of inverse problems can be found in various
fields within medical imaging, several areas of geophysics including earthquake
source inversion and hydrocarbons exploration and many machine learning
applications in data science. The proposed study will connect optimal transport,
a classical analysis subject, with many widely used methods in data-driven
problems. Results of this research will offer better understandings of existing
numerical methods and promote the development of the new techniques for solving
inverse problems with high accuracy and fast convergence. The wide range of
applications will also increase partnerships and collaboration between academia
and industry. Students will be offered many opportunities of joining this
research in translating attractive theoretical properties of optimal transport
onto various applications in modern science and engineering.

The proposed research analyzes the intrinsic multiscale features in optimal
transport-based seismic inversion to build robust algorithms for solving general
nonlinear large-scale inverse problems. The focus is on designing objective
functions in constrained local optimization. A standard approach of measuring
the least-squares mismatch between model predictions and data is to use
frequency marching and weighting methods in which different frequencies are
treated separately; first the low-frequency errors are eliminated followed by
high-frequency errors. This particular ordering based on the multiscale
inversion scheme addresses two of the biggest challenges in inversion by
mitigating problems with local minima in gradient-based optimization and
accelerating convergence. The PI's recent work has introduced a framework for
seismic inverse problems using the Wasserstein distance as the objective
function. Using the theory of optimal transport, the PI proved that this metric
offers a convex optimization landscape and the PI's numerical experiments
demonstrate the convergence to global minimizers for cases where the least-
squares norm has difficulties. The proposed research will investigate the
connections between optimal transport-based inversion with existing frequency
marching and weighting methods to extend the optimal transport techniques to
nonlinear inverse problems beyond seismology. In particular, the PI will
formulate optimal transport-based inversion for quantitative photoacoustic
tomography (QPAT) and cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM). Methods in this
work will be developed using existing frameworks of iterative methods and
dynamical systems for convergence analysis. Theoretical results from this
research will shed light on the relationship between data fitting (residual
reduction) and model fitting (solution error) in various data-driven inverse
problems and iterative methods. Computational algorithms will be developed for
inversion in seismic imaging, medical imaging, and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
