
* 1913291
* GOALI: Numerical Methods for Multiphase Flows in Porous Media
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/29/2019
* Beatrice Riviere,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 305,397.00

This collaborative project with the oil and gas industry aims to result in
improved models of oil production from reservoirs. While there has been
extensive work in academia on modeling subsurface fluid flows, many of the
methods fall short in delivering accuracy and robustness on real reservoirs.
Indeed, there are industrial constraints on the reservoir data, which this
project will address by a close collaboration between university and industry
partners. The project focuses on two-phase flow, for instance the flow of oil
and water. Many of the techniques under development can be applied to black-oil
(three-phase flow) or compositional models. One anticipated outcome of this
project is an accelerated transfer of technology from academia to industry.
Another impact is the training of students on industrial problems. State-of-the-
art algorithms developed by faculty and students will be applied to solve
challenging problems relevant to the industry. This could have the potential of
transforming the current computational tools used by the industrial partner and
beyond.

This project has two main goals. First, a multi-numerics approach will be
developed to produce fast and accurate numerical simulations of two-phase flow
in complex reservoirs. The numerical model couples finite volume methods with
discontinuous Galerkin methods on non-overlapping domains, and it utilizes
optimal coupling conditions between the subdomains. The popularity of finite
volume methods combined with the accuracy and flexibility of discontinuous
Galerkin methods are key positive features of the coupled method. A second goal
of the project is a new finite element scheme that employs physical unknowns,
such as phase pressure and phase saturation. Using a compactness argument, the
numerical approximations of the phase pressure and saturation are shown to
converge strongly to the weak solution, even in the case of degenerate relative
permeability coefficients. The convergence analysis is based on deriving bounds
for the gradient of the phase pressure, using intermediate variables like global
pressure. This new scheme is motivated by the industry constraints of using
physical primary unknowns in reservoir simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
