
* 1913073
* Efficient Numerical Simulations of Oceanic Flows with Application to Coastal Modeling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2019,07/10/2019
* Zhu Wang,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 167,916.00

Coastal ocean modeling has been developed for better serving climate impact
assessments that are closely related to pressing society problems such as
coastal flooding. To resolve multiple scales in ocean circulations and deal with
complicated coastal topography, it is quite natural to use multi-resolution
meshes in numerical simulations of oceanic flows. Typically, the grid sizes
would vary from 100 km in major ocean basins to 1km in coastal regions. This,
however, brings grand computational challenges: During explicit time
integrations, the time step size would be restricted by the smallest grid size
in the entire domain. Such a small time step size would make the numerical
simulations unaffordable, especially for the purpose of climate modeling because
long-term simulations are needed in such applications. To overcome this issue,
this project puts forth new schemes that will be substantially more efficient
compared to current algorithms used in ocean models while keeping their
fidelity. This award will support one graduate student each year.

We propose innovative, efficient numerical methods for simulating oceanic flows
with application to coastal modeling. The new approaches comprise two major
mathematical and computational developments: (i) conservative local time
stepping, which allows the use of spatially-variable time step sizes in regions
of different resolutions while keeping desired physical quantities conserved;
and (ii) structure-preserving reduced order modeling, which significantly
decreases the spatial dimension while maintaining the inherent Hamiltonian
structure in the resultant low dimensional model. These approaches provide fast
yet accurate and stable numerical solvers for simulating oceanic flow problems,
which would enhance the simulation capability of current coastal ocean modeling
and further increase computational efficiency required to solve pressing society
problems such as coastal flooding. As a first step, we will study the shallow
water equations on an unstructured, multi-resolution mesh. The effectiveness of
the proposed methods will be demonstrated by verifying their stability and
numerical accuracy. More complicated test cases and real-world applications will
be further considered in this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
