
* 1913272
* Hybrid Finite Element Methods for Geometric Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2019
* Ari Stern,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 212,640.00

Finite element methods are among the most important, powerful tools in
scientific computing. Their applications include several areas of Federal
strategic interest: materials and manufacturing, biomedical engineering and
biotechnology, structural engineering and civil infrastructure, environmental
engineering, and more. They are widely used by scientists and engineers in
academia, industry, and national laboratories to simulate large, complex
physical systems. These physical systems often obey "conservation laws," which
state that some quantity -- like mass, or energy, or electric charge -- can move
around in space, but cannot appear or disappear spontaneously. It is desirable
that simulations of these systems also obey these conservation laws, because
they are so fundamental; otherwise, the simulated results may not be physically
meaningful or trustworthy. However, this is not always the case with current
methods. In this project, the PI will develop and analyze finite element methods
that obey these conservation laws and preserve related physical properties. The
success of this project would lead to new computational methods and improved
understanding of current methods for a wide variety of scientific applications.
Because the specific applications addressed by the proposed research are of high
scientific value, this could have important ramifications for computational
physics and engineering.

The PI proposes to investigate structure-preserving hybrid finite element
methods for partial differential equations (PDEs) containing local symmetries,
invariants, and conservation laws. In applications, these locally-invariant
geometric structures often have important physical meaning (e.g., conservation
of charge in electromagnetics), so it is desirable to devise conservative
numerical methods that preserve these structures exactly rather than
approximately. Hybrid methods provide a natural framework for this, since one
may examine local invariants, element-by-element, in terms of numerical traces
and fluxes on their boundaries. The proposed research consists of two main
components. (1) Hamiltonian PDEs, which are ubiquitous in physical applications,
satisfy the multisymplectic conservation law, which is closely tied to
physically-important reciprocity phenomena, traveling waves, dispersion
relations, and bifurcations. The PI will extend his recent joint work on
multisymplectic hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin (HDG) methods for spatial
discretization to time-evolution problems, using spatial HDG semidiscretization
and spacetime HDG methods. (2) While the time evolution of Maxwell's equations
automatically preserves a divergence constraint associated with charge
conservation, this is generally not true for finite element discretizations.
Preliminary results show that this can be resolved using a class of hybrid
methods, where charge conservation holds in the sense of the numerical electric
flux. The PI proposes to extend this by analyzing nonconforming hybrid methods
for the Maxwell eigenvalue problem, as well as hybrid methods for Yang-Mills
theory using finite element exterior calculus.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
