
* 1913364
* Improving Numerical Methods for Large Eigenvalue Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/22/2019
* Zhaojun Bai,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Eigenvalue problems are the cornerstones of computational science and
engineering. They arise in applications ranging from electronic structure
calculations in physics and chemistry, dynamic of supramolecular systems in
biology to structural and vibration in civil and mechanical engineering.
Emerging applications include the investigation and design of new materials such
as Lithium-ion electrolyte and graphene and the study of dynamics of viral
capsids of supramolecular systems such as Zika and West Nile viruses. These
applications require large number of eigenvalues. The capability of being able
to efficiently compute large number of eigenvalues will not just be appealing,
but also mandatory for the next generation of eigensolvers. In this project, we
will undertake synergistic efforts to develop mathematical theory and numerical
methods for large eigenvalue problems. The outcome of this project will provide
mathematical theory and computational tools for scientists and engineers to
obtain more precise simulation outputs in much less time, and to allow them to
pursue more productive simulation strategies. This project will integrate
research activities into interdisciplinary teaching, education and training of
graduate students in the forefront of computational mathematics. One graduate
student will be funded by this award.

To address challenging issues of existing algorithms and software for large
linear eigenvalue problems, we will focus on two core techniques. One is an
explicit external deflation for reliably moving away the computed eigenpairs to
prevent the algorithm from computing over again those quantities. The second
technique is a communication-avoiding matrix powers kernel for fast sparse-plus-
low-rank matrix-vector products in Krylov subspace solvers with the explicit
external deflation. For large nonlinear eigenvalue problems, we develop
mathematical theory and algorithm templates for guiding the design and
implementation of approximation based nonlinear eigensolvers. In addition, we
will explore an emerging formulation of large nonlinear eigenvalue problems
where underlying nonlinear matrix-valued functions are not explicitly available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
