
* 1913294
* New Hierarchies, Cutting Planes, and Algorithms for Mixed Integer Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,04/23/2020
* Akshay Gupte,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2020
* USD 44,573.00

Mathematical optimization problems arise in many applications in diverse fields
in science and engineering. A large portion of these problems require discrete
decisions to be made, where some of the unknowns are restricted to take only
integer values. There continues to be a pressing need to further improve the
performance of the state-of-the-art for solving mixed integer problems,
especially when the unknowns in the problem are constrained through nonlinear
relationships. This research project develops new mathematics for optimizing
mixed integer problems. The overall impact will be visible through the
implementation of new and sophisticated algorithms for solving these problems.
An auxiliary algorithm will be developed to aid our main algorithm and it will
also be applicable to optimization in decision theory, game theory, and
cryptography. The algorithms will be empirically tested on benchmark problems,
and used to solve an application in oil and gas industry and a fundamental
problem in statistical learning that is widely-used for predictive analytics.
Research from this project will be integrated into classroom through the
development of a new graduate course that teaches algebraic and combinatorial
methods in discrete optimization. The award will provide support for graduate
student training through research.

The primary research objective of this project in computational mathematics is
to derive novel polyhedral relaxations for the feasible regions of mixed integer
problems (MIPs) through an innovative interpretation of discrete feasible
regions arising from ordered sets of integral vectors under some monomial
ordering. The research activities involve developing a rich body of knowledge
about cutting planes, valid inequalities, and polyhedral relaxations for MIPs,
approximation algorithms for MIPs, and using discretization methods to
efficiently approximate MIPs with polynomial constraints. Thus, this project
will establish new connections between computational algebra, combinatorics, and
mathematical optimization. One of our methods for generating cutting planes
using a monomial order generalizes and strengthens the cutting planes derived
from the well-known split disjunctions. The theory we develop does not depend
explicitly on the algebraic representation of the feasible set, therefore making
it applicable to all classes of MIP and presenting a very different approach
than many of the existing studies that explicitly depend on the linearity of the
constraints.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
