
* 1913133
* Discrete Maximal Parabolic Regularity for Time Discontinuous Galerkin Methods with Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2019
* Dmitriy Leykekhman,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,999.00

Parabolic problems touch many areas of pure and applied mathematics and serve as
a model of many environmental and real-life problems, such as optimal location
of wastewater outfalls, location of the pollution sources, modeling of calcium
waves in a heart cell and etc. Usually the resulting equations are very
complicated to be treated analytically and must be solved by numerical methods.
The analysis of such approximations is usually hard and technical and requires
expertise in time and space discretization methods. For continuous problems the
importance of the maximal parabolic regularity is well-recognized and has a
number of applications, for example to nonlinear problems, optimal control
problems and generally to problems where sharp results are required. In contrast
to the continuous case, the discrete maximal parabolic regularity only recently
came to the attention of the numerical analysis community and its potential is
not yet fully realized. Such results, for example, reduce the analysis of
transient problems to stationery ones, which are usually much less technical
with many results already available in the literature. This for example would
benefit a number of researchers, especially who are at the beginning of their
careers and are not experts in time discretization methods.

In this research the principal investigator will extend the theory of discrete
maximal parabolic regularity for discontinuous Galerkin time schemes in several
directions. The research plan includes the following projects. The first project
extends the known results to non-symmetric autonomous elliptic operators, such
as transient advection-reaction-diffusion problems, including the advection-
dominated case. Such problems are classical and have been at the center of
research for many years. As an application of such results, the PI intends to
answer some of the open questions, for example whether the stabilized methods
require stabilization parameters that depend on the time steps. In the second
project, the PI intends to extend our previous results for non-autonomous
problems to more general norms, that are important for a number of applications,
for instance, quasilinear parabolic equations and optimal control problems.
Finally, the PI plans to investigate more general parabolic systems, such as
transient Stokes and Navier-Stokes problems, which are very important for the
fluid flow problems and to obtain fully discrete best approximation type result
in general Lebesgue space norms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
