
* 1913243
* Learning Dynamics from Data: Discovering Interaction Laws of Particle and Agent Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/24/2019
* Fei Lu,MD,Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,998.00

Particle and agent-based systems are ubiquitous in science, for example,
particle systems in fundamental physics, agent-based systems that model opinion
dynamics under the social influence, prey-predator dynamics, flocking and
swarming, and phototaxis in cell dynamics. To understand the mechanism of these
systems, a fundamental challenge is to infer the laws of interaction between the
particles and agents from observational data. This project aims to develop
mathematical and statistical theory and computationally efficient algorithms for
learning these interaction laws from observations in the form of trajectories of
the systems. The theory provides performance guarantees and uncertainty
quantification in the estimations, therefore providing foundations for model
selection and for optimal data collection. The algorithms are scalable to large
data sets, avoiding the curse of dimensionality, and are applicable to a wide
variety of systems from Physics, Biology, Ecology and Social Sciences.

The interaction laws vary largely for different systems, and there is no
analytical form in general. The PIs propose non-parametric statistical inference
approaches for learning the interaction laws, with no reference or assumption on
their analytical form. The research will develop a systematical learning theory
for the non-parametric regression of the interaction kernels, whose values are
not observed and can not be computed from the data of trajectories of the
particles or agents in the system. The theory will study the identifiability of
the interaction kernels, the consistency of the estimators, and the optimal
choice of hypothesis spaces to achieve optimal rate of convergence of the
estimators. With the guidance from the learning theory, we will design
computationally efficient algorithms with the following features: (i) avoiding
the curse of dimensionality by focusing on the intrinsic dimension of the
interaction kernels; (ii) with theoretical guarantee and uncertainty
quantification which can be used for model selection and optimal data
collection; (iii) scalable to large data sets by implementing in parallel.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
