
* 1913120
* Novel High Order Accurate Finite Difference Schemes Constructed via Superconvergence of Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,06/20/2019
* Xiangxiong Zhang,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

The research on novel computational tools will benefit both computational
mathematics and interdisciplinary computational disciplines with not only deeper
mathematical understanding of advanced simulation technology but also further
development of existing popular scientific computing software. The study on
novel finite difference schemes will provide rigorous justification and
robustness guarantee on simplified implementation of high order accurate
numerical methods for simulating physical phenomenon such as wave propagation
and convection diffusion process with wide applications including gas dynamics,
plasma dynamics, inertial confinement fusion, etc. Progress in novel and
efficient high order accurate methods will impact on simulation technology in
such applications. Among other popular numerical methods, the finite element
method has been the most successful one thanks to its rich analysis theories and
flexibility for complex geometries. On the other hand, many real world
applications are given on or can be transformed to a rectangular domain, on
which finite difference (FD) type schemes are preferred due to their simple data
structure and easy implementation. The PI proposes to explore construction of
novel finite difference type schemes based on superconvergence of finite element
method to obtain simpler construction of high order accurate numerical schemes,
e.g., a fourth order accurate finite difference scheme can be constructed by
using only quadratic polynomials. One major advantage of this approach is the
simpler algebra in high order schemes since lower order polynomials are
involved. Moreover, simple algebraic representation makes it easier to analyze
discrete properties of high order schemes, such as the discrete maximum
principle for variable coefficient diffusion operators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
