
* 1913004
* Collaborative Research: Multilevel Methods for Optimal Control of Partial Differential Equations and Optimization-Based Domain Decomposition
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,06/11/2019
* Harbir Antil,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Optimal control of differential equations (PDECO) plays an important role in an
ever increasing number of real-life applications ranging from petroleum
reservoir modeling to weather prediction and the optimal shape design of
airplane wings. While traditional PDECO uses deterministic models, this project
targets PDECO where the differential equations also include uncertainties, such
as irregular fluctuations in the ground composition, or turbulent wind speeds.
The ultimate aim is to dramatically improve the solution quality and the
computing time of such optimal control problems. The novel algorithms resulted
from this project will impact optimization problems arising in geophysics,
weather modeling etc. These problems are generic and advances in solution
techniques will also benefit other sciences. Open source software will be
created and shared with the community. Four graduate students will benefit from
the project. Special attention will be given to recruit students from
underrepresented groups.

The project is focused on developing robust, scalable multilevel solvers for
mainly two classes of potentially large-scale PDECO problems: PDECOs constrained
by stochastic partial differential equations (PDEs) and by nonlocal PDEs. An
additional thrust is to develop multilevel solvers in support of optimization-
based domain decomposition - another kind of PDECO - for the forward PDE-models
themselves. Multilevel/multigrid solvers are known to be optimal for many
classes of forward models. However, their application to solve PDECO problems is
still in its infancy. A naive application of multilevel methods to solve such
optimization problems can lead to dependence on resolution (mesh-dependence) and
on other parameters of the problem such as the stochastic dimension or the
number of subdomains. In addition, since each iterate involves at least one PDE
solve, the cost of solving such optimization problems can be prohibitive for
large-scale, high-resolution problems, especially for problems that are
significantly more expensive than the traditional, deterministic ones. The
algorithms developed in this project aim to set new standards of efficiency and
robustness. Novel mathematical tools will further advance the knowledge in
numerical analysis and optimization. New special topics courses will be
developed based on the research generated in the project and the notes will be
shared with the community. The results of the research will be actively
disseminated via technical research papers and talks at national and
international conferences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
