
* 1913016
* Fluid-filled Fracture Propagation with a Phase Field Approach in Subsurface by Employing Nonlinear Strain Limiting Models and Enriched Galerkin Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/22/2019
* Sanghyun Lee,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,116.00

The project aims to investigate the way in which pressurized and fluid-filled
cracks or fractures spread through subsurface materials. In porous materials
such as soils and rocks, the flow of the fluids through the material's pores can
force significant deformations (such as cracks and fractures) to occur in the
solid porous media. These poromechanical interactions are crucial to many
important problems such as tunnel construction, subsidence, dam or levee
failure, and CO2 sequestration.

The classic mathematical model governing the spread of these deformations is
formulated by coupling linear elasticity or poroelasticity with deformation
systems. However, one of the major disadvantages of classical linear elasticity
models is that strain values are linearly proportional to stress values. Thus,
it contradicts the assumptions of the model, and it may not accurately predict
realistic scenarios. This project focuses on establishing the nonlinear strain
limiting model, a new class of theoretical model. The advantage of the nonlinear
strain limiting models over classical linearized models is that strain remains
bounded even if the stress tends to infinity, which is critical for fluid-filled
fractures. The new model will be extended to consider poroelasticity. Next, the
poroelasticity model will be coupled with a phase field approach to implement
quasi-static fluid-filled fracture propagation. Moreover, the novel enriched
Galerkin (EG) finite element approximations will be employed in the project to
address several crucial issues for numerical discretization. It is well known
that classical Galerkin finite element methods generally do not guarantee local
mass conservation, which could lead to non-physical oscillation. EG methods will
be investigated to overcome these challenges, and their stability and
convergence for the poroelasticity system will be analyzed. The findings will
then be used to develop a forecasting tool to predict the path of quasi-static
fracture propagation and will be utilized to evaluate and validate the
performance of these new models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
