
* 1914795
* Structure-Preserving Discretizations: Finite Elements, Splines, and Isogeometric Analysis
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2019,04/03/2019
* Michael Neilan,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides participants support to the conference "Structure-Preserving
Discretizations: Finite Elements, Splines, and Isogeometric Analysis", to be
held at University of Pittsburgh on May 31 - June 1, 2019. Structure preserving
discretizations are computational paradigms to solve physical models arising in
several scientific and engineering fields such as computational fluid dynamics,
structural mechanics, and cosmology. This class of methods produce faithful
approximations with several desirable properties including long-time stability
and accuracy, the exact enforcement of conservation laws (e.g., mass, energy,
momentum), enhanced stability properties with respect to model parameters,
absence of numerical artifacts, and reduced computational errors. Altogether,
these algorithms produce high-fidelity computational simulations that remain
true to the physics of the underlying models. The goal of the conference is to
bring together mathematicians and engineers with diverse research backgrounds to
interact, communicate, collaborate, and discuss recent developments in the field
of structure preserving discretizations. This will allow cross-fertilization of
various viewpoints in this field, lead to better understandings of these
methods, and the development of novel algorithms and theoretical results.

One focus of the conference is the finite element exterior calculus (FEEC)
framework, a powerful class of structure preserving discretizations that
formulates finite element methods in the calculus of differential forms. A key
feature of this approach is to combine tools from homological algebra and
functional analysis to develop finite dimensional subcomplexes of the canonical
de Rham complex. While the FEEC framework has been successfully applied to the
de Rham complex with minimal smoothness, recent progress has extended this
methodology to higher order Sobolev spaces, i.e., spaces with greater
smoothness. The extension of conforming finite element spaces of high-order
Sobolev spaces in the FEEC framework necessitates the use of piecewise
polynomial spaces with high regularity, i.e., smooth multivariate splines. This
is an extensively studied and active research area, but the theory and
construction, and even the language of smooth polynomial splines is relatively
unknown to researchers in finite element analysis. The conference will bring
together researchers working in finite element analysis, multi-variate splines,
isogeometric analysis, and algebraic geometry to collaborate and communicate
current trends and to share diverse viewpoints on common problems. The
conference will also define and discuss critical open problems in these
different sub-fields, and expose graduate students and early career researchers
to the intersection of finite element analysis, the theory of multivariate
splines, isogeometric analysis, and applied algebraic geometry. More details are
available at https://sites.google.com/view/spd2019/home.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
