
* 1916281
* Collaborative Research: A Two-Week Mentored Program to Prepare Graduate Students for Industrial Careers
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,06/19/2019
* David Edwards,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 18,600.00

The 15th annual Graduate Student Mathematical Modeling Camp (GSMMC) will be held
June 12-15, 2019 at the University of Delaware, followed the week after by the
35th annual Mathematical Problems in Industry (MPI) workshop, June 17-21, 2019
at the New Jersey Institute of Technology. GSMMC is a mentored, problem-solving
workshop, at which small teams of Ph.D. students from across the U.S. are guided
through successful mathematical modeling of real-world problems presented by
faculty or experienced postdoctoral mentors. Under careful mentoring, student
participants build their modeling, teamwork and presentation skills during the
week: via the teamwork on modeling and simulating the problems; through the
final team presentations made at the end of the week; and in writing the final
reports that are produced. Training activities also include numerical
simulations and the preparation of a final report outlining their discoveries.
These skills are put to use and consolidated the following week at MPI, where
industrial participants present immediate modeling challenges facing their
industries, on which academic participants (faculty, postdocs, and the Ph.D.
students from GSMMC) work. Significant progress on the industrial problems is
usually made, and Ph.D. student participants take the lead in presenting the
findings to the participants from industry in final presentations at the week's
end. In addition to building their skillsets and resumes, student participants
are exposed to valuable networking interactions with a range of industrial
participants.

The GSMMC-MPI program is designed to integrate interdisciplinary research and
education for graduate students. The GSMMC is focused on graduate student
education and training: its chief intellectual merit lies in the development and
analysis, by students, of the mathematical models for the problems presented.
Problems are highly interdisciplinary, presenting students with a novel
intellectual challenge. With the preparatory training provided by the GSMMC,
students are ready for the more open-ended, research-level environment of MPI.
The questions posed at MPI challenge participants to design new ways of modeling
and analyzing industrial mathematics problems in emerging areas of technology.
Mathematical modeling, analytical techniques, numerical simulations, and data
analysis must all be used effectively. The collaborative approach to problem
solving, which involves mathematicians ranging from graduate students to
experienced faculty, is central to the structure of MPI and provides significant
additional training to graduate students, while promoting effective scientific
communication. Full details for both events may be found at
https://www.mathsci.udel.edu/events/conferences/gsmmc-2019
https://web.njit.edu/~rmoore/MPI2019/MPI2019home.php

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
