
* 1943186
* CAREER: Tailored Entropy Stable Discretizations of Nonlinear Conservation Laws
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,01/16/2020
* Jesse Chan,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 271,331.00

The simulation of fluid flow is foundational to many scientific fields, ranging
from environmental and aerospace engineering to solar physics. However, next-
generation modeling and analysis is computationally challenging using existing
tools. Tailored numerical methods have the potential to address such
limitations. For example, projection-based reduced order models decrease
computational costs associated with many-query scenarios (such as engineering
design or uncertainty quantification) by replacing a high fidelity model with a
less expensive low-dimensional surrogate. Similarly, high order accurate schemes
are particularly effective at resolving fine-scale features in transient
vorticular flows. Unfortunately, when applied to the equations of fluid
dynamics, these numerical methods experience non-physical instabilities which
can cause simulations to fail unexpectedly. The goal of this project is to
enable robust and efficient simulations using discretely "entropy stable"
schemes. By building fundamental energetic principles directly into a
discretization, entropy stable methods retain accuracy while inheriting
verifiable properties which improve "out-of-the-box" robustness.

Discretely entropy stable high order discretizations for nonlinear conservation
laws have seen rapid development over the last 7 years. This project will extend
this methodology to three areas where existing approaches are suboptimal or
unavailable: (1) high order methods on non-conforming meshes, (2) high order
physical-frame discretizations for domain boundaries with fine-scale features,
and (3) reduced order modeling. Additionally, the PI will integrate aspects of
the proposed research with an educational program aimed at promoting
computational science and improving retention among college students and K-12
teachers. Specifically, the PI will (1) design and supervise senior capstone
research projects for engineering undergraduates, and (2) organize a summer
research program for K-12 teachers centered around numerical modeling and
discovery-based learning. The summer research program will also provide graduate
students with mentoring experience, and the PI will follow up by partnering with
teachers to incorporate concepts from numerical computing into reusable
classroom modules.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
