
* 2011148
* Imaging and Sensing via Plasmonic Nanohole Resonances: Quantitative Analysis and Numerical Inversion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,08/03/2022
* Junshan Lin,AL,Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 221,487.00

Plasmonic structures patterned with subwavelength holes can induce various types
of resonances, which lead to the so-called extraordinary optical transmission
(EOT) and strongly localized optical field near the hole apertures. Such
remarkable phenomenon has found significant applications in biological and
chemical sensing, optical lenses, and other novel optical devices. This project
will examine the fundamental mathematical and computational issues arising from
the imaging and sensing problems that arise from these plasmonic structures.
Specifically, this project will develop analytical and computational tools to
solve the underlying inverse problems in an efficient and innovative manner. The
outcome of the project will provide experimentalists with essential mathematical
tools in applications of nano-plasmonic structures for biochemical sensing and
to provide new avenues for super-resolution imaging. This project will also
provide interdisciplinary applied mathematics training and research experiences
for both graduate and undergraduate students.

The project will address key scientific challenges in the mathematical
investigation of plasmonic nanohole resonances and their applications in imaging
and sensing. First, analytical tools based upon a combination of boundary
integral equation approach, asymptotic analysis, and the Gohberg-Sigal theory
will be developed for characterization of spectral sensitivity when plasmonic
nanoholes are used in biochemical sensing. In addition, in order to accelerate
the solution of related inverse spectral problems, efficient finite element-
boundary integral equation eigensolvers will be designed to address the
significant computational challenges brought by multiscale nature of the
underlying problems. Finally, motivated by the studies of plasmonic nanohole
resonances, the PI proposes a new super-resolution imaging modality by using
illumination pattern generated from a collection of subwavelength hole
resonantors. The new illumination pattern allows for probing the high spatial
frequency component of the imaging sample in order to break the diffraction
limit. In this regard, the PI will investigate the mathematical modeling, and
develop deconvolution and optimization type numerical approaches for the
corresponding inverse problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
