
* 2011996
* Collaborative Research: Integrated Optoelectronic Optimization of Thin-Film Solar Cells with Light-Trapping Structures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2020,10/19/2020
* Akhlesh Lakhtakia,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Although recent years have seen a rapid drop in the cost of standard thick
crystalline-silicon solar-cells, small-scale photovoltaic generators of energy
(solar cells) must become ubiquitous for human progress to become truly
unconstrained by energy economics. Using an integrated optoelectronic computer
model developed under a previous NSF grant, the Principal Investigators (PIs),
have shown that thin-film solar cells containing absorber layers with optimally
graded electrical properties can have theoretical electrical generation
efficiencies of over 34%, a large increase over previous designs and competitive
with heavier standard solar cells. Once manufactured, such solar cells could be
incorporated in wearables, textiles, car roofs, etc, and deployed with less
infrastructure than current crystalline-silicon devices. Further improvement to
the design requires the incorporation of light-trapping structures, such as
antireflection coatings to improve the absorption of light, that are jointly
optimized with the composition of the electricity generating layers by grading
the bandgap parameters. In addition, simplified designs better suited to
manufacture need to be investigated. These additional steps require mathematical
improvement to the optoelectronic model, and the investigation of several new
combinations of materials with simplified bandgap grading.

This is a multidisciplinary project with two major goals: mathematical and
physical. The mathematical goal is to enhance the integrated optoelectronic
model by (i) using modern methods of numerical analysis to improve the
efficiency of the photonics solver, and (ii) improving the robustness and
reliability of the Hybridizable Discontinuous Galerkin method (HDG) finite
element method applied to the drift-diffusion system for charged-particle
transport. In particular, the PIs will analyze and implement a completely new
approach by hybridizing the rigorous coupled-wave approach (RCWA) with the C
method for solving Maxwell?s equations in 2D and 3D. As the HDG solver for the
drift-diffusion problem needs improved robustness and efficiency to handle
layered designs more suitable for manufacturing, the PIs will analyze and
implement a dual-weighted residual approach to a posteriori error estimation of
the total current and investigate the use of Anderson acceleration for the non-
linear solver. It is expected that the software developed on this project will
be useful to the wider photonics community. The physical goal is to use the
newly developed fast and adaptive solver so that the improved algorithms can be
used to simultaneously optimize light-trapping structures and bandgap grading
parameters. The light-trapping structures will include multilayered
antireflection coatings, nanocone arrays, and combinations of both. The PIs
expect to spur the development of colored solar cells to power miniature
electronic and optical devices on clothes, car roofs, tents, etc. Wearable solar
cells could be designed to perform not only in sunlight but also in indoor
light.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
