
* 2011902
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Chemical Separation Simulations: Computational Algorithms and Optimization with Implicit Adsorption Isotherms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 07/01/2020,06/17/2020
* Eleanor Jenkins,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 159,996.00

The unprecedented growth of biopharmaceuticals in recent years has led to better
strategies for managing chronic diseases in humans including diabetes,
immunodeficiencies, and cancer. These therapeutics are often produced using
purified proteins extracted from biological sera, which has created a need for
technologies that produce these proteins efficiently, quickly, and in sufficient
quantities to meet the growing demand. The global market for biologics is the
fastest growing market in the pharmaceutical industry with global revenues near
$163 billion; it is expected to grow annually by 10.9%. FDA approval rates for
protein therapeutics increased threefold from 2013 to 2017. There are currently
over 200 approved biotherapeutic drugs on the market with over 1500 in clinical
trials and more in the pipeline. The work in this project seeks to aid bio-
manufacturers in expanding their production capacity in existing facilities by
developing an accurate computational simulation framework for describing new
methods of protein separation strategies. The simulation will be used with
optimization algorithms to help engineers improve the performance of adsorption
membranes which in turn will reduce bottlenecks in manufacturing.

This project is motivated by the need for efficient new separation and
purification processes for protein therapeutics. The emergence of biologics, for
example drugs derived from biotechnology, as a leading way to manage chronic
diseases in humans has created a pressing need for lower cost, faster
biomanufacturing operations to make these products available and more affordable
for growing patient populations. This research project will develop numerical
approaches to solve the mathematical descriptions needed to simulate these
processes. The mathematical descriptions will incorporate new, more complex ion-
exchange relationships that define the solid phase adsorption as an implicit
function of the liquid phase adsorption, a significant change from the standard
explicit mathematical relationships. The goals of this project are to develop,
validate, analyze, and use computational tools to inform the design of new,
rapid membrane chromatography purification processes for bio-manufacturing
environments. Specifically, the research team will work on four major research
activities: (1) development and testing of a computational framework; (2)
analysis of computational models for nonlinear and implicit models of
chromatographic adsorption processes; (3) validation of the computational tools
using experimental data; and (4) simulation-based optimization using the
developed computational framework to understand the effects of the design
parameters on desired outcomes.

This project is jointly funded by the Computational Mathematics program of DMS,
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
