
* 2011140
* Tensors, Topics, Truth, and Time: Methods for Real Tensor Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/23/2020
* Deanna Needell,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,873.00

With the recent surge of applications involving large-scale data comes a
critical need to develop efficient, robust, and practical methods for data
analysis. With more and more applications having multi-modal data (data coming
from many distinct sources and of different types, often having a temporal
component), the need for mathematical developments to handle and understand this
data is critical. The key mathematical object at the heart of such study is the
tensor ? a multi-dimensional array that can be viewed as an algebraic extension
of the common notion of a mathematical matrix. The mathematics of tensors has
received a lot of recent attention, however, there are still many key lacunae in
the scientific understanding of these objects as well as their use in modern
data analytic techniques. The project focuses on the development of
computationally feasible methods to detect patterns within such tensor data as
well as the geometric properties of tensors that can be used for compression.
The team will partner with the California Innocence Project (CIP), a nonprofit
whose goal is to free innocent persons who have been convicted of a crime. The
data involved are inmate letters and case files, all of which are highly multi-
modal since they include, for example, court documents, interview testimonials,
forensic data, images, and more. The goals in this context will be to facilitate
the assessment procedure that CIP uses to decide what cases are likely to be
successful, what commonalities they share, and what populations may need more
attention. The partnership with CIP will serve not only as a means of direct
societal impact but also as a feedback mechanism to test and validate the
developed mathematical approaches.

We focus on two technical thrusts. The first thrust is centered around methods
to detect patterns in tensor data without impossible unfoldings, in an online
setting, and allowing for topic structures. The second thrust focuses on
dimension reduction, developing geometry preserving reduction maps that act on
tensors and map to tensors, along with related important methods that utilize
such maps. The first thrust will go beyond existing research in several ways.
First, it will provide much improved topic detection in dynamic applications.
Second, it will develop provable convergence of features in the stochastic
online setting. Third, it will offer improved topic structures using a deep
model. The second thrust focuses on the mathematics of tensor dimension
reduction and will provide provable guarantees for such, along with analysis of
the related algorithms. Such practical techniques and understanding simply do
not yet exist for true tensor data. The proposed research program will therefore
further mathematical understanding of tensor geometries while also providing
practical approaches that can be used in any field needing to analyze multi-
modal data. The transition of these results to society will be facilitated
through connections between the PI and nonprofits, including the California
Innocence Project. The project also includes a novel outreach and educational
component, including integration of high school student programs, community
change programs, teachers, and future teachers in summer workshops and events
throughout the year.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
