
* 2011943
* Robust and Efficient Numerical Methods for Electromagnetic Wave Propagation in Complex Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,08/03/2020
* Jichun Li,NV,University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 252,172.00

This project will develop novel mathematical modeling and robust computational
methods for simulating wave propagation in complex media such as metamaterials
and graphene. This interdisciplinary research has direct applications in
nanotechnology and materials through the advancement of discovery and
understanding of new phenomena in nanooptics and stealth technology brought by
metamaterials and graphene. Graphene can be used to generate picosecond laser
pulses because of its wide absorption range, fast decay, and high stability
properties. Graphene can be used in sensors to concurrently sense mass, gas,
tension, diseases, and explosives; graphene can be used in low-cost display
screens of mobile devices, lithium-ion batteries with fast recharge capacity,
hydrogen storage for fuel cell-powered cars, and low-cost fuel cells and water
desalination, etc. All of these applications benefit from accurate and efficient
numerical algorithms for solving the associated mathematical models by reducing
the cost of physical experiments. This project will provide support for one PhD
student per year. The focus of this project is to develop and analyze robust and
efficient finite element methods for solving electromagnetic wave propagation
problems in complex media. Theoretical analysis and practical algorithms will be
developed with the following objectives: (1) Further explore some perfectly
matched layer (PML) models recently developed for metamaterials, develop and
analyze time-domain finite element methods using both edge elements and
discontinuous Galerkin methods for solving them; (2) Explore graphene models and
efficient FEM algorithms to simulate wave propagation in graphene; (3) Develop
robust and efficient a posteriori error estimators for time-dependent Maxwell?s
equations in metamaterial and graphene, explore possible superconvergence points
for high-order triangular and tetrahedral edge elements; (4) Develop, and
analyze efficient numerical methods for Maxwell's equations with random inputs
with applications for random metamaterials. The developed algorithms and codes
in the project will lead to a better understanding of metamaterials and
graphene, and their physical effects, so that researchers can design and use
them in applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
