
* 2011324
* Multilevel Graph-Based Methods for Efficient Data Exploration
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/28/2020
* Yousef Saad,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 244,217.00

Graph theory helps scientists and engineers model various types of relations
between entities in a set, whether members of a social network, or molecules in
a chemical compound for example. Not surprisingly, with the advent of data-based
methodologies that work by unraveling and exploiting relations between data
items, graph theory tools are finding their way in a very broad range of
applications. The primary goal of this project is to examine a class of methods
that manipulate graphs, specifically by developing effective multilevel
algorithms that take advantage of divide and conquer approaches. In multilevel
techniques, smaller and smaller graphs are extracted from some original graph
with the goal of keeping as much of its intrinsic information as possible. These
smaller graphs are then employed instead of the original ones, resulting in
significant gains in performance. This project addresses issues that are of
great relevance to many current data-based methodologies and will be applicable
across various disciplines. As such it will help promote interest in problems
related to the current shift toward such methodologies because its research
theme blends mathematical methods, innovations in algorithms, and applications.
On the educational side, special courses and tutorials will be offered to
graduate students from other disciplinary fields who wish to explore research in
data sciences. This project will support one graduate student per year for each
of the three years.

The rapid expansion of machine learning methodologies into a great variety of
disciplines is pushing the demand for numerical methods that can effectively
deal with large datasets. Among these methods, those based on graph
representations of data figure prominently. The goal of this project is to
develop effective multilevel algorithms that are rooted in graph theoretical
approaches, for performing various machine learning tasks. A primary focus of
the planned research is that of "graph coarsening", a technique whereby an
original graph is substantially reduced in size by agglomerating nearby nodes
together, to produce a faithful representative of the original graph. The
project will exploit a class of methods based on multilevel coarsening, in which
coarsening is applied recursively for a few levels. The ultimate goal of a
multilevel coarsening approach is to make it possible to perform the heavy
computations with the coarsened graph which is much smaller, resulting in much
faster processing, with minimal loss in accuracy. Coarsening is an effective
alternative to random sampling, a well-established method that consists of
replacing the original data by a subset of its columns or rows that are selected
at random or quasi- randomly. This project will study, both empirically and
theoretically, various coarsening strategies. For example, coarsening will be
studied from the angle of a projection method for approximating eigenvectors.
Coarsening methods that try to preserve the eigenvectors exactly will also be
studied. Among the many possible applications of graph coarsening the project
will specifically consider their use in speeding up the training of a class of
neural networks known as Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs). A number of other
research issues, all under the general theme of graph-based methods, will also
be investigated. For example, the project will study how a form of hypergraph
coarsening can be used to provide a solution to the "graph sparsification"
problem, whereby a sparser version of a given graph is sought, or to the "column
subset selection problem" which consists of selecting important rows (or
columns) from a given data matrix.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
