
* 2012391
* Optimization Problems with Quasi-Equilibrium Constraints: Control, Identification, and Design
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,07/05/2022
* Carlos Rautenberg,VA,George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,922.00

A wide range of problems in applied sciences involve constraints on variables of
interest. These naturally arise in modeling of complex physical phenomena but
also appear as a result of hierarchy or competition. Two different classes of
these constraints can be described: explicit, where the bounds are known in
advance, and implicit, where the bounds depend on the solution of the problem
itself. One simple example of an implicitly constrained problem is that of
finding the position of an elastic membrane with an obstacle that deforms upon
the action of the membrane. In this example, the membrane position is the
variable of interest, and the position of the obstacle is the implicit bound or
constraint. The control and parameter identification for this class of
implicitly constrained problems represent a significant challenge for a large
variety of problems. Some possible applications include the design of composite
materials that sustain large forces without plastic deformation, the manufacture
of multilayer organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), and the detection of
subsurface cracks in buildings that may compromise structural integrity and lead
to catastrophic failure.

An increasing number of challenging problems in applied sciences involve non-
differentiable structures as well as partial differential operators, thus
leading to nonsmooth distributed parameter systems. Many of these problems have,
directly in the problem formulation, an additional form of implicit constraint
resulting in a quasi-variational inequality (QVI). This is commonly found in
elastoplasticity, friction mechanics, superconductivity, and also arises as the
result of competition of a finite resource in generalized Nash games.
Structurally speaking, QVIs are nonconvex and nonsmooth problems that possess a
variational formulation with a constraint not known a priori and depending on
the state itself. Many design, control or identification problems involve QVIs.
In particular, these are formulated as an optimization problem with the QVI as
constraint, and where the design variable or the unknown parameter is of
piecewise constant nature. This significantly increases the difficulty of the
overall problem but it links it directly to real life applications. This
proposal focuses on a class of optimization problems with quasi-variational
constraints. The formulation is wide enough to include problems associated to
water accumulation in real topographical data, non-isothermal elastoplasticity,
and current flow on organic multilayer structures (LEDs). We aim at the
development of solution algorithms of QVIs, and optimization thereof. The
approaches will include an appropriate form of Moreau-Yosida regularization of
the implicit constraint, and novel forms of regularization to guarantee a
piecewise constant nature of solution parameters. The new methods developed here
will enable the solution of problems that are currently intractable.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
