
* 2012015
* High Order Schemes for Gradient Flows and Interfacial Motion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/28/2020
* Selim Esedoglu,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,999.00

Many important phenomena in a wide variety of scientific and engineering fields
are described by moving curves or surfaces. For example, in materials science,
the internal structure of most metals and ceramics reveal millions of tiny
individual crystallites stuck together. The network of surfaces that delineate
the boundaries of these tiny crystallites and thus separate them from one
another begins to move when the material is heated during common manufacturing
processes such as forging or annealing. The shapes and sizes of the
crystallites, defined by this network of surfaces, have implications for
important physical characteristics of the material, such as its conductivity and
yield strength. Another, very different example comes from computer vision,
where a common technique for automatically separating the foreground object from
the background in a digital image is to start with a curve, such as a large
circle containing the foreground object, and then prescribe an update rule that
shrinks the circle until it runs into the edges of the object, shrink-wrapping
around it and capturing its outline in the process. The outline can then be
compared to a library of shapes, for recognition purposes. In both applications,
as in many others, the equations describing the motion of the interfaces
involved often fall into an important class known as gradient flow, or steepest
descent: The evolution can be characterized as the fastest way to decrease an
appropriate cost function or energy. This project will develop highly accurate
and reliable numerical methods for simulating these evolutions on the computer.
It includes support for research training of a graduate student, as well as
summer research opportunities for undergraduate students.

The project will develop very general, problem independent techniques for
boosting the order of accuracy in time of existing numerical schemes for
evolution equations that arise as gradient flow (steepest descent) for an
energy. A natural stability condition in the numerical analysis of gradient
flows is energy stability: whether the cost function is dissipated from one time
step to the next. The new techniques for boosting the order of accuracy of
existing schemes will preserve desirable stability properties. For example, if
the existing scheme is first order accurate in time and unconditionally energy
stable, its order of accuracy will improve to second order or higher, but its
unconditional stability will be preserved. Moreover, the improvement in accuracy
will be achieved by merely calling multiple times per time step a black-box
implementation of the original scheme. A primary goal of the project will be to
extend the technique to popular numerical methods (the level set method,
threshold dynamics) for geometric motions of interfaces that arise as gradient
flow, such as multiphase motion by mean curvature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
