
* 2012699
* Entropy-Consistent Moment-Closure Approximations of Kinetic Boltzmann Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,05/26/2020
* James Rossmanith,IA,Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 289,997.00

This research is concerned with the development of mathematical models and
corresponding state-of-the-art computational methods for simulating and
predicting the dynamics of complex fluid systems, such as those arising from
multiphase flows and plasma. The ability to predict the dynamics of these
complex fluid systems is of vital importance in understanding a wide range of
phenomena such as particulate flow in the atmosphere, fuel sprays in combustion
engines, magnetically-confined fusion reactors, laser-plasma accelerators, space
weather, and astrophysical events. The underlying physics of such systems are
often well-represented by kinetic models that represent the state of the fluid
in terms of probability density functions. The main challenge in accurately
simulating these kinetic models is that solutions live in a high-dimensional
phase space and contain information over wide-ranging spatial and temporal
scales. The goal of this research is to develop reduced models that
simultaneously capture the important physics and can be more readily solved on
modern computer architectures. As part of this research effort, graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained in mathematical modeling and
computational mathematics. Students from groups that are underrepresented in
applied and computational mathematics will be encouraged to participate in the
research efforts. The primary objective of this research is to develop accurate
and efficient computational methods for solving kinetic models of both
polydisperse multiphase flows and plasma flows via entropy-consistent moment
closures. The purpose of moment-closure techniques is to reduce high-dimensional
kinetic models to more computationally tractable approximations. However,
determining a suitable moment closure is a mathematical challenge; a general
approach that combines desirable mathematical features remains elusive. This
research will pursue two related approaches: (1) using quasi-exponential
representations of the underlying kinetic distribution functions, and (2) using
delta functions in conjunction with entropy maximization. Novel moment-inversion
algorithms and high-order numerical schemes will be developed. The resulting
codes will be implemented on massively parallel computers. These techniques will
be applied to problems in polydisperse multiphase flows and plasma flows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
