
* 2012414
* Efficient Numerical Methods and Algorithms for Nonlinear Stochastic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/22/2020
* Xiaobing Feng,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

Modeling in industry, engineering, and domain sciences often involves various
degrees of randomness and uncertainty effects. A large and important class of
models incorporating uncertainty are random and/or stochastic partial
differential equations (SPDEs). This research project will address several
important SPDEs and aims to develop improved numerical methods that are stable,
accurate, and efficient, with focus on nonlinear problems and adequate sampling
methods. The resulting numerical methods and algorithms are anticipated to
provide much-needed tools for computational modeling of systems described
mathematically by SPDEs from many scientific, engineering, and industry
applications such as materials science, fluid and quantum mechanics, wave
scattering, mathematical finance, and stochastic optimal control. Moreover, the
project will train graduate students through involvement in the research,
helping them develop applied and computational mathematics knowledge and skills
needed for successful careers in either academia or industry.

This research project develops advanced numerical methods and algorithms for
general nonlinear random and/or stochastic partial differential equations
(R/SPDEs). Current approaches for solving R/SPDEs face considerable challenges
at large scales: the sheer amount of computation involved in such systems
prevents the use of high spatial and temporal resolutions, and solver
optimization is often not considered. In the meantime, R/SPDEs become more
complex as additional nonlinearities and sources of noise are considered. This
presents a big challenge but also a great opportunity to the numerical PDE
community. The project focuses on developing efficient numerical methods and
algorithms for solving nonlinear SPDEs that arise from various scientific and
engineering applications, including stochastic Allen-Cahn and Cahn-Hilliard
equations and stochastic nonlinear wave and Schrodinger equations. The numerical
methods under development will aim to feature stability with respect to mesh
sizes and physical parameters, structure-preserving properties, and amenability
to fast and parallelizable implementation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
