
* 2012429
* Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Cutting Planes: Compression, Automation, Diversity, and Computer-Assisted Mathematics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/28/2020
* Yuan Zhou,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 179,768.00

Mixed-integer optimization is a powerful mathematical decision-making technology
related to operations research, data sciences, and artificial intelligence. This
project considers applications in which high-stake decisions need to be made
quickly and account for unknown future event or risk. In such applications,
simulation methods and machine learning cannot give sufficient confidence for
protecting against the possibility of catastrophic failures. Instead, one
requires multi-parametric optimization to precompute responses, certify their
safety, and guarantee the level of performance. In this direction, the
investigators will study a key component of optimization algorithms called
general purpose cutting planes in a novel multi-parametric setting suitable for
process control in chemical engineering and optimizing compilers for high-
performance computing platforms, aiming for major theoretical and computational
advances that will generalize to many important applications. Broader impacts
include the training of undergraduate and graduate students in computational
mathematics and research skills, as well as development of high-quality open-
source research software, and of further connections between several research
communities within mathematics, computer science, and engineering.

Mixed-integer (linear and nonlinear) optimization is concerned with finite-
dimensional, non-convex optimization problems that include discrete decision
variables such as those that model "yes/no" decisions. Systems of this type
arise in all areas of industry and the sciences. Algorithms for mixed-integer
optimization build upon convex optimization technology by relaxation,
approximation, convexification, and decomposition techniques. Increases in
system size in the presence of Big Data technologies creates new challenges that
need to be addressed by a next generation of algorithms. This project studies
convexification, specifically, cutting planes in multi-row and multi-cut cutting
plane systems that are effective and efficient from the aspects of compression,
automation, and diversity. In particular, spaces of extreme continuous piecewise
linear cut-generating functions with prescribed features will be computed; these
consist of semi-algebraic cells, parametrizing sub-additive piecewise linear
functions, glued at their boundaries. The computation of each cell requires the
proof of a theorem, and automated theorem proving technology, based on
metaprogramming and semi-algebraic computations, will be developed. The
investigators will apply the new cutting plane techniques to two target
applications for which guaranteed correctness and performance is mission-
critical: model predictive control in chemical process engineering and
optimizing compilers for high-performance computing platforms. The multi-
parametric optimization problems in both applications will benefit from the
parametric nature of the new cutting planes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
