
* 2012022
* New Advanced Time Integration Methods for Multiphysics Systems and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,09/02/2022
* Vu Thai Luan,MS,Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 130,749.00

Many important systems in science and engineering involve multiple physical
processes. Complex interactions between these components can result in dynamics
over a wide range of time scales, and this feature poses significant challenges
for computational simulations. Prominent examples come from the vastly differing
time scales in atmospheric phenomena, a central issue of numerical weather
prediction (NWP) and climate modeling. Similar challenges arise in computational
modeling of dynamics of coupled oscillators such as fibers, fluids, or flexible
solids, with many applications in animation and medical imaging. The goal of
this project is to develop new fast and accurate time integration methods for
complex coupled models and to apply them to NWP and climate simulations as well
as to other examples. On the educational side, the project will directly involve
and train one doctoral student, as well as offer research opportunities to other
undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics.

This project considers general coupled multiphysics systems. The goal is to
develop new advanced exponential Rosenbrock/Runge-Kutta and multi-rate time
integration methods for multiphysics models. The project has three research
objectives. First, the PI plans to derive new parallel and adaptive exponential
methods for stiff multiphysics systems. With this in place, the PI aims to
derive new time-stepping methods that have optimized structures and local error
control for efficiency. Second, the PI plans to develop a complete theory for
constructing two new classes of multirate methods for partitioned multiphysics
systems. Third, building on existing codes and ongoing collaborations with
numerical analysts, meteorologists, and computer scientists, the PI will
investigate the performance of newly-developed methods on applications mentioned
previously.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
