
* 2012410
* Novel Decomposition Techniques Enabling Scalable Computational Frameworks for Large-Scale Nonlinear Optimization Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,07/22/2020
* Andreas Waechter,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

This research project aims to develop improved numerical optimization
algorithms. The research considers situations in which decisions must be made in
the absence of perfect information, either due to the lack of reliable data or
due to unforeseen events. Most state-of-the-art methods tackle optimization in
this setting by considering many potential scenarios, which can result in
formulations that are too large to be solved directly. The methodology in this
project is fundamentally different and aims to create new decomposition
frameworks for large-scale nonlinear continuous optimization. The algorithms
under development will be tested on realistic questions in electrical power
systems. For example, the decomposition algorithm will be able to break down the
optimization of a large-scale power grid into computations for the high-voltage
transmission grid and computations related to the many distribution networks
that are attached to the transmission grid. This project provides research
training opportunities for a graduate student.

The project aims to create novel decomposition frameworks that lead to new
practical numerical algorithms able to tackle significantly larger instances of
certain structured problems in nonlinear nonconvex optimization than currently
possible. This will result in computational tools for the solution of stochastic
optimization problems when sample average approximation gives rise to very large
deterministic instances and will significantly expand the array of tractable
stochastic two-stage and bi-level optimization problems. The key innovation is a
smoothing technique that overcomes the predicament that optimal subsystem
solutions need not be differentiable functions of the overarching system
variables. In all aspects of the research, theory will be developed that
characterizes the properties of problem reformulations and the convergence
guarantees for new algorithms. One expected outcome of this project is high-
quality open-source software for public use, capable of exploiting parallel
computing resources.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
