
* 2012259
* Development and Analysis of Algorithms to Simulate Multi-Component Multi-Phase Porous Flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,05/21/2020
* Noel Walkington,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

One of the goals of science is to understand and explain natural phenomena in
order to predict and forecast outcomes. The continual development of
mathematical tools to express many of the fundamental laws of nature has
resulted in models with unparalleled predictive power. Mathematical models
involve complex systems of equations expressing the physical processes of
interest, and form the conceptual foundation of modern engineering and science.
These equations exhibit all of the depth, difficulties, and subtleties of the
physical systems being modeled, and sophisticated computational methodologies
are required for their solution. This project focuses on the development of
computational tools and software that engineers and scientists need to simulate
problems arising in geology. One of the physical problems motivating this work
is the need to model deep sea beds and permafrost regions where vast quantities
of frozen methane, carbon dioxide, and other gases are trapped. These gases
diffuse from deep within the earth and get trapped in permafrost, under
glaciers, and in the cold depths of the deep ocean where they may freeze.
Predicting the evolving state of these regions through geologic cycles and
changes in climate is essential for environmental modeling. This project will
develop and analyze computational tools and software required to model these
regions where multiple fluids and gases undergo freezing, thawing, and
dissolution as they flow. In addition to the technological developments, this
project will also support the education and training of the next generation of
scientists needed to sustain discovery and scientific leadership in these
disciplines.

The work proposed centers around the development and analysis of computational
tools needed to simulate flows in porous media containing multiple fluids, which
may combine to form multiple phases and states (solid, liquid, gas). The
thermodynamics of mixtures and phase changes is used to model the properties and
states of the fluids at the pore scale, which appear constitutively in the
macroscopic balance law of mass, momentum, and energy. This proposal focuses on
the challenging problem of integrating pore scale and continuum models of these
systems into a consistent framework where computational tools can be utilized to
simulate these complex physical problems. Convexity and homogeneity of the free
energy (or concavity of entropy) enter these models in a subtle way, and are
essential for proving stability of solutions. Numerical schemes will be
developed that faithfully inherit these important attributes; in addition,
convexity properties will be exploited to facilitate robust algorithms for the
solution of the nonlinear systems that arise. Development of mathematical tools
required to analyze the stability, robustness, convergence, and correctness of
these algorithms will be undertaken.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
