
* 2012548
* DMS-EPSRC Collaborative Research: Sharp Large Deviation Estimates of Fluctuations in Stochastic Hydrodynamic Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2020,08/12/2020
* Tobias Schaefer,NY,CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 147,603.00

Extreme events can be highly impactful. They are typically rare, which is
fortunate if their consequences are negative on society, but also makes them
difficult to predict. The focus of this project is to develop computational
tools that can be applied to gain understanding of how extreme events occur in
complex stochastic systems. Examples are models for the forecasting of extreme
weather-related events like tropical storms and flooding as well as the spread
of pollutants in case of ocean oil spills. These tools will enable researchers
to ask questions beyond what is currently possible. This will lead to
transformative improvement of current predictive models, which is essential for
efficient management of natural and man-made disasters. Further applications
include the characterization of extreme events in stochastic models that behave
similar to fluids, for example in the context of epidemics, traffic, and star
formation. This collaborative project will support one graduate student per year
at NYU.

Rare events are difficult to observe in controlled (numerical or physical)
experiments, even for low-dimensional systems. The difficulty increases with the
number of degrees of freedom, which makes high-dimensional systems even harder
to analyze ? fluids described by stochastic hydrodynamic models are a particular
example of interest. As a result the questions that researchers can ask in order
to gain insights about extreme events in these systems are often limited. The
goal of this project is to analyze rare but important events in complex systems
by developing new mathematical and computational tools to establish their most
likely way of occurrence and calculate sharp asymptotic estimates (with
prefactor included) of their probability and recurrence time. The aim is to
create a toolbox applicable to a wide range of models with a large number of
degrees of freedom described by stochastic partial differential equations
(PDEs), like advection-diffusion equations and Navier-Stokes equations, and
transferable across disciplinary borders. These tools will be applied to
stochastic hydrodynamic systems in order to gain deeper insights of classical
turbulence. In addition, the efficiency of this novel approach will be
demonstrated in the context of real-world applications, in particular the
advection of pollutants and the capsizing of ships.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
