
* 2012238
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Computational Ptychography: Fast Algorithms, Recovery Guarantees, and Applications to Bio-Imaging
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,09/02/2022
* Adityavikram Viswanathan,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 173,904.00

Ptychography refers to an imaging technique where overlapping regions of an
object are illuminated, usually by placing a pinhole (and possibly a mask)
between a light source and the object, and sequentially moving the pinhole. The
resulting diffraction patterns are then sampled and used to calculate an
approximate image of the object. The underlying physics of this imaging process
dictates that one can only directly collect the intensity of the diffraction
patterns, and not the critically important phase information. This makes the
recovery of an accurate image extremely challenging. Nevertheless, through
careful application of heuristic algorithms, practitioners have successfully
employed these methods in a vast array of important applications such as the
study of drug delivery mechanisms in complex bio-molecules, study of solar cells
and battery chemistry, and the study of fracture dynamics in materials science.
Despite these impressive results, several challenges remain, including the need
to image larger and larger specimens at increasingly higher resolutions, and the
growing size of datasets generated by a new generation of advanced imaging
apparatus. This project seeks to develop fast, highly efficient, noise-robust,
and mathematically rigorous computational methods in support of this next
generation of high-throughput, high-resolution ptychographic imaging. The
broader impacts of this project include curriculum development and training of
students, including those from underrepresented groups, application of the
computational methods to bio-imaging applications in the lab, and knowledge
dissemination to raise the scientific literacy of the public.

Mathematically, much progress has been recently made in understanding
ptychographic imaging and in analyzing novel algorithms for signal recovery from
phase-less measurements. However, these algorithms and their attendant analysis
often assume one collects the modulus of generalized linear measurements, where
the discretized measurements are highly random. In line with applications, a
focus of this project is on designing practical measurement schemes of the type
actually used in ptychographic imaging. Another major difficulty in realistic
phase-less imaging applications is that the imaging system's measurement
masks/probes can often only be approximately implemented and partially known.
Hence, another major objective of this project is the development of novel
theoretical and algorithmic results for the blind ptychography problem. In
either case, the emphasis is on constructing provably accurate recovery
algorithms that are fast enough to scale to large problems in multiple
dimensions. These tasks require developing and using a broad range of
mathematical tools. Techniques from time-frequency analysis, frame theory,
spectral graph theory, high-dimensional probability, and compressive sensing
will be necessary for analyzing the measurement schemes and for providing
rigorous theoretical guarantees for the developed recovery algorithms. Finally,
a key component of this project is the application of these computational
methods to real ptychographic phase-less imaging setups and bio-imaging
applications. More specifically, a novel wide-field, high-resolution lense-less
on-chip microscopy platform will be designed, which puts the theoretical
techniques developed as part of this project into practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
