
* 2012825
* Fast Algorithms for Nonlinear Optimal Control of Geodesic Flows of Diffeomorphisms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,06/05/2020
* Andreas Mang,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,930.00

Optimal control problems play a critical role in numerous computational sciences
applications, including those in medicine, geosciences, manufacturing, national
security, or economics. Optimal control problems are a systematic tool to infer
knowledge from data, enabling scientific discovery and decision making. They are
typically formulated as data-fitting problems with dynamical systems (the
simulation problem) as constraints. This simulation problem describes the
possible behavior of a natural or engineered system under investigation for
given values of input variables (for example, brain tumor and tumor growth
rates). In practice, the values are typically not known and cannot be measured
directly. One needs to infer them from observational data (for example, a series
of patient images) by optimizing a performance goal. This process constitutes
the control problem; the unknown variables are the controls of the simulation
problem. Solving optimal control problems poses significant mathematical
challenges. The project will consider control problems that can have up to
billions of unknowns. For decision making, one needs to equip the solutions of
the control problem with confidence intervals. This is achieved using a
statistical framework, which adds massive computational costs. Moreover,
distinct control variable realizations can yield simulation outputs that match
the observational data equally well, leading to what is known as ill-posed
problems. To alleviate this ambiguity, prior knowledge about plausible solutions
can be introduced based on regularization models. However, choosing adequate
regularization models remains a significant challenge. This project aims to
provide fast, scalable, and robust software tailored to modern computing
architectures to address the massive computational costs. The project will focus
on learning appropriate regularization models from data. The area of application
is statistical shape analysis for classifying objects, and, in particular, the
classification of patients (diseased versus healthy) based on the anatomical
shape variability of organs. Upon completion, the research will produce a
generic mathematical and algorithmic framework for transport-related optimal
control problems and more generally inverse problems, along with software
infrastructure that applies to a range of problems in (biomedical) imaging
sciences, atmospheric sciences, computer vision, remote sensing, data science,
and deep learning. The project will provide training for two graduate students
and summer research projects for undergraduates.

The research will develop effective, scalable computational methods for
nonlinear optimal control of geodesic flows of diffeomorphisms. The novelty is
the design of hardware-accelerated computational kernels and efficient numerical
schemes that exploit problem structure and rigorously follow mathematical
principles for studying shape variability. This is achieved through the design
of a Bayesian framework for statistical shape analysis. The quantification of
shape variability of distinct realizations of an object under investigation is
done through the lens of geodesic flows of diffeomorphisms that map one object
to another. In particular, one quantifies the proximity between two shapes by
the length of the geodesic path that connects them. From a statistical point of
view, one can study shape variability in a database by identifying an average
geometry (the "statistical template") of a particular object under
investigation, and then studies how individual datasets deviate from this
average. The project will focus on adaptive, hierarchical numerical schemes,
enabling high-accuracy computations if desired, and low-accuracy approximations
when possible. The solvers will feature fast computational kernels, maximizing
single-node, and single-GPU throughput while maintaining scalability on
(heterogeneous) high-performance computing platforms. Work packages include
preconditioning, fast hierarchical computational kernels for evaluating forward
and adjoint operators, mixed-precision implementations on heterogeneous
architectures, and computational methods that exploit problem structure to speed
up the solution and allow for high acceptance rates when sampling from high-
dimensional probability distributions. In particular, the project will provide
methodology for (i) the solution of nonlinear initial value control problems,
(ii) uncertainty quantification, (iii) statistical template estimation from
large imaging databases, and (iv) learning regularization operators from data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
