
* 2012562
* Mathematical and Numerical Analysis of Asymptotically Compatible Discretization of Nonlocal Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,07/26/2022
* Qiang Du,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The study of nonlocal models has attracted much attention in many science and
engineering disciplines such as materials science, mechanics, biology, and
social science, and they are therefore of interest to applied and computational
mathematics. Nonlocal models differ from the more common local models because
they account for the factors active on a range rather than only at a point at
which they are considered. The project is aimed at advancing the mathematical
and numerical analysis of robust and effective numerical methods for those
nonlocal models with a finite range of interactions. The research will
complement the ongoing development of effective simulation platforms for
nonlocal modeling in various application domains. It will also contribute to the
integrated interdisciplinary education and research training of students.

An important class of robust numerical schemes for nonlocal models is provided
by asymptotically compatible (AC) discretization schemes. The latter are
designed to assure the convergence of approximate solutions, as numerical
resolution gets refined, to correct physical solutions for problems with
changing or even diminishing ranges of nonlocal interactions. The project will
include a comprehensive study of AC schemes for nonlocal problems with
heterogeneously distributed ranges of nonlocal interactions and/or having
boundary/interfaces. Further investigations of AC schemes will be carried out
for problems involving coupled local/nonlocal models and nonlinear problems
motivated by important applications. The focus on robust discretization methods
like the AC schemes is particularly relevant to reliable and efficient
simulations of nonlocal models with application to complex physical systems
involving multiscale, singular, and anomalous behaviors. An integrated
analytical and computational approach will be used to develop both fundamental
ideas and practical insight so that the research findings will not only enrich
the mathematical theory of AC schemes but also offer guidance to their practical
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
