
* 2012439
* Distributed Synchronous and Asynchronous Stochastic Optimization Algorithms over Networks
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/27/2020
* Ming Yan,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The number of installed internet of things (IoT) devices reached 26.66 billion
in 2019, and this number will reach 75 billion by 2025. These devices collect
massive volumes of datasets, and the analysis of these datasets can
significantly improve our daily lives. However, how to process these datasets
efficiently is still challenging. First, it is impossible to transfer all the
data to a location because of the large volume and privacy concerns. Second, the
networks formed by these devices are complex. Thus, existing distributed methods
can not be directly applied to this scenario, and novel algorithms based on the
communication between these devices have to be developed to make sense of these
large-scale datasets.

In this project, the PI will tackle the major drawbacks of existing
decentralized consensus algorithms and greatly promote the efficiency and
scalability of large-scale decentralized algorithms. To achieve this goal, the
PI will systematically investigate the theoretical understanding of
decentralized algorithms and two major challenges, i.e., large-scale data and
large-scale networks. There are three objectives. The first objective is a
better convergence rate for existing, and new, decentralized deterministic
algorithms. The success of this objective will be the first step that will form
the foundation of the next two objectives. The second objective is to develop
decentralized stochastic algorithms with variance reduction for large-scale
data. The last objective is asynchronous decentralized algorithms. This project
will pave the way for new research endeavors to deal with large-scale
distributed datasets and largely push the research boundaries of decentralized
optimization in various application domains. This research will impact the use
of decentralized algorithms in fields including wireless sensor networks,
machine learning, the internet of things, and healthcare.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
