
* 2012243
* An Accelerated Decomposition Framework for Structured Sparse Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2020,07/11/2020
* Daniel Robinson,PA,Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

There has been an explosion in the availability of data that is collected from
countless sources and through various modalities. For instance, medical image
archives are increasing by 20-40% each year and over 400 million procedures per
year involve at least one medical image. A goal among engineers and scientists
is the design of advanced scientific tools that can use data to aid humanity.
Many such tools already exist but their success is tightly bound to the idea of
problem ?sparsity?. For example, when predicting whether a patient in an
intensive care unit will develop septic shock, only a few medical measurements
are truly helpful in making such predictions. Since there are few important
measurements compared to the total measurements available to a doctor, the
prediction problem can be viewed as ?sparse?. Despite the success of existing
methods for sparse problems, their inadequacy for many modern machine learning
and other types of problems has gradually been noticed by researchers. Since
covariates often come in groups (e.g., genes that regulate hormone levels), one
may wish to select them jointly instead of individually so that the models
deployed make practical sense. Similar concerns occur in other important
healthcare settings such as in the prediction of Parkinson's disease. This
project will design, analyze, implement, and validate a new optimization
framework that can handle these more complicated notions of ?sparsity? beyond
the simplest ones currently analyzed in theory and used in practice. This
project provides research training opportunities for graduate students.

The minimization of a function composed of a loss/data-fitting term and a
regularization function is of immense interest throughout science and
engineering. The past decade has witnessed an explosion of interest in problems
involving sparsity-promoting regularization such as the L1-norm. Moving past
simple L1-norm regularization, researchers are continually realizing the
potential benefits of using more intricate regularization functions that promote
structured sparsity, such as the group L1-norm and elastic net functions. The
proposed project involves the design, analysis, and implementation of new
algorithms for solving optimization problems that involve such structure
promoting regularization. The algorithms will be designed to be broadly
applicable, scalable, and efficient, and will be shown to possess strong
convergence rate guarantees. The novelty of the proposed algorithmic framework
is a carefully defined "space decomposition with subspace acceleration"
mechanism. This mechanism adaptively decomposes the search space, and employs
subspace steps based on proximal point and reduced-space Newton-type techniques.
The step decomposition aspect of the methodology makes it more scalable and
efficient than, say, straightforward first-order methods. The PIs will also
enhance their general approach by designing new innovative strategies that
combine domain decomposition and subspace acceleration in such a way that good
complexity properties are obtained, accurate solution support estimates can be
reliably achieved, and state-of-the-art numerical performance is attained.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
