
* 2012469
* State and Parameter Estimation: Variationally Stable Models and Physics-Informed Learning
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2020,07/29/2020
* Wolfgang Dahmen,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 224,607.00

Advancing technology and science in a variety of areas, such as civil
infrastructure, material science, and manufacturing, can often be formulated
mathematically as design and control problems, or more generally, as inversion
tasks. Such tasks often need to be based on incomplete information given, on the
one hand, in terms of data collected by sensors, and on the other hand, in terms
of a mathematical model which may be incomplete or depend on a large number of
uncalibrated parameters. An illustrative example concerns the estimation of
groundwater porous media flow where the data are pressure heads taken from
boreholes and the model is Darcy's law for the pressure equation with an unknown
parameter: permeability field. A similar situation is encountered in many
seemingly different application scenarios such as Electron Impedance Tomography
where one wants to infer inner tissue structure from voltage responses at a
number of electrodes, located at the surface of the object. A common challenge
in these problems is that the available data are not sufficient to effectively
learn the underlying physical process, and that the problem may have a
prohibitively large computational complexity. The key objective of this project
is to develop robust methods for fusing the information provided by the
mathematical model and by the data so as to ensure that the required
computational complexity remains affordable while the resulting estimators have
a high and quantifiable predictive capability. To warrant the applicability of
the work to a broad range of applications, a sufficiently general problem
setting for state and parameter estimation will be considered. A central role
will be played by the interplay between classical model-based approaches and
novel data-driven methodologies from data science. This project will give
students and young researchers a clear orientation on the principal role of a
variety of relevant mathematical concepts and machine learning algorithms.

A guiding theme in this project is the search for alternatives to Bayesian
inversion with a stronger emphasis on deterministic accuracy quantification with
rigorous complexity estimates revealing intrinsic information limits. The main
conceptual framework is the so called Parametrized-Background Data-Weak method,
which opens a ?geometric perspective? with the following important
ramifications: it is based on stable variational formulations for the parametric
partial differential equations, well beyond the classical elliptic model
classes, by invoking suitable problem-adapted nonsymmetric weak formulations.
Distinguishing data from the functionals and sensors, and lifting the latter to
the properly identified trial space, induces an infinite-dimensional ?coordinate
system? that accommodates the generation of optimal reduced models as well as a
machine learning framework for regression so as to still respect intrinsic
problem metrics. Different from the conventional approaches, our method does not
cast the inversion task directly into any a priori fixed discrete form. Thus, it
avoids introducing ambiguous regularization terms, clipping possibly important
scale information and coupling less compatible metrics. This allows one to
identify optimality benchmarks reflecting essential recovery limitations and
construct estimators that meet these benchmarks or come close within a proper
accuracy-complexity balance. Moreover, using again stable weak formulations on a
continuous level, the PIs will explore ways of reducing (highly ill-posed)
parameter estimation typically formulated as a non-convex optimization problem
to more benign state estimation in combination with a convex optimization
problem. This sheds light on the interplay between the underlying variational
formulations, structure of solution manifolds, and their approximability by
reduced basis methods or highly nonlinear deep neural networks. This research
will lead to rigorous complexity and accuracy quantification, and reduce the
need for ad hoc and ambiguous problem truncations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
