
* 2012875
* Construction of New Parallel Time Integrators
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,09/02/2022
* Mayya Tokman,CA,University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,142.00

For many problems in science and engineering experimental data and observations
do not provide a complete picture of a system's behavior and computer
simulations have become an indispensable tool for studying its evolution.
However, the complexity and scale of many application problems make even
computer modeling a challenging task. This is particularly true when a system
undergoing complex dynamics is modeled using time dependent partial differential
equations. In fact, special mathematical techniques known as time integrators
must be developed to ensure that the evolution of the system is reproduced on a
computer with a reasonable fidelity and in a reasonable time. It is also
important that such time integration algorithms have the ability to take
advantage of the parallel computational capabilities offered by both
supercomputers and workstations. This project will develop new time integration
methods that exploit parallelism and novel mathematical ideas in order to
achieve higher accuracy and better efficiency when simulating complex systems
that evolve over a wide range of temporal and spatial scales. General methods
applicable to problems across science and engineering will be developed as well
as special schemes particularly optimized for certain applications. The project
will explore the advantages of the new numerical approaches in the context of
real-world problems such as computer design of efficient engines and weather
prediction. This project will also contribute to educating and mentoring
undergraduate and graduate students.

Employing parallelism effectively in the spatial discretization of partial
differential equations has proven to be revolutionary in computational science.
Recent developments in time integration provide an opportunity to extend these
gains to the time domain. This project will combine ideas from exponential and
polynomial interpolation-based temporal integration to construct new parallel
time integrators. Both parallelization across the method (i.e. over each time
iteration) and parallelization across time steps (i.e. simultaneous computation
of the solution over multiple time intervals) will be explored. New approaches
for fine-tuning the parameters to optimize performance of the new methods will
also be investigated. The behavior of the new methods will be studied in context
of real application problems such as modeling reactive flows involved in
combustion. An additional objective of this work is to provide a guide for
determining which of the new techniques are best suited for problems with a
given structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
