
* 2012371
* RUI: Computational Models for Coupled Free/Porous Media Flow
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,07/22/2022
* Svetlana Tlupova,NY,SUNY College of Technology Farmingdale
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 160,114.00

This project will study fluid flow models with applications in human health and
the environment. The focus is on models that combine a free fluid part and a
porous media part. For example, in physiology, such fluid flow models help to
understand transport of oxygen and nutrients between blood vessels and tissue.
In hydrology, such models can be used to study and predict contamination by
toxic chemicals from leaky underground storage tanks or landfills mixing with
groundwater. In industrial filtration, the flow models studied in this project
can be incorporated into more complex models to optimize the design of the
three-way catalytic converter used to reduce vehicle emission levels. Efficient
computer simulation of these coupled free/porous flows remains challenging due
to the multi-physics nature of the systems. This research aims to develop
accurate and efficient numerical simulation techniques for such models. The
project provides training through undergraduate research experiences.

This project studies models of coupled flow systems using the incompressible
Stokes equations in the free domain and the Darcy equations in the porous
domain. An advection-diffusion equation is added to the system to model the
transport phenomena at the free/porous interface. The research aims to develop,
analyze, and implement an integrated numerical model of this system of equations
in three dimensions. The main goals are to (i) address severe limitations of the
direct solution, due to incompatibilities in the differential operators in the
free and porous subdomains, (ii) develop robust, high accuracy, and well-
conditioned integral equation formulations, (iii) apply rigorous analysis on the
iterative methods to deduce optimal convergence, and (iv) add the ability to
combine different methods of discretization to effectively model heterogeneous
porous media. The project will develop a new boundary integral formulation, with
regularization and correction for high accuracy, and a simple quadrature based
on implicit representation of the surface. Efficient domain decomposition
methods with new transmission conditions based on non-local operators will be
used to speed up the iteration process. High-performance computing techniques
and a kernel-independent treecode algorithm will be implemented to increase the
speed of computations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
