
* 2012585
* Design and Analysis of Highly Efficient Algorithms for Complex Nonlinear Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2020,07/05/2022
* Jie Shen,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,845.00

This project focuses on the development and analysis of innovative, structure
preserving algorithms for complex nonlinear systems in science and engineering
applications. This project will not only lead to efficient numerical algorithms
for a large class of complex nonlinear systems of current interests, but also
contribute through numerical simulation to a better understanding of some
fundamental issues in materials science, fluid mechanics and other related
fields. This project will also provide opportunities for the involved students
to learn critical skills of computational and applied mathematics and to develop
state-of-the-art numerical algorithms for science and engineering applications.
This project will support one graduate student per year.

Complex nonlinear systems that possess dissipative or conservation properties
are ubiquitous in modeling of real-world phenomena. It is a major challenge to
construct efficient and accurate numerical schemes that can preserve important
dissipative or conservation properties, and in certain cases, positivity of
physical variables. This project will overcome these challenges by extending the
flexible and robust scalar auxiliary variable or SAV approach, which has proven
to be highly effective for gradient flows. In particular, the SAV approach will
be extended to deal with additional difficulties such as those in (i) systems
with physical constraints such as mass and/or surface area conservations; (ii)
highly anisotropic systems and systems with nonlinear mobilities; (iii) systems
with positivity preserving or maximum principles; (iv) systems coupling gradient
flows with other conservation laws, and (v) optimizations. The proposed
methodology will lead to numerical predictive tools that extend the
applicability of mathematical and experimental analysis, and contribute to
better understanding of complex physical systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
