
* 2012382
* Collaborative Research: On Some Fundamental Computational Issues in Simulating Interaction Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2020,07/05/2022
* Min Hyung Cho,MA,University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,405.00

This project will investigate some fundamental computational issues for
mathematical interaction models arising from scientific and engineering
applications. Examples of these models include the electromagnetic and
gravitational interactions in physics, interactions between molecules or cells
in biology, and more general fractional differential equations and network
models in material science, quantum theory, and social science. It is evident
that modern interaction models are becoming more complex and demanding more
accurate and efficient computational methods to handle the large scale
interactions on high-performance computers. This project will (1) introduce
novel representations of interaction models that are suitable for accelerated
computation, (2) design efficient algorithms for interaction evaluations, (3)
develop advanced open source tools, and (4) apply them to applications in nano-
photonic devices, remote sensing, and medical imaging devices. This project will
also train graduate students, including those from under-represented groups in
STEM fields. This project will support one graduate per year for all 3 years on
one campus and one graduate per year for years 2 and 3 on the other campus. In
most interaction models, kernels usually depend on the spatial or temporal
locations that may include the contributions from the interfaces between
different materials. They may even depend on the given density functions at both
the source and target locations. It is critical to find suitably compressed
kernel representations for easier analysis and accelerated computation. This
project will start from the optimal representations of the layered media Green?s
functions for acoustic and electromagnetic waves that are spatially variant due
to the contributions from the layer interfaces. These will be found through
optimal integration contours and the corresponding discretized basis functions.
The PIs will also generalize the partial-wave and plane-wave frame
representations of the Laplace layer potentials to Yukawa, Helmholtz, and
layered media potentials. The result will lead to better compressed density,
kernel, and potential representations of more challenging non-local models in
physics, biology, material science, social science, and image analysis. The PIs
will develop effective numerical schemes for computing the compressible features
and accelerating their algebraic operations by utilizing a multi-resolution
framework to identify the interaction kernel features at different scales. The
project also aims to create advanced open source software packages for the
commonly used Laplace, Yukawa, and Helmholtz equations. Finally, through
collaborations with application domain scientists and engineers, the numerical
tools will be used in the design of optimal nano-photonic devices such as
passive cooling devices, which may lead to a reduced carbon footprint and help
socioeconomically disadvantaged communities lower their energy bills.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
