
* 2012560
* Erosion, Transport, and Dispersion in Granular and Porous Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,12/12/2022
* Matthew Moore,FL,Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,636.00

Naturally occurring porous and granular materials, such as soil, sand, and clay,
play a pivotal role in regulating the Earth's water resources by filtering
contaminants and, over long timescales, supplying fresh water. Understanding of
this contamination and filtration cycle relies on the phenomenon of transport
and dispersion in porous media, with the added complexity that continually
flowing groundwater can, over time, alter the details of the porous medium
itself such as the size, shape, and position of individual sand grains. These
effects are most noticeable during rapid events such as the gravitational
collapse of a sinkhole, but can also occur due to the accumulation of slower
processes, such as mechanical or chemical erosion. This project will leverage
advanced computational methods to study in detail the interplay between fast and
slow processes by which groundwater flow alters porous medium properties. By
gaining a deeper understanding of the underlying physical processes, the project
offers the societal benefit of better management of water resources in the face
external factors, such as contamination or sinkhole formation. For example, the
understanding developed herein may enable identification of specific regions
most susceptible to contamination or to collapse. Graduate students will be
involved and receive mentoring and interdisciplinary training in this project.

This project is to analyze a set of complex, dynamical problems that arise in
geophysical porous-media applications by using a host of newly developed
computational tools and reduced mathematical models. The particular problems of
interest include: (1) the erosion of microscopic constituents of porous media
leading to anisotropic macroscopic properties; (2) the modified transport of
tracers through the medium, including anomalous dispersion; and (3) the
occurrence of catastrophic events, such as sink hole collapse, resulting from
interaction between groundwater seepage, erosion, and buoyancy forces. The
project will address several computational challenges and opportunities. First
the range of scales is vast: spatial scales range from microscopic granular
constituents to large geological aquifers; timescales range from that of a
sudden sinkhole collapse to years required mechanical and chemical erosion. The
systems are inherently multicomponent, with coupling between the fluid and solid
phases. Although the governing PDEs are linear, the presence of moving
boundaries introduces nonlinear feedback between geometry and flow. One
challenge in computational fluid dynamics is to obtain high-fidelity simulations
of dense suspensions of dynamic bodies. Using integral equation methods in
conjunction with accurate quadrature, fast summation methods, contact
algorithms, and high-order time stepping, this project will use fast numerical
methods to accurately simulate dense suspensions of anisotropic eroding,
dissolving, and sedimenting bodies. Mixed-scale, deep neural networks will be
used to learn from the data generated by high-fidelity numerical simulations to
parameterize coarse-grained models based on the multiphase framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
