
* 2012882
* Computational and Multi-Scale Methods for Nonlinear Electromagnetic Models in Plasmas and Nanocomposites
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,06/22/2020
* Vrushali Bokil,OR,Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 224,854.00

This project is an inter-disciplinary collaboration involving mathematical
modeling, computational simulation and experimental data for accelerating the
design of advanced electromagnetic nanocomposite materials as well as
alternative power generators. Nanocomposites, made of ferromagnetic
nanoparticles in a dielectric, non-magnetic matrix, offer unparalleled
opportunities for innovation in electromagnetic materials. The ability to
predict electromagnetic material properties as a function of size, shape and
concentration of inclusions in the host matrix, from computational simulations
of physics-based models, will crucially aid in the digital fabrication of
nanocomposites. These advances in design will enable applications including
microwave frequency antennas and gradient refractive index lenses, printed
electronic circuits and systems, to name a few. This objective is related to the
Materials Genome Initiative's mission to accelerate materials innovation via
computation. A second objective involves Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) power
generation, which is potentially a significant component of a secure U.S. energy
portfolio. The lack of moving parts in an MHD power generator increases the
overall efficiency of the power plant and potentially decreases carbon emissions
significantly. Computational simulations of physics-based models will aid in the
optimal design of these thermally efficient energy systems. The models we
consider are also essential to correctly modeling solar flares which can trigger
geomagnetic storms disrupting power and communications costing millions of
dollars in losses. Thus our techniques will advance applications in
astrophysics, space weather prediction and clean energy systems, among others.

The major goal of this project is to develop novel numerical discretizations and
computational multiscale electromagnetic models incorporating uncertainties in
nonlinear material properties. The resulting methods will enable optimal design
strategies in the applications discussed above. We will validate the
effectiveness of our methods using experimental data provided by our
collaborators, which will also be used to calibrate statistical descriptions of
uncertainties. One area of research involves a model-driven robust design
methodology for a magnetic nanocomposite material with the desired properties
critically needed for advanced devices. A second area, involves nonlinear models
for magnetic fields in plasma. The PIs each have demonstrated records of
integration of research into education and are dedicated educators committed to
recruiting minorities and creating welcoming environments. The PIs will train
three doctoral students on theoretical, computational and experimental aspects
of this interdisciplinary project. The partnerships with government labs and
industry will provide internship opportunities for the graduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
