
* 2044945
* Mathematical Analysis and Numerical Methods for Peridynamics and Nonlocal Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2020,10/14/2020
* Xiaochuan Tian,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 58,381.00

Improvements in computer technology are fueling the development of more
realistic mathematical models for complex applications, including nonlocal
models that are more realistic than conventional local models for studying
various phenomena from physics and biology to materials and social sciences. An
example is the peridynamics model, a spatially nonlocal mechanics theory, which
has been successfully used to model material defects and predict dynamics of
crack formation in various engineering applications. Although new nonlocal
models have been gaining popularity in various applications, the study of
mathematics behind them is still at the nascent stage, impeding the further
development of computational tools. The goal of this project is to develop
efficient and reliable numerical methods for simulating nonlocal models and
establish related mathematical analysis as part of the rigorous validation and
verification process. It aims to improve the effectiveness and robustness of
nonlocal modeling while retaining modeling accuracy. On the educational side,
this project will provide training to students in both mathematics and
computational mechanics.

This project aims to develop state-of-the-art multiscale modeling techniques to
improve computational efficiency while retaining the accuracy of nonlocal models
for predicting dynamic fractures, with new theoretical methodologies built to
study the analytic properties of the models. Three specific methods of
multiscale modeling will be addressed, in which the treatment of boundary traces
and interfacial conditions plays pivotal roles. The first is the seamless
coupling of nonlocal and local models via heterogeneous localization of nonlocal
interactions at the interface. A novel nonlocal trace theorem is used to ensure
the well-posedness of the coupling. The goal is to treat the interface as a free
boundary based on the development of the solution. The second is a quasi-
nonlocal coupling method inspired by the atomistic-to-continuum coupling method.
It is aimed at building a bridge between the discrete atomistic model and
continuous nonlocal model. The third is to design appropriate nonlocal boundary
conditions to reduce the computational cost for problems on unbounded domains. A
new notion of nonlocal Neumann boundary condition will be introduced, which will
shed light on domain decomposition methods and the coupling of nonlocal models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
