
* 2103933
* Geometry Processing Summer Institute 2021
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 03/15/2021,05/21/2021
* Justin Solomon,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 02/28/2022
* USD 48,067.00

This award provides support for a 6-week program titled the Summer Geometry
Institute (SGI), a workshop intended to introduce a broad pool of students to
geometry processing research through immersive interaction with top researchers
in the discipline. The Institute will be held July 19-August 28, 2021 online;
more information can be found on its website (http://geometry.institute).
Overall, SGI aims to accomplish the following objectives: (1) spark wide
collaboration among students and researchers in geometry processing, (2) launch
inter-university research projects in geometry processing involving team members
across broad levels of seniority (undergraduate, graduate, faculty, industrial
researcher), (3) introduce students to geometry processing research and
development, and (4) diversify the "pipeline" of students entering geometry
processing research, in terms of gender, race, socioeconomic background, and
home institution. The first week of the Institute will train undergraduate and
MS student participants on state-of-the-art techniques in geometry processing,
intended as their first exposure to this discipline. Then, for the remaining
weeks, student teams collaborate on research problems, with the goal of
exploring directions suggested by senior attendees. Beyond these day-long
interactions, visitors will give talks on frontier areas and lead relevant
tutorials. The opportunity cost for students taking six weeks to participate
will be covered by the workshop.

As a discipline, geometry processing presents substantial theoretical challenges
motivated by practical considerations of manufacturing/fabrication, computer
vision, physical simulation, and high-performance computing. Participants will
be exposed to---and will advance state-of-the-art in---technical problems
ranging from the development of a toolkit for discrete differential geometry to
the incorporation of probability/uncertainty in the shape processing pipeline.
Participating in geometry processing research also gives mathematics students
exposure to fields like differential geometry in a more tangible environment,
coupled with computer visualizations and concrete applications with immediate
impact. Our workshop is designed to make progress on several concrete challenges
in geometry processing, including development of robust geometry processing
algorithms, design of high-throughput shape analysis methods, design of sensible
machine learning architectures for understanding and processing geometry built
on foundations from differential/algebraic geometry, and extending machinery
from geometry processing to higher-dimensional problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
