
* 2109831
* General-Domain, Scalable, Accelerated Spectral Partial Differential Equation Solvers and Applications in Simulation and Design
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2021,07/05/2022
* Oscar Bruno,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 362,653.00

This project seeks development of effective computational methods for simulation
and design in a range of important areas of science and engineering.
Methodologies will be developed that facilitate design of electromagnetic
nanodevices; solution and optimization of fluid-dynamics and elasto-dynamics
problems; and radiative transfer with applications to breast-cancer detection
and visualization. This work thus impacts a variety of areas of societal
interest, including efficiency optimization for aircraft, ships and underwater
vehicles, seismic forecasting, design of optical devices and communication
systems, medical treatment planning, etc. The present effort will result in
training of students and researchers at post-doctoral, graduate, and
undergraduate levels. These activities are typically rewarding for all involved,
including the students and postdocs, as well as the industrial and lab
researchers who propose specific engineering applications. As a result of this
work, some of the participating graduate students discover a talent for teaching
and advising in mathematics, and most of the participating undergraduate
students go on to graduate schools or four-year colleges, as appropriate, and
seek to pursue work on mathematically related fields. This project will support
one graduate student, one undergraduate student and one postdoc each year of the
three year project.

Notwithstanding great advances in numerical analysis and computational methods
over the last few decades, and even leveraging the accompanying improvement in
computer power, a number of challenges remain in the general field of PDE
simulation and design. Significant progress in recent years has arisen, in the
context of realistic problems in science and engineering, from combined use of
accelerated spectral methods and classical ideas in local asymptotic analysis
and perturbation theory. The desired generality, computational efficiency and
parallel scalability of the proposed approaches result in part from specialized
accounting of important features in the structures of the PDE problems,
solutions, and Green functions, including the singular, rapidly varying and/or
oscillatory character of solutions both in space and time, as well as the full
geometric complexity of domains and boundaries, material composition, etc., that
often arise in realistic applications. Along these lines, the work to be pursued
in this effort seeks development of scalable frequency-domain Green function
methods for direct and iterative integral-equation solvers without recourse to
Fast-Fourier transforms (thus leading to parallel scalable algorithms), as well
as consideration of related theoretical and computational edge-singularity and
time-domain problems, novel structural optimization methods in photonics and
radiative transfer, and neural net-informed spectral solution of shock-wave
problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
