
* 2110981
* Machine-Learning-Based Modeling of Multiscale Dynamic Systems with Non-Markovian State-Dependent Memory
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,07/05/2022
* Huan Lei,MI,Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 139,948.00

Accurate modeling of multiscale dynamic systems has been a long-standing problem
that has attracted tremendous interest in computational mathematics and
applications in fluid physics, chemical engineering, and materials science. The
focus of this project is on multiscale systems that do not have clear scale
separation, such as nanoscale multi-physics systems. For such systems the
existing approaches feature so-called memory effects and non-Markovian behavior,
which limit their understanding and control. The project will develop new
advanced computational tools based on machine learning to construct highly
accurate models of multiscale systems directly from first-principle-based
descriptions. The constructed models retain a molecular-level fidelity and can
be broadly applied to investigate the dynamic processes relevant to material
design, drug delivery, and soft matter assembly. This project will also provide
interdisciplinary training and research experiences for both graduate and
undergraduate students.

The research in this project will address a fundamental problem in model
reduction and multiscale modeling for dynamic systems without clear scale
separation. Current empirical models generally show limitations to retain the
microscale level fidelity due to the over-simplification of the state-dependent
Markovian memory term arising from the unresolved dynamics on microscale. This
gap can be bridged by the methods based on machine-learning developed in this
project; these will provide a general framework to learn a set of non-Markovian
features from the full descriptions, and simultaneously, train the stochastic
reduced model by embedding the state-dependent memory term in the extended
dynamics of the non-Markovian features. Different from the conventional machine
learning approaches for modeling dynamic equations, the models developed in this
project are based on rigorous projection formalism and retain a clear physical
interpretation. Consistent noise terms can be naturally introduced to the
reduced models, which are well-suited for studying complex dynamic systems out
of equilibrium. As a result, the methods can be employed to investigate open
scientific questions such as the nanoscale assembly process by faithfully
accounting for the microscale interactions. In the long term, this project will
provide more comprehensive computational tools for establishing predictive
modeling and control of such systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
