
* 2110745
* Development of Geometrically-Flexible Physics-Based Convolution Kernels
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2021,06/14/2021
* Jennifer Ryan,CO,Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 297,627.00

Data compression is essential in many areas of technology such as satellite
imaging, speech recognition, database design, and much more. However, most of
this understanding is based on data with good properties.  Increasingly, there
is a necessity for techniques that can be applied to complex or incomplete data,
so-called flexible data. This project contributes to the development of more
advanced compression techniques that can be applied to flexible data.  The main
purpose of the project is the development of physics-based computational
techniques that enhance data compression algorithms by making them more accurate
and efficient.  The ideas developed in this project are applicable to more
traditional computational fluid dynamics applications such as hypersonics and
atmospheric modeling as well as areas such as machine learning.  In addition to
the scientific impact, this project broadens the participation of women in the
computational sciences.  It includes support for student mentorship,
traineeship, and retention.   The computational skills that the students will
obtain are broadly applicable and allows them access to a variety of career
options, including in areas of great national need. The PI expects that the
tools developed in this proposal will also be included in future outreach talks
to the general public.

The overall goal of this research is to develop innovative, mathematically
rigorous, geometrically flexible, physics-based, multi-dimensional convolution
kernels that are useful in areas of data compression, shock filtering, post-
processing, and machine learning. The GEOCONKER (GEOmetrically-flexible physics-
based CONvolution KERnels) project will not only concentrate on establishing a
robust analytical framework, but also on the efficient implementation of these
kernels. This will allow for enhancing accurate capturing of multi-scale physics
that includes information from sensor data. These techniques will be able to be
applied to different types of data and in different manners.   These convolution
kernels will aid in establishing provable high-order resolution filters by
establishing the interaction between the mathematics, physics, numerics, and
geometry in applications.  These novel techniques will use (flexible) spline
functions that can adapt to the geometry of the given data on the fly. This will
allow for efficient computational codes that will enhance the accurate capturing
and filtering of multi-scale physics.  This will include kernels that are useful
in shock capturing, accuracy enhancement, and filtering of noisy data. 

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
