
* 2110886
* An efficient, accurate and robust solution technique for variable coefficient elliptic partial differential equations in complex geometries
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,05/17/2021
* Adrianna Gillman,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 294,914.00

Numerical simulations play a key role in scientific discovery and device
development because they have the ability to reduce the cost of testing theories
and ideas. These simulations often involve the solution of problems that are
prescribed by physics models. In many cases, the geometry where the problem is
posed is complex and/or the equation that is modeling the physical phenomena
results in geometry complexities. Applications involving complex geometries
include materials design, inverse scattering and fluid simulations. Due to the
sophisticated nature of solutions, it is desirable to keep the computational
cost as low a possible. The key to doing this is to use as few degrees of
freedom as possible to capture the physics and to couple this with efficient
solution techniques. A recent numerical technique called the hierarchical
Poincare-Steklov (HPS) method is able to do this for many problems. This method
has been demonstrated to be effective for high frequency scattering problems and
has been integrated into inverse scattering simulations. However, the current
version of the HPS method is not able to handle the complex geometries that
arise in most applications. This research will address this shortfall allowing
the method to be applied to complex geometries. This work will also connect the
new version of the HPS method to existing software for complex geometries
allowing it to be integrated into simulation packages.

The numerical simulations under consideration in this project are linear
elliptic partial differential equations with variable coefficients including
high frequency Helmholtz problems. These equations arise in the modeling of
physical phenomena such as scattering, electrostatics, and when using many time-
stepping techniques for solving time dependent problems (i.e. in fluid
simulations). The current version of the HPS method can only handle geometries
that can be easily mapped from a square or cube. This is problematic as in most
applications, there are geometric features that do not fall into either of these
categories. This project will extend the HPS method to a general range of
geometries and will integrate seamlessly with existing mesh generation software.
Additionally, this project will make the HPS method efficient for three
dimensional problems (which it currently is not) and develop the necessary
analysis to support the numerical results that are observed in practice. Thanks
to the robustness of the HPS method, it can be used in material design and
inverse scattering with a known a priori computational cost. This means that
practitioners can confidently use this technique for scattering applications
knowing that the method is achieving the desired accuracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
