
* 2111522
* Optimality and Robustness in Piecewise-Deterministic Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,06/27/2021
* Alexander Vladimirsky,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 466,802.00

This project focuses on quantifying and actively managing uncertainties
resulting from random switches in global environments. An abrupt ecological
change, a new disruptive technology, a global economic downturn, or an emerging
pandemic ? any such game-changer event may transform the planning environment
and shift the priorities of decision makers. Reactive planning is often the norm
in practice, with the working assumption that global mode switches are too rare
and unlikely to take them into account. But if a statistical characterization of
such switches is available, using it in strategic planning can significantly
improve the performance of the controlled system. Models with these features
arise naturally in many research areas including economics, behavioral ecology,
public policy, robotic navigation, evolutionary biology, and security
applications (e.g., preventing illegal logging or wildlife poaching). PI will
develop efficient numerical methods for controlling such systems, focusing on
trade-offs between the average-case optimality and robustness (interpreted as
minimizing the probability of undesirable outcomes.) This project will support 2
graduate students in each of the first two years and 1 graduate student in the
third year.

Piecewise-Deterministic Markov Processes (PDMPs) provide an excellent framework
for modeling large-scale stochastic perturbations of the global environment. The
aleatoric uncertainty due to such perturbations is an important feature of
realistic control problems, but until recently it has attracted far less
attention in mathematical literature than the diffusive perturbations studied in
``classical'' stochastic optimal control theory. Practitioners often want to
model these environment-switch uncertainties as well as time-structured
information accumulation patterns present in their applications. Moreover, it
may not be enough for them to optimize the expected value of the outcome. They
often need to maximize the probability of good outcomes while imposing
constraints on the worst-case scenario. To accomplish this, we need to modify
the partial differential equations (PDEs) encoding the optimal behavior, and
this presents a range of new computational challenges: free boundaries,
discontinuities, higher dimensionality of the state space, and larger systems of
coupled nonlinear PDEs. We propose to study the trade-offs involved in using
such modified models and to develop numerical methods to solve them efficiently.
In the PDMP setting, even the traditional risk-neutral approach of optimizing
the expected performance can be computationally costly since it involves solving
a coupled system of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations. We develop several
approaches for decreasing this computational cost by constructing new
discretization schemes and leveraging efficient methods previously developed for
fully deterministic problems. We also extend our recent approach for optimizing
the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the total cost incurred by a
stochastic switching system. This is accomplished by solving a different system
of HJB equations on an expanded state space, with ``threshold-optimal'' controls
recovered for all starting configurations and all threshold values
simultaneously. We further investigate the trade-offs between conflicting
optimization criteria and several notions of robustness.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
