
* 2111612
* RUI: Development of Fast Methods for Solving the Boltzmann Equation through Reduced Order Models, Machine Learning, and Optimal Transport
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,06/02/2021
* Alexander Alekseenko,CA,The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The Boltzmann equation arises in a wide range of applications from external
aerodynamics and thruster plume flows to vacuum facilities and microscale
devices. Emerging applications of the Boltzmann equation include self-organizing
systems and flocking, as well as networks and bacterial dynamics. Continuing
technological advances in these areas require improvement of algorithms and
models to enable development of a ?digital twin? for the problems at hand. While
the Boltzmann equation provides the most accurate model for these systems, its
use in multiple spatial dimensions remains limited due to its prohibitive
computational costs. The goal of this project is to leverage data-driven reduced
order models, machine learning, and optimal transport theory to make
deterministic solution of the Boltzmann equation tractable so it can be applied
to simulation of novel engineering applications. The project will support new
courses and new training opportunities at California State University Northridge
which is a minority serving institution.

The key difficulties in solving the Boltzmann equation are its high
dimensionality and the prohibitive costs of evaluating the five-fold collision
integral. To address these, this project will focus on the development,
implementation, and validation of data driven low dimensional discretizations of
the Boltzmann equation. The project will develop methods to enforce long term
stability of the reduced order models and to design stable macroscopic models
that are based on solution data. Fast models for kinetic equations will be
developed using deep residual neural networks and numerical gradient flow
approaches. Additionally, efficient evaluation of convolution on octree meshes
and optimal transport formulation of the Boltzmann equation will be studied. The
solvers will be validated using available deterministic high order accurate
solvers. The project will deliver algorithms for three-dimensional solutions of
non-continuum flows, benchmark solutions as well as new approaches to develop
and test approximate kinetic and macroscopic models of gas. The techniques will
increase the range of applicability of non-continuum solvers and will include
multiple physics into models that were previously prohibitively expensive. The
new methods will apply to the simulations of atmospheric re-entry, hypersonic
flows and also gas-driven lab-on-the-chip technologies, micropropulsion, and
atomic force microscopy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
