
* 2111159
* Direct Finite Elements on Convex Polygons and Polyhedra
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Todd Arbogast,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

Mathematical modeling and computational simulation is a safe and cost-effective
way to understand and test natural and engineered systems. Often one needs to
determine the rate of change of some quantity of interest. In that case, the
models will generally include partial differential equations (PDEs), which can
be solved computationally using finite element methods. The quantity of interest
is a function of, say, space that is approximated over small simple shapes
called elements which together form a computational mesh. Meshes are often
composed of simple triangles and rectangles (or simplices and bricks in 3D), but
these meshes have various limitations. Meshes of polygons (or polyhedra in 3D)
are more flexible, but there are not many finite elements available for these
meshes that accurately approximate the function. This project will develop
practical finite elements on polygons and simple polytopes that merge together
continuously and are provably accurate. The new finite elements are expected to
have an impact on broad areas of science and engineering by making the use of
polytopal meshes more accessible. They may also have a broader impact in terms
of interpolation and visualization of functions in computer graphics and in the
representation of data. Specific applications to the geosciences (subsurface
modeling for energy and water resource management) are planned. The project will
support the research of students who will work in an interdisciplinary
environment. Students thus trained are in high demand in industrial and
governmental labs, as well as in academia.

Many computational scientists are interested in defining finite elements on
nonstandard, polytopal elements (polygons and polyhedra). Often one desires a
conforming approximation with an explicit finite element basis. The latter is
particularly helpful when dealing with nonlinear PDEs and coupled systems of
equations. One could define a finite element on a reference element and map it
to the physical element. However, there is a loss in accuracy due to the fact
that the map is non-affine, and also mapped mixed elements generally do not
preserve the divergence free property in a pointwise sense. The proposed
research involves explicit and practical construction of minimal degree of
freedom finite elements on polygons and simple polytopes, as well as the
mathematical analysis of their approximation properties and numerical
applications. The approach is to define H1-conforming shape functions in terms
of polynomials posed directly on the physical element and supplement the space
with a small number of explicitly defined nonpolynomial functions. These
supplemental functions will be defined as rational functions that allow us to
define a nodal basis. The de Rham theory can then be used to define mixed finite
elements. The objectives are to: 1) Develop direct serendipity and mixed finite
elements on 2D convex polygons; 2) Develop direct serendipity and vector-valued
H(curl) and H(div) finite elements on 3D cuboidal hexahedra; 3) Develop direct
serendipity and vector-valued finite elements on general 3D convex polyhedra
(however, it is not expected that this objective will be fully resolved within
the three year duration of the project); and 4) Use the new finite elements to
solve problems in subsurface flow applications, including some that can use and
explore hp-refinement properties of the polygonal elements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
