
* 2111440
* Tensor Models, Methods, and Medicine
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,05/13/2021
* Jamie Haddock,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 01/31/2022
* USD 232,568.00

There is currently an unprecedented demand for efficient, quantitative, and
interpretable methods to study large-scale data. It is often the case that this
data is naturally multi-modal and represented well by a tensor, a higher-order
generalization of the common matrix which can be represented by a multi-
dimensional array. For this reason, there has been a surge of interest in the
mathematics of tensors, but as questions in this area are often far more complex
than the analogous questions for matrices, there are key gaps in translation to
development of tensor-based data analytic techniques, especially in the area of
topic modeling, which seeks to automatically learn latent trends or topics of
complex data sets. Indeed, practitioners often must perform a costly
transformation of their tensor data into a matrix before applying matrix-based
topic modeling techniques that fail to detect latent information in the data
from the discarded modes; such loss of information is especially dangerous in
sensitive applications like medical imaging. This project seeks to fill these
gaps and to provide tools for tensor topic modeling that treat the data in its
natural form. The team will partner with collaborators in the Harbor-UCLA
Medical Center Department of Cardiology to apply these tools to case study
cardiac imaging data, providing direct societal impact as well as directing the
development of the mathematical techniques.

This project will provide practical models that can be applied in any field with
multi-modal data, as well as to advance the theoretical understanding of these
models, their training methods, and the complex tensor data to which they are
applied. The PI focuses on three main aims. The first aim is to develop tensor-
based topic models which respect the natural multi-modal structure of the data,
allow for incorporation of flexible supervision information, and identify
hierarchical topic structure. The second aim is to design efficient, low-memory,
and online training methods for tensor-based topic models, provide convergence
guarantees and complexity analysis for key subroutines, and produce publicly
available open-source implementations. Finally, the third aim is to illustrate
the promise of these models and methods in an important case study application
to echocardiogram analysis. Together, these aims will broaden the mathematical
foundations of tensor analysis while also expanding application of tensor
analysis to important and sensitive real-world domains. The developed models and
methods will have wide impact as they can utilize domain expert knowledge and
limit dependence on model parameters that even tensor experts do not understand
well. In addition to this societal impact, the project includes a strong
outreach and educational component that will provide formative research
opportunities to undergraduate participants, and promote collaboration between
application domain experts and experts in mathematical and data-scientific
techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
