
* 2111283
* Rapid and Robust High Order Spectral Solvers for Learning Photonic Structures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,07/09/2021
* David Nicholls,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,821.00

Over the past two decades engineers have built optical devices with stunning
capabilities of detection, sensing, and imaging. While intuition has been an
invaluable guide in pushing the envelope of what is possible, the increasing
complexity of design and the wide array of available components is rendering
this approach ever more difficult. For this reason, numerical simulation has
become an invaluable tool. As this approach becomes ever more pervasive, the
search for rapid, robust, and highly accurate algorithms has become quite acute.
The PI will enhance his class of simulation tools by exploring new avenues of
numerical approximation, novel paths to enforcing the governing equations, and
appealing to the powerful methods of Machine Learning (in particular, Deep
Learning) to discover optimal parameter values for device design. The PI will
also develop a rigorous analysis of these new numerical schemes in order to
evaluate and validate their real-world performance. This project will provide
support for one graduate student each year of the three year award.

Over the past two decades engineers have built optical devices with stunning
capabilities of detection, sensing, and imaging. While intuition and linearized
models have been invaluable guides in pushing the envelope of what is possible,
the increasing complexity of design and the wide array of available components
is rendering this approach ever more difficult. For this reason, numerical
simulation has become an invaluable tool. As this approach becomes ever more
pervasive, the search for rapid, robust, and highly accurate algorithms has
become quite acute. The PI will enhance his class of High-Order Spectral solvers
with the following objectives: (1) Incorporating two-dimensional materials into
his rapid and highly accurate three-dimensional "Field Expansions" vector
Maxwell equation solver; (2) Expand his "High-Order Perturbation of
Surfaces/Asymptotic Waveform Evaluation" algorithm for joint geometry/frequency
perturbation to the three-dimensional vector Maxwell equations; (3) Extend his
"High-Order Perturbation of Envelopes" algorithm for structural perturbations to
this three--dimensional case; (4) Provide rigorous analytical justification for
each of the latter two; and (5) Bring to bear the powerful new tools of Deep
Learning to discover optimal parameter values for device design.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
