
* 2111129
* Mathematical and Computational Modeling of Interaction between Fluids and Poroelastic Structures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,05/27/2021
* Ivan Yotov,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 375,000.00

The objective of this work is modeling and simulation of the interaction between
a free viscous fluid and flow in an adjacent deformable porous medium through an
interface separating the two regions. Such physical phenomenon occurs in a broad
range of applications, including geosciences, biomedical sciences, and
industrial design. The project makes advances in the mathematical and
computational modeling of this problem, including development and analysis of
new mathematical models and numerical methods for their solution. High
performance computational software designed to run on massively parallel
computers will be developed and applied for modeling LDL transport and drug
delivery in cardiovascular flows and tracing organic and inorganic contaminants
in coupled surface-subsurface hydrological systems.

The goal of this project is mathematical and computational modeling of fluid-
poroelastic structure interaction (FPSI). The free fluid flow is modeled by the
Stokes or the Navier-Stokes equations, while the poroelastic medium is modeled
by the Biot system of poroelasticity. The two regions are coupled via dynamic
and kinematic interface conditions, including balance of forces, continuity of
normal velocity, and no-slip or slip with friction tangential velocity
condition. The project includes development and analysis of 1) new mathematical
models; 2) stable, accurate, and robust structure-preserving numerical methods;
and 3) efficient multiscale parallel domain decomposition algorithms for the
solution of the resulting algebraic problems. In the first main component,
variational formulations of new FPSI models, including Navier-Stokes - Biot
couplings, use of Brinkman and Forchheimer models, non-Newtonian models, and
fully coupled FPSI-transport models will be developed and analyzed. These new
models will extend current model capabilities to flows with higher Reynolds
numbers, fluids with non-Newtonian rheology, and tracking species dissolved in
the fluid, including the effect of the concentration on the flow field.
Existence of model solutions will be established employing results from
semigroup theory and monotone operators in Hilbert or Banach space setting,
coupled with fixed point arguments. The second main component involves
investigation of novel discretization techniques for the numerical approximation
of the FPSI models, focusing on dual mixed discretizations with local
conservation of mass, local momentum conservation, accurate approximations with
continuous normal components for velocities and stresses, and robustness with
respect to physical parameters. Methods of interest include multipoint stress-
flux mixed finite element methods and local-stress mimetic finite difference
methods that can be reduced to positive definite cell-centered schemes, coupled
through mortar finite elements across the interface. In the third main
component, efficient multiscale domain decomposition algorithms for FPSI will be
developed and analyzed. The methodology will be based on space-time variational
formulations and will allow for multiple subdomains within each region with non-
matching grids along subdomain interfaces, as well different time steps in
different subdomains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
