
* 2111224
* Collaborative Research: Numerical Methods for High-Dimensional Sticky Diffusions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,06/10/2021
* Nawaf Bou-Rabee,NJ,Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 82,890.00

Numerical simulations can provide insight into many problems in science or
engineering, for example by providing access to variables that are otherwise
difficult or impossible to observe experimentally, or by allowing a user to
optimize over variables more cheaply than though experiments. Yet, numerical
simulations can be a challenge to implement, because computers cannot reproduce
all scales from the quantum mechanical to the macroscopic scales of interest. A
particularly challenging system to simulate are collections of interacting
particles, which are studied in a wide variety of applications, from designing
new materials such as impact-resistant or energy-efficient materials, to
understanding how the interior of a cell works, to biomedical applications such
as designing the lipid nanoparticles that carry the mRNA vaccines. This project
will develop methods to simulate interacting particles which currently require
the computer to take timesteps that are many times smaller than the timescales
of interest. We will build upon a recent mathematical description of the
effective interactions between such particles to allow a simulation to take
significantly larger timesteps. This will allow for simulations over
significantly longer times and of larger collections of particles, and hence
will enable scientists to use computations to understand a richer collection of
systems that arise in a variety of important applications. Students will be
involved and trained in interdisciplinary applications.

This project aims to develop numerical methods to simulate high-dimensional
stochastic differential equations (SDEs) modeling systems of particles that can
repeatedly form, break and re-form bonds due to stiff, short-ranged forces. Such
particles are models for systems such as colloids, cross-linked polymers (gels),
DNA nanotechnology, networks of actin filaments or other cytoskeletal
components, chromatin in the cell, among many others. Because of the stiffness
of the particle forces, current simulation methods require extremely small time
steps and thus prohibitively long simulation times. The project will develop
methods that allow significantly larger timesteps and thus can work for systems
of hundreds to thousands of particles, and the approach is based on two key
developments. The first is an analytic result which eliminates the stiff forces
and replaces them with rigid bonds when particles are in contact, which can be
achieved with the help of sticky boundary conditions. The resulting sticky
diffusion allows particles to evolve stochastically subject to rigid distance
constraints, but crucially, allows these constraints to change. The second is a
discretization of SDEs in space and numerical PDE theory to discretize the
infinitesimal generator of the sticky diffusion to be later used to simulate a
Markov Jump Process. This approach allows one to handle sticky boundary
conditions because one can choose discretization points directly on the
boundary. The methods will be applied to study systems such as DNA-coated
colloids and networks of actin filaments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
