
* 2111479
* Physics-Informed Structure-Preserving Numerical Approximations of Thermodynamically Consistent Models for Non-equilibrium Phenomena
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2021,08/06/2021
* Jia Zhao,UT,Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Non-equilibrium phenomena, including those described by non-isothermal and
isothermal hydrodynamic models with applications to complex multiphase fluids,
are ubiquitous in science. They require well-developed models to describe their
dynamics but pose challenges to the algorithms for their approximations. This
project aims to establish a computational framework for models of non-
equilibrium phenomena that have the property of being thermodynamically
consistent. The algorithms to be designed will preserve the desired properties
at the discrete levels. Furthermore, these numerical schemes will be utilized to
simulate and investigate the dynamics of several classes of non-equilibrium
models in an accurate and efficient way. Software will be developed on high-
performance computing platforms and made available to the public. Students will
be involved and trained through research involvement in the project.
Thermodynamically consistent (TC) partial differential equation (PDE) systems,
derivable from the GENERIC formalism (General Equation for Non-Equilibrium
Reversible-Irreversible Coupling), encompass a large class of models in science
and engineering for non-equilibrium phenomena. The project will (1) establish a
paradigm for designing structure-preserving, high order, energy stable, and
efficient numerical approximations to solve TCPDE systems by exploiting the
mathematical structure of the TC models and reformulating them using the GENERIC
formalism; (2) design physics-informed deep neural network frameworks to solve
TCPDE models while preserving their structures and properties; (3) apply the
numerical framework to investigate several classes of TC models; and (4) develop
an object-oriented, open-source, and high-performance software package for
hybrid GPU-CPU architectures. The outcomes will advance modeling, analysis, and
numerical simulations of non-equilibrium thermodynamic and hydrodynamic models,
fostering a deeper understanding of non-equilibrium phenomena in a wide range of
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
