
* 2111228
* Approximation and Analysis of Selected Nonsmooth, Nonlinear, and Nonlocal Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2021,07/08/2021
* Abner Salgado,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 367,450.00

The numerical approximation of partial differential equations, and the analysis
of schemes to approximate the solution of classical models in the pure and
applied sciences, is a well-established topic. There are general theories to
deduce convergence and accuracy of approximations. However, new classes of
models have recently appeared that do not lend themselves to the general
treatment and require new techniques and ideas. In this project the PI aims to
develop, together with students and a postdoctoral associate, rigorous analyses
of approximation techniques for nonsmooth, nonlinear, and nonlocal systems that
describe a wide range of phenomena. The analysis will require a careful
interplay between subtle smoothness properties of the solutions and the fine
structure of the problems and schemes at hand. The analysis will borrow
techniques, not among the standard tools invoked in numerical analysis, from
other fields of mathematics. The research will enhance modeling and prediction
capabilities for this important class of models, and early-career researchers
will be trained through involvement in the project.

Systems under study in this project include a) initial value problems where the
presence of singular data or the inherent nature of the equation make the
solution very rough; b) nonlinear systems where the strength of the nonlinearity
is such that even for smooth data one cannot immediately assert the smoothness
of the solution; c) nonlocal problems, those which describe long range
interactions or memory effects and, thus, the determination of the state of the
system at one point requires global knowledge; and d) nonvariational equations,
that is, those that do not arise from conservation principles. In all these
examples, standard arguments invoked to establish stability and convergence of
numerical methods are not effective. As an outcome of this work, new numerical
techniques will be developed, and the existing ones will be strengthened by
solid mathematical analysis of their approximation properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
