
* 2111303
* Data-Driven Discovery of Dynamics in Interacting Agent Systems and Linear Diffusion Processes
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2021,08/03/2021
* Sui Tang,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop data-driven methods for dynamical systems
and specifically on interacting agent/particle systems and linear diffusion
processes that arise in various disciplines such as opinion dynamics under
social influence, prey-predator systems, flocking and swarming of animal groups,
rumor/threat propagations over networks, and traffic flow over road networks.
The project will focus on ideas from statistical learning for the discovery of
governing laws and turning the observational data into equations that can be
used for predictions. While machine learning techniques are particularly
promising for this task their application to learning dynamical systems is still
in its infancy. This project will develop efficient algorithms to learn unknown
structures and parameters of the systems from various types of observational
trajectory data, together with a rigorous quantitative framework to guide the
selection of models that generalize well on unseen data. Students will be
involved and trained in interdisciplinary aspects.

The first part of the project addresses regression-based learning approaches to
discover interaction laws between agents from various types of trajectory data,
with applications to systems arising from physics, biology, ecology, and social
sciences, using methods at the interface of machine learning and inverse
problems. Systematic learning theories will be developed to study the well-
posedness and model selections to achieve statistically optimal performance. The
second part of the project will develop robust methods to recover linear
diffusion processes over graphs from partial observations of evolving states,
with applications to graph signal processing. In particular the project will
develop sampling theorems to collect space-time samples as well as robust
reconstruction algorithms. The sampling theorems will shed light on how to
utilize dynamics over graphs and the structure of graphs to compensate for the
loss of spatial information. Theoretical and algorithmic ramifications of the
effects caused by imperfect data will be studied to test the proposed algorithms
on synthetic and real data sets over a wide variety of graphs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
