
* 2111007
* Integration of Randomized Methods and Fast and Reliable Matrix Computations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,05/24/2021
* Jianlin Xia,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

In modern scientific computing, engineering simulations, and data analysis, the
complexity of numerical problems and the scale of data sizes pose unique
challenges to matrix computations. The demand for efficiency and reliability
continues to grow, and in the meantime, researchers increasingly desire
algorithms that are convenient to use. Randomized algorithms are not only
convenient and fast to apply, but also powerful in the sense that they can
sometimes extract surprisingly useful information from challenging situations
that are otherwise very difficult to handle. This project will integrate a wide
variety of randomized techniques and a sequence of novel matrix algorithms so as
to build a comprehensive framework for fast, reliable, and flexible randomized
matrix computations. The project will bridge the gap between convenient
randomized ideas and various challenging numerical tasks. Innovative randomized
methods will be designed to extract valuable information in numerical
computations and also to guide algorithm design and parameter tuning. The
project will help effectively make randomized strategies more widely accessible
to broader scientific communities. It will help introduce novel randomized
algorithms into various numerical analysis fields and can also significantly
improve the efficiency and reliability of many practical computational tasks in
application fields such as data science, image processing, geosciences, and
engineering. The research results will be widely disseminated via multiple
channels. The project will give students a nice platform to gain knowledge in
different areas such as numerical analysis, statistics, and data analysis.
Relevant course materials will be developed. Open-source software packages will
be designed.

The research will seamlessly integrate a wide variety of randomized techniques
and a sequence of novel matrix algorithms. The research will result in a series
of novel randomized methods for computations such as low-rank approximation,
data-sparse preconditioning, and eigenvalue solution. Rigorous theories will be
given to understand the effectiveness of the proposed methods and also to
establish connections between randomized algorithms and various challenging
numerical tasks. Unlike the usual compromise between efficiency and reliability
in many randomized strategies, the integration of multiple randomized techniques
and novel matrix computations can achieve the combined benefits of flexibility,
convenience, efficiency, and also reliability. The studies can further help
uncover intrinsic matrix properties that can be used to design robust numerical
algorithms for handling difficult situations. The new analysis and randomized
methods will help make matrix computations better meet the rapidly emerging
challenges of modern computational tasks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
