
* 2111459
* Collaborative Research: Multidimensional Couplings for Flow and Transport in Porous Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2021,06/17/2021
* Beatrice Riviere,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 291,309.00

The project focuses on the study of physical phenomena coupling different
spatial scales. The mathematical and numerical analysis of these coupled
problems is challenging because of the lack of smoothness in the solution.
Applications of these coupled problems are many; for instance the mathematical
modeling of blood flow in organs is important in understanding the mechanisms of
organ perfusion, embolization and drug delivery. The project will train graduate
students and undergraduate students in computational and applied mathematics.
Research outcomes will be published in research journals, online and presented
at scientific meetings.

The overall goal of the project is the formulation, analysis and application of
discontinuous Galerkin methods for the solution of coupled one-dimensional and
three-dimensional flow and transport processes in porous media. The numerical
analysis is challenging because weak solutions exhibit a singularity on the line
source. The research team will develop and analyze numerical methods for model
problems with singular data. The methods will combine novel efficient time-
stepping algorithms with discontinuous finite element methods. The investigators
will apply the algorithms to multidimensional couplings in organ and
vasculature. The development and validation of physics-based computational
models will be guided by imaging of flow and transport. Neural network based
image image segmentation extracts the geometry of the organ and blood vessels.
Students will be involved in the research and they will be trained in numerical
analysis and scientific computing. Outreach activities will engage high school
students with recent developments in computational mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
