
* 2111117
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Simulations and Imaging of Viscoelastic Media in Reduced Order Model Framework
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2021,08/10/2021
* Elena Cherkaev,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 287,802.00

Imaging and noninvasive evaluation of viscoelastic material properties have
paramount importance in medical diagnostics, geophysical exploration, and
engineering applications. Viscoelastic properties of materials are a result of
dissipative processes that could stem from nonlinear wave energy dissipation in
atomic lattices, from grain boundaries dislocations in thin films and
polycrystalline materials, or from damage, fracturing, and repairing at the
microscale in polymers and biological materials. In biomedical applications,
changes in viscoelasticity of soft tissues often serve as an important biomarker
associated with specific malignancies and have a diagnostic value for the
detection, characterization, and monitoring of arteriosclerosis, osteoporosis,
and various cancers. Recent advances in reduced order modeling of large scale
systems have enabled us to approach many practical problems viewed as unsolvable
ten years ago. However, viscoelastic modeling and imaging are still challenging
problems. Wave propagation in viscoelastic media is characterized by attenuation
and dispersion effects, which are absent in the case of elastic materials. This
project will develop an efficient computational method for imaging of
viscoelastic media and simulation of attenuating waves propagating in
dissipative materials.

The project develops an extension of the Stieltjes-Krein continuous fraction
reduced order modeling method to dissipative viscoelastic systems. This very
efficient method is based on the Stieltjes network realizations of
nondissipative problems and currently cannot be applied to problems with
dissipation and dispersion. The project will eliminate this limitation and
extend the method to dissipative viscoelastic systems. Three main components of
the approach are the following: (1) Efficient dissipative sparse network
realizations of ROMs for viscoelastic problems by generalizing the matrix
continued-fraction approach beyond Stieltjes-Krein theory; (2) Multiscale
simulation framework based on dissipative sparse network approximations of
Neumann-to-Dirichlet maps; (3) Extension of the network embedding approach to
dissipative problems and direct nonlinear imaging algorithms for viscoelastic
media. The method will lead to an orders-of-magnitude reduction in the
computational cost of large-scale wave propagation simulations as well as novel
direct imaging algorithms for scattering problems based on network embedding.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
