
* 2111044
* Design and Sensitivity Analysis of Infinite-Dimensional Bayesian Inverse Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2021,07/22/2022
* Alen Alexanderian,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 176,072.00

Mathematical models of complex physical and biological systems play a crucial
role in understanding real world phenomena and making predictions. Examples
include models of weather systems, ocean circulation, contaminant transport,
porous media flow, or spread of infectious diseases. Models governing complex
systems typically include a large number of parameters that are needed for a
full model specification. Typically, some of the model parameters are uncertain
and need to be estimated using indirect measurements. This is done by solving an
inverse problem that uses the model and measurement data to estimate the unknown
parameters. Measurements are often scarce and noisy. Moreover, not all
parameters can be estimated due to lack of data that informs them or the sheer
computational cost associated with estimating all model parameters. This project
makes fundamental contributions to parameter estimation and model-based
prediction by establishing methods for assessing sensitivity of the solution of
parameter estimation problems to additional model uncertainties and for making
principled decisions on the choices of experiments one needs to conduct to
obtain measurement data. The latter, i.e., the experimental design problem, is a
crucial aspect of successful parameter estimation as it enables making judicious
use of scarce experimental resources to obtain informative data. The PI will
disseminate research results through peer-reviewed publications, organization of
mini-symposia at international conferences, and release of open-source software.

This project will support 1 graduate student each of the three years of the
project. This research program focuses on Bayesian inverse problems governed by
partial differential equations (PDEs) with infinite-dimensional parameters.
Examples include estimation of boundary conditions or coefficient functions in
PDE models. Available measurement data are usually not sufficient to
simultaneously inform all of the model parameters. Hence, the governing model
typically contains parameters, herein referred to as auxiliary parameters, which
are uncertain but must be specified for a complete model characterization
necessary for an inverse problem formulation. An important question regarding
such parameterized inverse problems is: what is the relative importance of the
different auxiliary parameters to the solution of the inverse problem? This is
addressed by developing a sensitivity analysis framework, called hyper-
differential sensitivity analysis (HDSA), for large-scale Bayesian inverse
problems. Another key aspect of successful parameter estimation is collection of
informative experimental data. Physical or budgetary constraints often put
severe limits on the amount of data that can be collected. Therefore, optimal
data acquisition is crucial; this can be tackled through optimal experimental
design (OED). This research program will bring about key advances in
computational methods for PDE-based Bayesian inverse problems by developing
methods for (i) analyzing the sensitivity of the solution of a Bayesian inverse
problem to auxiliary parameters and (ii) fast computation of optimal
experimental designs. The proposed methods achieve these goals through an
intricate combination of rigorous methods from numerical analysis, randomized
linear algebra, probability, and optimization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
