
* 2111496
* Computational Methods for Large Algebraic Eigenproblems with Special Structures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2021,06/01/2021
* Fei Xue,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 252,312.00

This project concerns development and analysis of new numerical methods for
solving several important classes of large-scale and complex algebraic
eigenvalue problems with special structures. Eigenvalues play an important role
in many areas of applied mathematics and scientific computing. Fast and robust
computations of physically relevant eigenvalues are essential to mathematical
modeling and simulations for applications throughout computational sciences and
engineering. This research will enhance the development and understanding of new
solvers for large eigenproblems arising from condensed matter physics, quantum
field theoretical systems, or dynamical systems with a need for reliable
stability analysis. The new algorithms will help enable more efficient and
robust large-scale modeling and simulations involving eigenvalues in many areas,
including condensed matter physics, optical properties of materials, stabilities
of dynamical systems arising from control problems, and many more. The project
will also provide support for graduate students that will enhance their
understanding of the essential techniques needed to analyze and solve these
computational problems.

Structure-preserving methods play a crucial role in solving eigenvalue problems
arising from physics and mechanics, in both linear and nonlinear cases.
Researchers need to take advantage of the special structures to design efficient
problem-dependent methods that preserve the underlying physical properties of
these problems. For eigenproblems with nonlinearity in eigenvalues,
nontraditional problems such as computing the rightmost eigenvalues are relevant
for understanding the stability of the associated dynamical systems. The project
will investigate three classes of problems: (1) Computing ground states of Bose-
Einstein condensation (BEC). Ground states of BEC are described by the solutions
to the static Gross-Pitaevskii equation (GPE), a nonlinear eigenproblem with
nonlinearity in eigenvectors, with the lowest total energy. Preconditioned
optimization methods based on the structure of the energy functional will be
studied. (2) Iterative methods for the complex Bethe-Salpeter Eigenvalue problem
(BSE). BSE is a Hamiltonian eigenvalue problem, which can be transformed to a
Hermitian problem with symmetric spectrum. The linear response eigenvalue
problem is a subclass of BSE. Structure-preserving iterative methods will be
investigated for computing a few smallest eigenvalues. (3) Reliable detection of
instability of nonlinear eigenproblems. Evaluation of the distance of a
nonlinear eigenvalue problem to instability largely depends on robust
computation of the rightmost eigenvalues of a sequence of perturbed problems.
Algorithms based on functions of matrices approximated by rational Krylov
subspace methods will be explored.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
