
* 2120413
* Efficient Ensemble Methods for Predictive Fluid Flow Simulations Subject to Uncertainty
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 01/01/2021,02/01/2021
* Nan Jiang,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 16,172.00

Uncertainty quantification is a central topic in predictive science, where model
predictions with quantified uncertainties are critical for understanding and
predicting scientific phenomena and making informed decisions based upon these
predictions. The applications include energy (nuclear, wind, solar, etc.)
generation, control and manufacturing, atmosphere-ocean modeling, weather
prediction, surface water and ground water contamination, and so on. For all of
these applications, the model problem is subject to numerous sources of
uncertainty that include uncertain model parameters, forcing functions, initial
conditions, and boundary conditions. For instance, in numerical weather
prediction, to deal with uncertain initial conditions the weather model needs to
be run multiple times with different initial conditions to generate an ensemble
of possible model outputs, which will be analyzed and predictions made according
to these data. This process is called ensemble forecasting, which is commonly
done at all major operational weather prediction facilities worldwide, including
the U.S. National Centers for Environmental Prediction and European Centre for
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF). One common problem faced in these
calculations is the excessive cost in terms of both storage and computing time.
For many complex systems, especially those that deal with large spatial scales,
running the model once is already very expensive. Running the model multiple
times within a given limited computational time is very challenging even with
modern supercomputers, and is not feasible in most large-scale applications. An
efficient ensemble simulation algorithm that can reduce the computing cost
significantly is thus highly desirable. This project seeks to develop novel,
efficient ensemble algorithms and their analytical foundation for fast
calculation of flow ensembles that is required to account for uncertainties in
predictive simulations of fluid flows.

The inevitable conflict of high-resolution single realizations and computing
ensembles is a central difficulty in many engineering and geophysical
applications that are subject to uncertainties in both input data and model
parameters. The development of efficient methods that allow for fast calculation
of flow ensembles at a sufficiently fine spatial resolution is of great
practical interest. This research is to develop novel, efficient ensemble
algorithms for fast calculation of flow ensembles and conduct rigorous numerical
analysis for the new algorithms and methods. The first research problem is to
develop new efficient ensemble algorithms to compute multiple realizations for
the Boussinesq equations. This includes the development of partitioned ensemble
algorithms so that highly optimized Navier-Stokes-equation codes can be used to
solve the problem. The second is to advance higher-order time discretizations
for ensemble algorithms based on artificial compression. The third problem is
the development of novel, efficient ensemble algorithms for the fast calculation
of flow ensembles with varying model parameters. The methods studied will allow
efficient determination of the multiple solutions corresponding to many
parameter sets.
