
* 2136075
* Novel Virtual Element Methods with Applications in Interface Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 11/15/2020,01/12/2022
* Shuhao Cao,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 72,279.00

Interface problems arise from many important complex multiphysics and biological
systems, such as those involving the evolutions of multi-fluid/material
interfaces, tumor growth, or stem cell deformation. Computer-aided simulation is
a cost-friendly tool for the studies of these challenging interface problems. To
approximate the governing mathematical equations of these systems, Virtual
element method (VEM) is an emerging powerful tool in the scientific computing
community. The objective of this research project is to develop both theoretical
and practical aspects of various VEMs. Being able to reliably answer the
question "can we trust our simulation results?" justifies the use of VEMs in
simulating these complex systems. Meanwhile, this project strives to provide the
public with a state-of-the-art VEM computer program that saves valuable
computing resources. In addition, this research project creates opportunities to
pass the torch on to graduate students to become the next generation
computational mathematicians.

Solving elliptic partial differential equations with high-contrast diffusion
coefficients play a central role in the modeling these complex systems. This
project shall develop an in-depth robust a priori error analysis of VEM on
elliptic interface problems. Different from the existing VEM analysis, this
project devises a new novel paradigm to study the error analysis for the
interface VEM, and further clarifies the dependence of the VEM convergence on
the polytopal mesh geometries, justifying the VEM's applicability on interface-
fitted mesh which may become extremely irregular or degenerate near the
interfaces. Meanwhile, this project learns from the novelty of VEM framework to
improve the analyses of traditional approaches for interface problems. The VEM's
meta-formulation for elliptic problems enables us to construct immersed finite
element spaces naturally in higher order and/or in 3-D. Higher order interface
VEMs, the a posteriori error estimation, and the adaptive polytopal mesh
refinement are to be studied to render VEM more efficient and effective. This
integrated study enables us to attack the challenging 3-D interface problems,
which, in turn, broadens the scope in terms of both theory and tools for the
whole numerical partial differential equation community. Last but not least, a
portable and highly-vectorized VEM software library shall be made publicly
available, including the semi-structured interface-fitted mesh generation,
vectorized assembling, polytopal adaptivity, and fast multigrid solvers. The
portability of the computer code enables the researchers to incorporate the VEM
into existing software libraries dealing with interface problems, thus
facilitating the interdisciplinary research in simulating those complex systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
