
* 2207449
* Deep Neural Network Machine Learning for Oscillatory Navier-Stokes Flows and Nonlinear Operators, and High Dimensional Fokker-Planck Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,08/02/2022
* Wei Cai,TX,Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 348,805.00

The goal of this project is to develop machine learning (ML) technology with
deep neural networks (DNNs) to study a wide range of physical and chemical
phenomena. DNN has demonstrated its tremendous power in artificial intelligence
(AI) applications such as speech recognition, automatic self-driving, image
classification, etc. This research will attempt to harness the power of the DNN
for scientific discoveries by increasing computational and simulation
capabilities in learning and understanding complex phenomena such as fluid flows
for ship building applications, seismic wave predictions, chemical reactions in
drug designs. In this project, to address some of the key computational
challenges in scientific computing, new classes of deep neural network (DNN) ML
algorithms will be developed with capabilities for better frequency resolution
for simulating oscillatory fluid flows in complex geometries and nonlinear
operators in oscillatory function spaces, and increased powers for addressing
the curse of dimensionality (CoD) in solving high dimensional Fokker-Planck
equations (FPE) from transition path theory (TPT) of complex biochemical
systems. Specifically, research will be carried out in three major computational
issues relevant to scientific and engineering computing: (a) To develop
multiscale DNNs as a viable meshless method for solving time dependent highly
oscillatory Navier-Stokes flows in complex domains, and a practical alternative
method to traditional numerical methods with no costly mesh generation or linear
system solvers. (b) To develop multiscale DNN learning algorithms for nonlinear
operators in highly oscillatory function spaces for seismic wave prediction, and
forward and inverse scattering applications. (c) To develop forward and backward
stochastic differential equation (FBSDE) based multiscale DNNs for boundary
value problems of high dimensional PDEs such as Fokker-Planck equations arising
from statistical description of physical systems with application in computing
committor functions and transition rates in transition path sampling theory of
complex chemical and biological systems. This research will have a broad impact
in improving the capability of ML for scientific computing in many ways.
Efficient meshless DNN algorithms for oscillatory flows in complex geometry and
representation of nonlinear operator for physical qualities of highly
oscillatory nature can reduce the cost of many optimization, and forward and
inverse problems in scientific and engineering research. Overcoming the CoD in
solving high dimensional Fokker-Planck equations with the multi-scale FBSDE DNN
algorithms will have a wide range impact on both the ML research and many
scientific areas such as material sciences and optimal control, financial
engineering, as well as to biological system dynamics. Moreover, the project
will place strong emphasis on data science education with new ML course
development and activities in the Data Science Institute at SMU.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
