
* 2207971
* Domain Decomposition Methods for Coupled Models of Non-Newtonian Fluids and Solid Structures
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2022,08/03/2022
* Hyesuk Lee,SC,Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 244,828.00

There has been increasing interest in numerical studies on fluids interacting
with poroelastic structures; however, most numerical and analytical studies in
this area have been focused on Newtonian fluids coupled with solid structures,
and few analytical and numerical studies have been undertaken on the interaction
of non-Newtonian fluids and elastic/poroelastic solids. Non-Newtonian fluid-
poroelastic structure interaction (FPSI) problems are themselves of interest to
related scientific and engineering communities, as the study of these strongly
coupled nonlinear problems leads to a better understanding and a unifying
description of complex real-life processes. This research will provide an
underlying mathematical foundation for non-Newtonian flows in a multi-physical
setting while promoting teaching, training graduate students, and involving
undergraduates in research experiences. The proposed research will also benefit
the biomedical, polymer, material, and oil industries by providing improved
algorithms for the numerical simulation of important processes.

The research activity lies in the development of rigorous, efficient, and stable
numerical schemes for FPSI problems. Most current research results of FPSI
problems discuss numerical methods with matching grids and time steps between
subproblems in either a monolithic or partitioned setting. The goal of the
research is to design domain decomposition methods for non-Newtonian FPSI
systems that allow local space and time discretization. At the same time, the
theoretical accuracy and stability properties of the numerical schemes will be
analyzed. Specifically, we have five main objectives for this project: (i)
develop and analyze parallel, accurate, efficient decoupling algorithms based on
global-in-time, non-overlapping domain decomposition for non-Newtonian FPSI
systems; (ii) develop and analyze accurate discretization and projection methods
in time to effectively handle non-Newtonian FPSI systems with a large difference
in local time scales; (iii) study the well-posedness of the viscoelastic FPSI
system; (iv) develop and analyze accurate and efficient discretization methods
for viscoelastic FPSI systems based on weighted least-squares finite element
methods; (v) educate and train graduate and undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
