
* 2207207
* Structure-Preserving Algorithms for Hyperbolic Balance Laws with Uncertainty
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2022,06/28/2022
* Yekaterina Epshteyn,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

The project will make significant contributions to the design and analysis of
novel stochastic models and numerical algorithms for hyperbolic
conservation/balance laws with uncertainty. Such systems are the essential
mathematical apparatus for modeling a variety of complex physical phenomena,
including wave propagation and fluid flow. The developed stochastic models and
numerical methods will improve the accuracy and predictive capabilities of the
computational tools used in different areas of science and engineering with
applications ranging from coastal and hydraulic engineering, to modeling
atmospheric and oceanographic phenomena, including hurricanes, typhoons,
tsunamis, and resulting storm surges. The obtained numerical algorithms and data
will be made available to other researchers. For the training of the next-
generation mathematical workforce, in addition to mentoring of graduate and
undergraduate students, the PIs will participate in outreach activities and will
continue to work towards increasing diversity and broadening participation
within STEM.

The main objective of the project is the development and analysis of robust
high-resolution structure-preserving stochastic models and numerical methods for
hyperbolic conservation/balance laws with uncertainty. As a primary exemplar,
the research will focus on the shallow water equations, but the designed tools
will be applicable to a wider class of conservation/balance laws, as well as to
convection-diffusion model problems, and problems more general than the shallow
water equations will be investigated. Shallow water models and related systems
are widely used in many important applications related to modeling and
prediction of the dynamics of surface flows, such as water flows in rivers,
lakes, and coastal areas. The classical system of deterministic shallow water
equations, known as the Saint-Venant system, is a nonlinear hyperbolic system of
conservation/balance laws. The Saint-Venant model can admit non-smooth solutions
that may have shocks, rarefaction waves, and if the bottom topography is
discontinuous, contact discontinuities. In the latter case, the solution may not
be unique, which makes the development of accurate and efficient algorithms more
challenging even in the one-dimensional deterministic case. Taking into account
the effects of, for example, Coriolis forces, bottom friction stresses, and
randomness/uncertainties in the data, on one hand is crucial for the design of
models and simulations with improved predictive capabilities. On the other hand,
such mathematical models can present a significant challenge for the
construction of robust numerical algorithms. Therefore, the primary goals of
this research are (1) to develop intrusive and non-intrusive robust uncertainty
quantification (UQ) techniques that will lead to physically-relevant stochastic
shallow water models and related systems; (2) to design and analyze adaptive
high-order accurate structure-preserving deterministic and stochastic solvers
for resulting models; (3) and to develop computationally efficient and
parallelizable algorithms. Advances achieved by the project will tackle
outstanding challenges in numerical methods for nonlinear conservation/balance
laws and UQ for transport problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
