
* 2207164
* The High-Order Shifted Boundary Method: A Finite Element Method for Complex Geometries without Boundary-Fitted Grids
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,08/02/2022
* Guglielmo Scovazzi,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 127,675.00

High fidelity computational methods are an invaluable tool for analysis, with
many breakthroughs in the simulation and understanding of complex physics
phenomena. However, over the past two decades, high-fidelity methods have faced
the daunting challenge of an increasing geometric complexity of the shapes to be
simulated. Additive manufacturing and optimization raised the geometric
complexity of designs to new heights, and the current algorithms are lagging
behind. Because of the specific computational infrastructure of a high-fidelity
method, setting up the geometrical description of design shapes takes more time
than the actual computation. Consequently, high-fidelity computational methods
for physics modeling have often been confined to simple design shapes. This
project is aimed at breaking this barrier, introducing a new way of
computationally model the boundary surfaces of complex geometrical objects. This
project aims to transform the field of computing as we know it, fostering a
renaissance of high-fidelity methods in scientific computing, with broad
benefits in all fields of science and engineering, including the interface of
simulation with artificial intelligence and other meta-algorithms, digital
twins, etc.

High-Order Finite Element Methods (HO-FEMs) were originally applied to
computational physics problems, with the primary goal of supporting the
scientific understanding of complex multi-scale phenomena. Later, HO-FEMs have
extended their realm of applications to engineering simulations, in which
geometrically complex design shapes are very frequent. In this case, mesh
generation with curvilinear elements is necessary to retain optimal accuracy
near boundaries. This task is rather involved, and low levels of automation are
often experienced, with a consequent slow-down of the entire design and analysis
cycle. In 2018, the Shifted Boundary Method (SBM) was developed as an
alternative to traditional methods. In the SBM, which belongs to the broad class
of approximate/immersed boundary methods, the location where boundary conditions
are applied is shifted from the true boundary to an approximate (surrogate)
boundary. At the same time, the value of boundary conditions, applied weakly, is
modified (shifted) by means of Taylor expansions to maintain optimal accuracy.
The SBM is a simple, robust, accurate and efficient algorithm for very complex
geometries, including the case of non-watertight boundary surfaces. This project
aims at developing the higher-order SBM (HO-SBM) and its mathematical analysis
of numerical stability and accuracy, for the Poisson, Stokes, Darcy, and
compressible Euler equations. HO-SBM has several advantages: first and foremost,
it does not require curved grid edges along the surrogate boundary to obtain
optimal accuracy. Complex geometries are characterized by the distance between
the surrogate boundary and true boundary of the shapes to be simulated. Hence,
the HO-SBM has a flexible integration with current CAD and mesh generation and
can help the broad diffusion of reduced-order modeling, machine learning,
uncertainty quantification, and optimization methods to complex engineering
problems. Together with the education of a graduate student in computational
mathematics and sciences, this projects also aims at attracting undergraduate
students interested using computing for design, by exposing them to simplified,
easy-to-use versions of the HO-SBM method.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
