
* 2208256
* Direct and Inverse Scattering in Biharmonic Waves: Analysis and Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2022,08/03/2022
* Peijun Li,IN,Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 84,878.00

Scattering problems, which are concerned with the effect that an inhomogeneous
medium has on an incident field, are fundamental in many scientific areas,
including geophysical inspection, medical imaging, stealth technology, and
nondestructive testing. As one of the key topics in modern mathematical physics,
scattering problems have been widely investigated, and a large number of
mathematical and numerical results are available, especially for acoustic,
elastic, and electromagnetic waves. Recently, scattering problems for biharmonic
waves have attracted much attention in the engineering and mathematical
communities due to significant applications in thin plate elasticity, such as
the design of platonic diffraction gratings and ultra-broadband elastic
cloaking. The goal of this project is to address scientific challenges posed by
scattering problems of the biharmonic plate wave equation. The nature of the
proposed research is multidisciplinary, and the results of the proposed work
will be actively shared with other researchers in mathematics, physics,
engineering, and materials science. The educational plan is centered around
providing interdisciplinary student training as well as developing an integrated
curriculum from the undergraduate level to the graduate level.

Compared with the second-order acoustic, elastic, and electromagnetic wave
equations, many direct and inverse scattering problems for the fourth-order
biharmonic wave equation are not well understood. This project will further the
modeling, theory, and algorithmic development of the direct and inverse
scattering problems of the biharmonic plate wave equation, addressing scattering
in periodic structures, scattering by multiple cavities, and inverse scattering
for random sources. Specifically, the principal investigator will develop
effective mathematical models and examine mathematical issues for the biharmonic
plate wave equation in periodic structures, design an efficient computational
approach for biharmonic wave propagation in multiple cavities, and establish
mathematical theory on the uniqueness and stability of the inverse problems for
the stochastic biharmonic wave equation. Results of this project are intended to
contribute to our understanding of complex physical and mathematical problems in
the scattering theory of thin plate elasticity. The research has the potential
for evolving new science and providing the industry with guidance to design and
fabricate new elastic devices in thin plates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
