
* 2208465
* Hybrid Computational Modeling and Advanced Numerical Methods for Biomolecular Interactions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2022,08/17/2022
* Li-Tien Cheng,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 536,946.00

This project develops rigorous scientific theories and powerful computational
tools to investigate the principal mechanisms by which drug and protein
molecules associate and dissociate. Often, a drug molecule moves around in a
crowded environment, and finds a spot of the surface of a protein to bind to,
stays there, and can also leave, unbinding from the protein. During such binding
and unbinding events, often repeated, both molecules constantly change their
internal atomic positions. They also interact with other molecules, particularly
the water molecules, in the surrounding environment. There are two key
scientific questions on such complex processes that are characterized by
multiple spatiotemporal scales and many-body effects. One is how stable the
drug-protein bound unit is. Such thermodynamic stability serves as a criterion
for searching drug molecules capable of binding to targeted proteins. The other
is how fast or slow the binding and unbinding can occur. Such kinetics has been
found recently in experiments and computer simulations to be critical to the
drug effectiveness and efficacy. For decades, the scientific communities have
made an enormous amount of effect, searching the quantitative answers to these
questions to guide the computer-aided drug design and discovery. A recent
assessment by the National Institutes of Health of the existing such computer
programs, however, has concluded that advanced scientific theories are needed
urgently to improve the practice. The success of this project can therefore
provide a solid theoretical foundation as well as computational algorithms for
drug design and discovery, potentially helping reduce the very high cost often
needed for laboratory experiments and speed up the process of drug discovery. In
addition, this highly interdisciplinary research project provides unique
opportunities for students at different levels to receive training at the
interface of mathematical, computational, and biological sciences, keeping our
nation's strength in scientific research in a highly competitive international
environment.

To tackle the complex problem of molecular association and dissociation, the
investigators will design, implement, and analyze a very fast binary level-set
method for interface relaxation to capture the molecular interfacial structures
in the framework of an advanced, variational molecular solvation theory. The new
method combines the strength of the threshold dynamics and the binary level-set
representation, and utilizes the locality of the underlying energy landscape,
and new pixel-flipping techniques, to achieve very high efficiency. They also
develop a new and hybrid computational approach to the kinetics of interface
stochastic dynamics, coupling the interfacial energy minimization by the fast
algorithm, the string method for transition pathways, and a novel, multi-state
Brownian dynamics simulations. All these are applied specifically to
investigating the molecular binding and unbinding kinetics for which some of the
conventional methods, such as the standard Brownian dynamics simulations, may
fail. It is expected that this project will advance significantly basic research
in scientific computing and numerical analysis, particularly at the interface of
dynamics and stochastic modeling. This research will help resolve some of the
bottle-neck issues in solving very complex scientific problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
