
* 2208461
* Collaborative Research: Advancing the Data-to-Distribution Pipeline for Scalable Data-Consistent Inversion to Quantify Uncertainties in Coastal Hazards
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2022,06/21/2022
* Clinton Dawson,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2025
* USD 174,600.00

Coastal hazards are a persistent threat to citizenry, industry, and governments
worldwide. Of particular concern to US interests are storm surge and flooding
from hurricanes in communities stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to the western
North Atlantic, interactions between Arctic storms and evolving sea ice coverage
impacting North American coastal communities, and oil spill spread from sources
such as tankers and deep-water drilling rigs. The ability to quantify
uncertainties in the modeling and simulation of these coastal hazards is
therefore critical to making data-informed decisions about how to best prepare,
mitigate, and respond to such hazards. The research team aims to advance state-
of-the-art mathematical, statistical, and computational capabilities to address
these applications of societal importance. Moreover, the mathematical,
statistical, and computational research are broadly applicable to a wide range
of applications of interest to both the scientific and engineering communities.
Educational impacts include the training of undergraduate and graduate students
in this field.

This project requires a multi-faceted research approach built upon a rigorous
measure-theoretic foundation to expand the application of Data-Consistent
Inversion (DCI), a methodology to identify, quantify, and reduce sources of
uncertainty for inputs (parameters) of physics-based computational models, to a
wide range of complex physical systems. One facet is the development and
analysis of a deep learning based data-to-distribution pipeline to transform
spatial-temporal data clouds into non-parametric distributions for DCI that can
incorporate optimal experimental design criteria within the pipeline. Another
facet is the development of a scalable approach to DCI that simultaneously
addresses computational issues arising from high-dimensional feature-spaces as
well as limited availability of simulated data due to computationally expensive
models. A third facet is the development of an iterative approach to DCI that
can be deployed in an operational setting to identify the most likely critical
model parameters as data become available. The PIs will implement the
algorithmic developments in public domain software for DCI and the data-to-
distribution pipeline. The PIs will primarily utilize the state-of-the-art
Advanced Circulation (ADCIRC) model and its variants for modeling coastal
hazards.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
