
* 2208321
* Analysis and Novel Finite Element Methods for Elliptic Equations with Complex Boundary Conditions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,08/01/2022
* Hengguang Li,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 220,347.00

Partial differential equations (PDEs) with complex boundary conditions (CBCs)
are essential models across scientific disciplines. By CBCs, we mean boundary
conditions (BCs) that are more complex than the basic Dirichlet or Neumann BC
with regular boundary data that are usually adopted for the illustration and
theoretical study of general-purpose numerical algorithms. These CBCs often lead
to different types of singular solutions that severely deteriorate the efficacy
of the numerical approximation. This project will develop simple, efficient, and
robust numerical methods for problems with CBCs that appear in important
applications. For example, in structural mechanics, low regularity boundary data
(e.g., discontinuities or distributions) are used to model sudden changes of
loads or concentrated forces acting on the boundary; the Robin BC, combined with
the Dirichlet BC, is used to model the impedance BC that occurs in complete
electrode models, in singularly perturbed radiation problems, and in embedding
of quantum structures into a macroscopic flow; the Ventcel BCs are used to model
heat conduction processes; and CBCs involving high-order differential operators
are essential for biharmonic equations to model the static loading of a thin
plate. It is also noted that different CBCs are important for models in fluid
dynamics, electromagnetic fields, and fluid-structure interactions in
hemodynamics applications. In addition, the PI expects that the project's
educational component will demonstrate exciting innovations in scientific
computing and encourage the future workforce from diverse backgrounds to pursue
education in STEM fields.

The research project is on regularity analysis and on the development of finite
element methods (FEMs) solving 2nd-order and 4th-order elliptic (PDEs) with
CBCs. For 2nd-order PDEs, the CBCs include low regularity boundary data and
various BCs (e.g., Dirichlet, Neumann, mixed, Robin, and Ventcel). For 4th-order
PDEs, the CBCs under consideration are classical BCs especially associated with
the biharmonic operator. These CBCs, together with the domain geometry, give
rise to some of the most common solution singularities in practice. Addressing
key analytical and computational issues, this research has two main components.
(I) Innovative numerical algorithms. The PI will develop FEMs that are simple
(easy to implement), efficient (effective in numerical approximation), and
robust (applicable to general polygonal or polyhedral domains) for various
singular solutions due to CBCs. (II) Rigorous theoretical investigation and
applications. The PI will devise new analytical tools to justify and broaden the
applications of the proposed FEMs. This includes (i) new well-posedness and
regularity estimates for problems with CBCs; (ii) optimal error analysis; (iii)
extensions to 3D and other practical models; (iv) efficient implementations in
high-performance computing environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
