
* 2208046
* Numerical methods for incompressible multiphase flows applied to magnetohydrodynamics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,08/04/2022
* LOIC CAPPANERA,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2025
* USD 170,913.00

The development of Earth-friendly technologies such as electric cars leads to
greater consumption of electric power. To address this, the development of
renewable energies, such as wind, solar and tidal waves, is a key societal
challenge. These sources of energies are highly intermittent by nature and bring
more stress to an electric grid that needs to balance demand and supply with a
limited or saturated energy storage capacity. Thus, the development of green
energy is tied to the development of efficient large scale energy storage
devices. In this context, this project aims to develop efficient numerical tools
that will help to design effective and robust liquid metal batteries, a
promising type of battery that is considered for grid-scale energy storage
devices. These numerical methods will model the action of various phenomena that
arise in such batteries (e.g. multiphase flows, thermal-solutal convection,
magnetohydrodynamics). Thus, this project also has applications in geophysics
and metallurgy industry by improving our understanding of various instabilities
that arises in liquid metals. This project will provide research training
opportunities for graduate students to introduce them to the development,
analysis and application of state of the art numerical methods in an
interdisciplinary environment.

In this project, the PI will use theoretical and computational mathematics to
develop and analyze numerical methods for solving multiphysics problems applied
to magnetohydrodynamics setups in energy storage industry and geophysics. High-
order numerical methods will be developed to approximate the solutions of
nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in fluid dynamics that involve space-
time dependent coefficients. These methods will use sequential semi-implicit
algorithms and will be made suitable for spectral and high-order finite element
methods. The objectives of this project are organized around four research
directions: (1) Analysis and development of new numerical methods to approximate
incompressible multiphase flows where the density and viscosity of fluids vary
in space and time; (2) Modeling of multiphysics mechanisms that arise in a
liquid metal battery, a promising grid-scale energy storage device. This
includes the development of multiphase algorithms for thermodynamics and
compositional (solutal) convection problems; (3) Integration of the above
techniques in the massively parallel code SFEMaNS and their applications to
liquid metal batteries and geophysics setups that involve magnetohydrodynamics
effects; (4) Transition of the code SFEMaNS to current high performance
computing standards (multithreading, cache handling, SIMD vectorisation, etc),
and distribution to the magneto-hydrodynamic scientific community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
