
* 2208612
* Collaborative Research: Nonconvex Models for Structured Sensing: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,05/23/2022
* HanQin Cai,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 12/31/2022
* USD 57,563.00

The rapid advance of technology has enabled more than ever the ability to
collect large amounts of data. While the abundance of such data is advantageous,
it brings forth several computational challenges. One challenge is the fact that
data might contain numerous missing entries. This is the case for instance when
using physical measurement devices with a limited range or in collecting user
preferences for a product where we lack complete information. One line of
methods that has proved to be useful for this problem is matrix completion
algorithms which predict missing entries with minimalistic assumptions on the
data. However, in problems such as structure prediction and recommendation
system with side information, the measurements are not entry-wise. Specifically,
the observations are an aggregate of some entries of the underlying data, i.e.,
rather than directly observing the entries of the data, the user has access to
certain combinations of these entries. This project aims to study this problem
which is well known as the matrix sensing problem. The majority of previous
works consider the case where measurements of the data are missing at random or
assume that the measurement protocol itself is random. Motivated by practical
applications, this project considers a realistic setup where the measurements
are structured and deterministic. A key goal of this project is to advance the
state of art theory and computation of matrix sensing by studying new
optimization algorithms. Another aim of the project is to apply the constructed
framework to robust structure prediction and machine learning.

This project seeks to study scalable non-convex methods for a class of
generalized matrix recovery problems. In particular, PIs are interested in low-
rank matrix sensing problems with deterministically structured measurements
under various settings. The main approach is based on formulating the
optimization problem with respect to a deterministic measurement basis and its
associated dual basis. This yields a well-posed problem under some mild
conditions. The project is centered on three objectives. In the first part, the
project studies the local convergence of a Riemannian gradient descent algorithm
that directly optimizes over the manifold of low-rank matrices. The recovery
guarantee then will depend mainly on the spectral properties of the basis and
the dual basis, the sampling scheme, and the initialization. Tight estimation of
the spectral properties and effective initialization method will be investigated
by bridging connections to spectral graph theory. The second objective is to
design an algorithm tailored for the Euclidean distance geometry (EDG) problem
which aims to estimate the configuration of points given partial information
about pairwise distances. EDG is a representative problem that utilizes
deterministically structured measurements. By leveraging the special structure
of EDG, the project aims to design optimally efficient algorithms and establish
theoretical analysis for the exact recovery of the point configuration. The
third objective considers the setting where the measurements might be sparsely
corrupted. The project aims to develop fast and robust algorithms tailored to
this case and carry out the necessary analysis for recovery guarantees. To
realize these objectives, the project leverages tools from high-dimensional
probability, Riemannian optimization, numerical analysis, and spectral graph
theory. The project will provide opportunities to train undergraduate and
graduate students with interests in distance geometry, optimization theory, and
computational science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
