
* 2208551
* Structure-Preserving Hybrid Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,08/02/2022
* Ari Stern,MO,Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 237,648.00

Finite element methods are among the cornerstones of modern scientific
computing, combining high performance with strong theoretical guarantees of
accuracy and stability. Their applications include several areas of Federal
strategic interest: materials and manufacturing, biomedical engineering and
biotechnology, structural engineering and civil infrastructure, environmental
engineering, and more. They are widely used by scientists and engineers in
academia, industry, and national laboratories to simulate large, complex
physical systems. However, in order for the simulations produced by these
methods to be physically meaningful and trustworthy, it is desirable that they
capture certain fundamental physical laws present in the original systems.
Certain systems satisfy "conservation laws," which state that some quantity
(like mass, energy, or charge) can move through space but not appear or
disappear spontaneously, while other systems satisfy "dissipation laws" that
require these quantities to grow or decay at a certain rate (e.g., decay of
energy due to friction). Although classical finite element methods make it
difficult to express these physical laws, the PI has shown that "hybrid" finite
element methods provide a way to do so. In this project, the PI will conduct
further investigations into hybrid finite element methods, developing and
analyzing computational techniques for preserving these important physical
structures. The success of this project would lead to new computational methods
and improved understanding of current methods for a wide variety of high-value
scientific applications, with important ramifications for computational physics
and engineering.

Many partial differential equations (PDEs), particularly those encountered in
physical applications, contain local symmetries, conservation laws, and related
structures. At first glance, some of these local structures appear difficult for
a finite element method to capture, and consequently, much of the research in
this direction has been restricted to finite difference methods on rectangular
grids. However, in recent years, the PI has developed a successful research
program showing that hybridization provides a route around the apparent
obstacles to local-structure-preserving finite elements. This project will
investigate several new questions in this direction, organized around two main
themes. (1) Local conservation laws with quadratic densities are common in
Hamiltonian PDEs, because they arise from linear point symmetries. However,
conventional finite element discretization breaks local symmetry, resulting only
in global conservation laws. The PI aims to circumvent this obstacle by using
hybrid methods, and to extend this to non-conservative systems where a quadratic
quantity is dissipated rather than conserved. (2) The PI and his collaborators
have recently succeeded in hybridizing finite element exterior calculus (FEEC),
which uses differential forms to unify several families of methods for Laplace-
type operators. The PI will investigate the application of hybridized FEEC
methods to Hamiltonian PDEs, specifically focusing on multisymplectic structure
preservation, and to investigate hybrid FEEC methods with strongly (rather than
merely weakly) conservative fluxes, including nonconforming and hybridizable
discontinuous Galerkin (HDG) methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
