
* 2208219
* Collaborative Research: Time Accurate Fluid-Structure Interactions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2022,08/02/2022
* Martina Bukac,IN,University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 224,923.00

In realistic problems describing fluid flow, sometimes the dynamics are not
known, or the variables are changing rapidly. Hence, to accurately compute the
solution, one might need to use small temporal discretization parameters. For
example, in simulations of blood flow, the pressure rapidly increases and then
decreases during the systole, which lasts 3/8 of the cardiac cycle, followed by
slower and smaller changes in the pressure during diastole, lasting 5/8 of the
cardiac cycle. To accurately capture the peak systolic flow, a small time step
has to be used in that interval. However, that same time step might be
unnecessary small during diastole and could lead to longer computational times.
Therefore, robust adaptive time-stepping is central to accurate and efficient
long-term predictions of the solution. The adaptive time-stepping methods for
partial differential equations describing flow problems are under-investigated
and this project will make a major contribution in that field. The methods
developed in this project will be used to model problems involving transport and
fluid-elastic/poroelastic structure interaction, such as the transport of
contaminants in hydrological systems where surface water percolates through
rocks and sand, transport of nutrients and oxygen between capillaries and
tissue, or spread of a disease across a border. This project will involve the
training of graduate students.

The focus of this project is the development of adaptive time-stepping methods
for two classes of coupled flow problems: the fluid-porous medium coupled
problems and the fluid-structure interaction problems. A monolithic and a
partitioned method will be developed for the fluid-porous medium problem
described using the Stokes-Darcy system. Partitioned numerical methods will be
developed for the fluid-structure interaction problems with both thin and thick
structures. The proposed methods will be semi-discretized in time based on the
refactorized Cauchy?s one-legged theta-like method, which is B-stable when used
with a variable time step. Furthermore, when theta is 0.5, the method is also
second-order accurate and conserves all linear and quadratic Hamiltonians.
However, the application of this method to coupled problems, especially when
partitioned methods are designed, has to be carefully performed to allow the use
of black-box and legacy codes. The proposed methods will be mathematically and
computationally analyzed. Various adaptive strategies will be considered. The
performance of each method will be investigated with respect to the parameters
in the problem. In both classes of multi-physics problems, the underlying
equations will be coupled with a transport equation. The proposed techniques
will also be applied to the transport problem, with a particular attention to
mass and energy conservation. Conservative properties of the transport problem
will be investigated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
