
* 2208438
* Development and Application of Modern Numerical Methods for Nonlinear Hyperbolic Systems of Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,08/05/2022
* Alina Chertock,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 368,594.00

The goal of this project is to develop new mathematical and computational tools
for a large class of hyperbolic conservation and balance laws and related
problems. Such systems arise in a wide variety of applications ranging from
classical fluid dynamics (gas dynamics including multicomponent and multiphase
compressible flows, many shallow water models including rotating shallow water
equations, thermal rotating shallow water equations, shallow magnetohydrodynamic
equations, and others), astrophysics, meteorology, oceanography, atmospheric
sciences, to electromagnetism and modern biological models. While the PI is
planning to work on several particular applications, the main focus of the
research will be in the development of novel numerical methods and computational
techniques that can be applied to a wide class of applied problems arising in
today?s science. The project has also a potential to contribute to the emergence
of accurate, robust and efficient algorithms and will overall increase the
practical applicability on numerical methods. This project involves the training
of graduate students.

Many practical applications, especially in the cases of high space dimensions,
require development and implementation of special numerical methods that are not
only consistent with the governing system of partial differential equations, but
also preserve certain structural and asymptotic properties of the underlying
problem at the discrete level. The project is aimed at the development of
efficient high-order methods for systems of conservation and balance laws whose
basic properties go beyond consistency, stability and convergence. This will be
achieved by designing special numerical techniques for (i) finding a delicate
balance between the numerical diffusion and dispersion to ensure sharp?yet non-
oscillatory?resolution of shock and contact waves, while achieving a high order
accuracy in smooth regions, (ii) exactly preserving physically relevant steady-
state solutions and involution constraints, (iii) establishing asymptotic
preserving properties in certain stiff regimes, and (iv) analyzing the influence
of uncertainties in problems with random data. The design and implementation of
the new numerical schemes will be based on high-order shock-capturing finite-
volume and finite-difference methods, accurate and efficient time integrators,
and stochastic Galerkin and collocation methods, utilizing the main advantages
of each of these methods in the context of the studied problems. The derivation
of such numerical techniques is fundamental for understanding many physical
phenomena and will contribute to their quantitative and qualitative study.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
