
* 2208467
* Hybrid Kinetic Monte Carlo Methods with Applications in Biofabrication and Epidemics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2022,08/09/2022
* Yi Sun,SC,University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2025
* USD 176,321.00

The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has rapidly spread throughout the world. By
July 30, 2022, more than 577 million cases and over 6.4 million fatalities have
been reported, making it one of the deadliest pandemics to date. Over recent
decades other epidemics such as HIV/AIDS, hepatitis, SARS, H1N1 swine flu,
Ebola, Zika, measles, malaria, and tuberculosis have also caused tens of
millions of deaths. To combat the pandemics of emergent and re-emergent
infectious diseases, mathematical modeling and simulation plays an important
role in predicting, assessing, and controlling potential outbreaks. Endothelial
network formation is a critical process in fabricating functional vascular
constructs, and it is a very crucial impediment in the state-of-the-art
biofabrication technology. The goal of this project is to develop new hybrid
kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) methods and algorithms for the study of complex
biological systems and problems arising in epidemics and biofabrication. This
project will provide multidisciplinary research training to graduate and
undergraduate students interested in both computational mathematics and
mathematical biology/computational epidemiology.

In the thrust (1), to study spatial and temporal dynamics of epidemics, the PI
proposes to develop a hybrid KMC method with focuses on the mobility and
heterogeneity of individuals and spatial structures as critical aspects in
determining possible outcomes for an epidemic. The proposed model describes the
motion of individuals on a discrete lattice with moving rates between
neighboring sites and couple the SIR-like transition mechanism to describe the
conversion between individuals' health states. In the thrust (2), the PI plans
to develop another hybrid KMC model with focuses on cell motility, cell-matrix
and cell-cell interactions in endothelial network formation. The approach
combines a hybrid mechanochemical model with the KMC algorithm to enhance the
capability of the computational modeling platform in studying cell-cell and
cell-matrix interactions significantly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
