
* 2208373
* RUI: Geometric Optimization Involving Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2022,05/25/2022
* Chiu-Yen Kao,CA,Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2025
* USD 244,985.00

Optimal geometric design provides a vast number of interesting and challenging
mathematical problems. One of the famous problems goes back to 18th Century.
J.-L. Lagrange formulated the problem to maximize the critical load of a rod of
variable cross-sectional area with given length and volume. Another famous
classic example is that L. Rayleigh conjectured that the disk should minimize
the fundamental frequency of a membrane among all shapes of equal area, more
than a century ago. Other recent applications include mechanical vibration,
design of optical resonator, photonic crystal waveguides, determination of
favorable and unfavorable regions in population dynamics, soap films and minimal
surfaces, drug design, and image segmentation. Numerical approaches for these
kinds of problems require both forward solvers and optimization solvers. The
forward solvers are numerical approaches to solve problems on a given setting of
geometric parameters or domain. The optimization solvers aim to find the optimal
geometric design, which maximizes the design objective.

In this proposal, the aim is to study geometric optimization of p-Laplacian
Poisson?s equations, Laplace Beltrami operator, Steklov problems, and their
applications in optimal radiotherapy design and free boundary minimal surfaces.
The forward solvers are based on finite element methods and methods of
particular solutions while the optimization solvers are based on rearrangement
methods, shape derivatives, and sensitivity analysis of conformal factor,
conformal classes, and metrics. The PI will study a wide class of problems
arising from many applications including (1) optimization of total displacement,
(2) convergence rate study of rearrangement methods for optimization problems,
(3) optimal radiotherapy design, (4) maximizing conformal and topological
Laplace-Beltrami eigenvalues on closed Manifolds, and (5) extremal Steklov
eigenvalue problems and free boundary minimal surfaces. The project will advance
the development of optimization solvers based on rearrangement methods, shape
derivatives, and sensitivity analysis and provide tools to solve aforementioned
applications. Also, the obtained results will be integrated to develop new
curriculums on numerical analysis and partial differential equations at
Claremont McKenna College. The PI will supervise both undergraduate and graduate
students. In addition, the PI will organize applied math seminars, working group
seminars, and a series of minisymposium at coming AIMS, ICIAM, SIAM, and other
international conferences to engage interested scientists, including those from
underrepresented groups. The PI and her students will also outreach to K-12
students via Gateway to Exploring Mathematical Sciences (GEMS) program at
Claremont.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
