
* 2208504
* Machine Learning for Effective Computation in Multiscale Hyperbolic Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2022,07/13/2022
* Bjorn Engquist,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2025
* USD 449,995.00

In physical science and engineering applications, it is often necessary to solve
systems of differential equations that involve many temporal and length scales.
Direct numerical simulations for these equations are often computationally
infeasible. This research program aims to reduce the overall wall-clock
computation time for simulations of multiscale dynamical systems found in
applications by developing algorithms that leverage recent advancements in
machine learning and parallel-in-time algorithms. The goal is to provide a
systematic approach that can be generalized to other multiscale time-dependent
problems and improve the efficacy of a class of existing methodologies. The
algorithms will enable realistic computer simulations in a class of important
applications, including molecular dynamics and seismic imaging, on massively
parallel exascale computer architectures. The machine learning aspects of this
project will attract students to scientific computing and stimulate further
interdisciplinary work. Such training will be essential for preparing the future
generation of researchers in scientific computing in the era of data science and
artificial intelligence.

This project concerns multiscale oscillatory dynamical systems, in which phase
errors typically dominate the numerical solutions and do not dissipate in time,
making accurate long-time simulations very difficult. This research program aims
to construct effective solution operators for multiscale dynamical systems by
using modern machine learning approaches combined with good training examples
that properly sample the physics and causality in the system. Accordingly, a
central focus of this research program is to develop a framework for the
generation of effective training data that correctly sample the strong causality
in the hyperbolic systems. The flow-based ensemble sampling strategy under study
exploits the physical properties of the targeted systems. The program also
includes a ?self-improving? iterative procedure, which not only enables massive
parallel-in-time computation but also improves the accuracy of machine learning-
based computations. The project will directly involve two graduate students and
the mentoring of undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
