
* 2208056
* Computational Tools for Exploring Eigenvector Localization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,08/02/2022
* Jeffrey Ovall,OR,Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 381,179.00

Vibrations in complex systems are best understood in terms of superpositions of
stationary waves whose amplitudes vary in time. These stationary waves are
eigenvectors (modes of vibration) of an associated time-independent differential
operator, and their corresponding eigenvalues represent energies associated with
these modes of vibration. A better understanding of where such eigenvectors are
likely to localize, and for which eigenvalues this localization occurs, is of
practical interest in the design of structures having desired acoustic or
electro-magnetic properties: sound-mitigating outdoor barriers and next
generation organic LEDs and solar cells are examples of this design principle in
action. Computational tools for exploring eigenvector localization phenomena are
an essential component of simulations guiding design decisions, but such tools
are very new and very few. The work supported by this grant will provide new
techniques for a much broader exploration of localization phenomena than is
currently feasible, allowing for exploration much deeper into the spectrum for a
broader class of operators/models, with built-in mechanisms for
accepting/rejecting localization claims based on measurable quantities.

This project focuses on the following fundamental task: Given a subdomain, a
small tolerance and a finite interval, find all eigenvalue/eigenvector pairs
(eigenpairs) of the operator whose eigenvalue is in the interval and whose
eigenvector is localized in the subdomain to within the given tolerance. A
complex and compact perturbation of the original operator is constructed such
that any eigenpair of the original operator satisfying the conditions above will
have an "echo" for the new operator, i.e. there will be an eigenpair of the new
operator whose eigenvalue is in a well-defined "target region" of the complex
plane determined by the localization conditions, and most(!) eigenpairs of the
original operator not satisfying the localization condition will not have such
an echo. A contour-integral based eigenvalue solver is then used to efficiently
identify eigenpairs of the new operator whose eigenvalues are within the target
region. This constitutes the first phase of the method, and empirical evidence
already strongly indicates that most unlikely candidates are filtered out in
this phase, and all likely candidates are maintained. The remaining candidates
are then (cheaply) post-processed to determine the eigenpairs of the original
operator of which they were echos. A final simple check of these eigenpairs
determines which are ultimately accepted. Several aspects of this approach are
embarrassingly parallel, and that fact will be exploited to conduct more
thorough investigations of localization than have been previously attempted. The
project involves the development of software that will be made publicly
available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
