
* 2212165
* Conference: Women in Scientific Computing on Complex Physical and Biological Systems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2022,08/03/2022
* Chunmei Wang,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 27,445.00

The workshop "Women in Scientific Computing on Complex Physical and Biological
Systems'' will be held on the campus of the University of Florida (UF) in
Gainesville, FL from Monday October 24 to Wednesday October 26, 2022. The
workshop will bring together leading experts from various areas of computational
mathematics, life science, computer science, and engineering to vigorously
discuss recent developments in scientific computing on complex physical and
biological systems with applications to climate change, clean energy, and
biotechnology as well as to advance the state-of-the-art developments in these
rapidly developing fields. The workshop will provide a cross-disciplinary forum
for catalyzing the research in scientific computing on complex physical and
biological systems, facilitating rapid diffusion of new mathematical and
computational methods into life science, computer science, and engineering, and
stimulating more researchers to work in these important areas. The workshop will
consist of presentations, posters, panel discussions, group discussions and
tutorial sessions which will stimulate an intensive exchange of ideas, foster
fruitful interactions, identify challenges, promote interdisciplinary
collaborations and initiate joint research projects. This award supports the
attendance of both researchers and graduate students, with priorities given to
female researchers, graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, early career
researchers, minority researchers and researchers who do not have other federal
support. Scientific computing is a combination of computing tools, techniques,
and theories to solve mathematical models arising from real applications in
science and engineering with the help of a computer. Computational mathematics
is not only the application of mathematics for solving challenging real-world
problems but also the discovery of new mathematical theories originating from
such applications. Mathematical modeling and simulations form a predictive
methodology that supplements real experiments as indispensable power for new
discoveries. Simulation performance relies not only on computational power but
also on the algorithm efficiency and reliability for the underlying complex
systems modeled by PDEs. Designing robust and efficient algorithms is crucial
for characterizing many phenomena in science and engineering. Life science is an
intellectually rich field that has been advanced remarkably through a
synergistic interplay between the deep understanding of biology and mathematics.
However, biologists are overwhelmed by the amount of experimental data. New
methods for data-management and quantitative theories are needed to interpret
and contextualize their observations. A variety of challenges in scientific
computing related to problems in life science, such as developing predictive
models for disorder detection, feature dimensionality reduction, have emerged in
recent years. These issues and many other open problems will be discussed among
the diverse group of scientists participating in the workshop.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
