
* 2237628
* CAREER: Ensemble Kalman Methods and Bayesian Optimization in Inverse Problems and Data Assimilation
* DMS,STATISTICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 02/01/2023,01/26/2023
* Daniel Sanz-Alonso,IL,University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 01/31/2028
* USD 80,229.00

Blending complex predictive models with data is essential in many applications,
including numerical weather forecasting, climate science, petroleum engineering,
signal processing, and medical imaging. The challenges posed by the increasing
complexity of forward models and dynamical systems in inverse problems and data
assimilation can be mitigated by the development of computational methods that
are derivative-free and require few model evaluations. This project is concerned
with two important families of cost-efficient, derivative-free algorithms:
ensemble Kalman methods and Bayesian optimization. Rigorous mathematical
analyses will established which will contribute to the understanding of these
algorithms, determining their potential and limitations in high-dimensional
inverse problems and data assimilation. Methodological contributions will focus
on the design of novel algorithms and computational frameworks to merge
derivative-free optimization with machine learning. Numerical implementations of
these new algorithms will be made publicly available. Beyond inverse problems
and data assimilation, the principal investigator will also investigate the
potential of ensemble Kalman methods and Bayesian optimization in large-scale
scientific computing problems where gradients are unavailable or expensive to
compute, and in data science applications where privacy is a concern. A central
component of the project is the integration of education and research. The
principal investigator will engage in the new Preceptor Program, a collaborative
initiative to build data science curricula at minority-serving community
colleges in Chicago. This program will create pathways for community college
students from underrepresented groups to transfer to the University of Chicago.
In addition, the investigator will complete two books aimed at graduate and
upper-level undergraduate students that will incorporate topics drawn from this
project. Mentorship of graduate students and development of graduate-level
courses is a core part of the project.

The project will consist of two interrelated research thrusts on ensemble Kalman
methods and Bayesian optimization. Ensemble Kalman methods are popular
algorithms in the geophysical sciences, where they are often used with a small
ensemble size to keep the number of model evaluations low. The first research
thrust of the project will develop a new comprehensive non-asymptotic analysis
of ensemble Kalman methods that rigorously explains when and why a small
ensemble size may suffice. Previous analyses have focused instead on large
ensemble asymptotics that cannot explain the practical success of these
algorithms with a small ensemble size. Methodological contributions of this
research thrust will be focused on deriving principled frameworks to blend
ensemble Kalman methods and machine learning, as well as novel regularization
techniques based on hierarchical formulations of inverse problems and data
assimilation. The proposed non-asymptotic theory will establish ensemble size
requirements for these new methods. The second research thrust of the project
will advance Bayesian optimization in graphical and manifold settings by
developing new geometry-aware kernels, acquisition functions, and convergence
guarantees. The PI will use tools from computational harmonic analysis to obtain
approximation guarantees for stochastic processes on manifolds and tools from
information theory to obtain regret bounds under mis-specified models. Finally,
the investigator will explore synergistic ways to combine ensemble Kalman
methods and Bayesian optimization, leveraging the strengths of both families of
algorithms to mitigate their weaknesses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
