
* 2310340
* Efficient Hybridizable Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Phase Field Fluid Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 12/01/2022,12/14/2022
* Daozhi Han,NY,SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 152,848.00

Multiphase flow is ubiquitous in natural phenomena and industrial applications.
Common examples include wave-breaking and sloshing, contaminant transport in
aquifers, oil recovery in petroleum engineering, drug delivery in blood flow,
gas-particle flow in combustion reactors, exhaust management in Polymer
Electrolyte Membrane fuel cell technology, and so forth. The diffuse interface
fluid models have become increasingly popular in the numerical modeling of
interfacial phenomena associated with multiphase flows. They are able to capture
smooth transitions of fluid interface, and simulations can be carried out on a
fixed grid without explicit interface tracking. A particular challenge in
solving diffuse interface models is that the diffusive interface of small width
often exhibits instability such as bubble merging or splitting. Traditional high
order methods are prone to spurious oscillations around diffusive interfaces
which can pollute the numerical solution beyond the interface region and even
cause blow-up of the code due to negative viscosity, density or mobility. The
aim of this project is to develop high order numerical methods that can
accurately capture moving interfaces of multiphase flow.

Real-world applications see both diffusion dominated flows and advection
dominated flows. The investigator first develops and analyzes provably
superconvergent hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin methods (HDG) for solving
diffuse interface fluid models in the diffusion-dominated regime. The key idea
in the design is to approximate solution variables by higher order polynomials
than those for the numerical traces and gradient variables, and to explore local
projection based stabilization. The PI then designs stabilized high order HDG
methods effected with the Scalar Auxiliary Variable (SAV) time-stepping schemes
for advection-dominated flows. The methods stabilize advection in the nonlinear
fourth order advection-diffusion equation while preserve the underlying energy
laws. The stabilized SAV-HDG algorithms enable diffuse interface methods to
accurately capture sharp fronts and unstable interfaces in the advection-
dominated regime, and allow efficient parallel computation of smaller systems at
each time step. Finally the PI develops and implements fast nonlinear HDG
multigrid solvers for diffuse interface fluid models. The practical solvers will
further address the lack of efficient iterative solvers/preconditioners for HDG
methods Graduate students participate in the work of this project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
