
* 8619562
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometry Supercomputer Project
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM, SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE, NSF PLANNING & EVALUATION
* 09/01/1987,03/21/1991
* Albert Marden,MN,University of Minnesota Saint Paul
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 08/31/1993
* USD 2,377,336.00

This award will provide support for a group of mathematicians and computer
scientists working on problems related to geometry. The broad objectives (i) to
develop and understanding of geometry and algorithms in geometry, and (ii) to
carry out work on the computation of geometric structures and on the sythesis
and analysis of images of these structures. The role of the computer in this
effort is both for explication as well as an experimental tool to advance the
research. The novelty of this project derives from the use of a supercomputer in
the generation and display of geometric constructs such as fractal sets, Dehn
surgery space, Julia sets Mandelbrot sets and pleated surfaces. A welding of the
mathematical theories of Kleinian groups, Teichmuller theory, analytic dynamics,
combinatorial group theory and 3-manifold theory lies at the foundation of this
project. In addition it will mark the first time that mathematical researchers
located at diverse universities and in several countries will be combining their
talents on such a large project. Large scale communication links will be used
extensively in this joint effort. Currently available algorithms for the
purposes envisioned here are insufficient. In addition to the planned
theoretical and graphical experimentation, work will be done in developing
advanced algorithms addressing problems of combinatorial complexity and more
general language design to establish portable software and advance understanding
of fundamental data structures. After an initial set-up period, graduate
students and postdoctoral associates will be incorporated into the project. The
interdisciplinary research experience will provide a model for future large-
scale initiatives in the mathematical sciences.
