
* 8704196
* Numerical Linear Algebra for Signal Processing and Integral Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1987,05/26/1988
* William Gragg,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 12/31/1989
* USD 142,800.00

Many questions in signal processing can be formulated as problems for positive
definite Toeplitz and unitary (or orthogonal) Hessenberg matrices. For example,
systems of linear filtering, recursive estimation, time series analysis, as well
as in image processing. Furthmore, Pisarenko frequency estimates, also of
interest in signal processing, can be computed using Toeplitz and unitary
Hessenberg matrices as follows: a Toeplitz eigenvalue problem is solved; the
Schur parameters associated with the orthogonal polynomials defined implicitly
by the Toeplitz matrix are then used to construct a certain unitary Hessenberg
matrix; the eigenvalues of this matrix are the frequency estimates sought. Using
the close connection between the theory of polynomials orthogonal on the unit
circle and these problems of linear algebra, the investigators have already
developed competitive numerical methods for computing eignevalues and
eigenvectors of unitary Hessenberg matrices for solving the inverse eigenvalue
problem for unitary matrices, and for solving systems of linear equations with
positive definite symmetric Toeplitz matrices. The purpose of this work is to
further speed up the algorithms for the above problems and to investigate how
they can be implemented efficiently on computers with vector and parallel
architectures. The investigators also wish to gain a better understanding about
the numerical properties, such as stability, of some of the algorithms mentioned
so that fast reliable computer programs can be developed. The work should result
in published fast stable algorithms for the above problems. Another application
of fast Toeplitz solvers is the solution of integral equations. Iterative
schemes with Toeplitz matrices as preconditioners will also be investigated.
Encouraging preliminary results for an integral equation of plane potential
theory on a piecewise smooth curve currently exist. This is a model problem for
integral equations on a piecewise smooth curve or surface with a displacement
kernel. Such integral equations are common in applications of the boundary
element method. The project will investigate when Toeplitz matrices make good
preconditioners. More generally, it will continue the investigation in and
develop fast solution methods for integral equations by exploiting the structure
of the system of equations obtained after discretization. Both direct and
iterative schemes will be considered.
