
* 8711495
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Cusp Volumes in Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 03/15/1988,03/08/1988
* Colin Adams,MA,Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 08/31/1990
* USD 48,100.00

Adams will continue the study of cusp volumes in hyperbolic 3-manifolds. It has
been conjectured by W. Thurston that all 3-manifolds can be decomposed into
components, each of which has one of eight geometries. He has already proven
this conjecture for large classes of 3- manifolds. A complete classification of
the 3-manifolds with seven of those geometries has already been completed. The
largest and richest case corresponds to those manifolds with the eighth
geometry, namely hyperbolic geometry. A hyperbolic 3-manifold has a well-defined
volume, which is an invariant for the topology of the manifold. The set of
volumes of all finite volume hyperbolic 3-manifolds is a well-ordered subset of
the reals. Hence it is of interest to determine some of the hyperbolic manifolds
of low volume, a problem suggested by Thurston. A noncompact hyperbolic
3-manifold has additional invariants called cusp volumes. They offer a means of
determining manifolds of low volume. This idea has already been utilized by the
investigator to determine the smallest hyperbolic manifolds of one or two cusps.
The project will continue investigations along these lines both by extending
current computer programs in order to create more examples for study and also by
utilizing the examples to point the way to proofs that certain manifolds are the
smallest manifolds in their classes. In particular, a goal of the project is to
prove that the figure-eight knot complement and its sister manifold are the
noncompact orientable hyperbolic 3-manifolds of minimal volume, also a
conjecture of Thurston's.
