
* 8800800
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Harmonic and Parabolic Measure to Problems in Function Theory and PartialDifferential Equations
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1988,07/18/1990
* John Lewis,KY,University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1991
* USD 78,908.00

This project involves mathematical research combining certain advances in
measure theory with partial differential equations and classical function
theory. Problems in the latter area stem from several sources. One is the
Littlewood conjecture which predicts the mean value of the spherical derivature
of polynomials and rational functions. The conjecture has been shown to be sharp
for rational functions but not for polynomials. Work will be done in obtaining
sharp constants in the rational case and working out the correct power of the
polynomial's degree in the other. These results are expected to derive from
better estimates for harmonic measure. These should follow from recent work on
the dimension of sets which can support harmonic measure. Work on elliptic
partial differential equations will be concerned with measuring the growth of
solutions to the biharmonic equation in terms of the Riesz capacity of set where
the gradient vanishes. Sharp results for lower dimensions have been obtained. In
the area of parabolic and heat equations, the question of absolute continuity of
the parabolic measure with respect to Lebesgue measure will be taken up. That
this is not always the case has already been established for two-dimensional
domains. In this context, good necessary and sufficient conditions on the
boundary for absolute continuity have been established. The present work looks
to extend the theory to higher dimensions. Applications to the representation
theory for solutions of parabolic equations will follow.
