
* 8804580
* Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Computational Aspects of Complex Analysis; San Diego, California, August 13-18, 1988
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1988,06/27/1988
* Burton Rodin,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1989
* USD 18,000.00

This award will provide support for a mathematical conference to be held at the
University of Arizona in January 1989. The purpose of this meeting is to bring
together experts in the field of complex analysis to present and discuss ways in
which computers are affecting research in this field. The conference will be
international in scope combining both theoreticians and computational experts.
The need for this gathering has arisen, as in many other areas of mathematics,
because of the sharp impact computing has made on attitudes of researchers and
their approaches to solving long-standing problems. Examples of phenomena in
complex analysis which could not be analyzed by hand have been worked out. New
insights, conjectures and, eventually, new theorems have resulted. In addition,
computers have created a demand for new methods which would have been of no use
in precomputer days. Intense activity in numerous locations has led to research
aimed at solving similar problems from different computational points of view.
This is particularly noticeable in the area of conformal mapping where improved
techniques lead to immediate application in grid approximations to problems in
partial differential equations. It is vital that groups such as these be brought
together to compare their accomplishments and to introduce others to computation
as a valuable tool which can make important contributions to their fundamental
research.
