
* 9020220
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Bifurcations of Forced Oscillator Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1992,07/07/1992
* Bruce Peckham,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1995
* USD 40,000.00

Families of maps generated by periodically forced oscillators undergo a rich
and fascinating set of bifurcations. The investigator proposes to develop new
numerical and analytical tools to further investigate the bifurcations of these
forced oscillator systems. Current numerical "continuation" routines are able to
trace out one-parameter curves of local bifurcations of fixed and periodic
points for orbits of low period, typically less than four or five. Proposed work
will include development of new routines that are expected to trace out
bifurcations curves for higher period orbits. These new "high period" routines
will then be used for locating "global bifurcations," where invariant manifolds,
typically a stable one and an unstable one, become tangent before crossing. Once
developed, these routines will enable a much more automatic and detailed
bifurcation study, not only of maps generated by forced oscillators, but also of
any two-parameter family of maps. Many processes in science and engineering can
be mathematically categorized as "forced oscillator systems." One example of an
oscillator is a pendulum, because it swings back and forth, or oscillates. We
usually think of a pendulum as having a fixed support (the nail in the wall to
which the string with a weight is tied), but if we keep moving the location of
the support, we say the pendulum is being "forced;" if we move the support in a
repeating pattern, such as back and forth, then we have a "periodically forced
oscillator." It turns out that the resulting motion depends critically on how
fast the support is moved back and forth (the forcing frequency) and how far it
is moved back and forth (the forcing amplitude). Fairly simple mathematical
models also exhibit this same behavior, including the sensitivity to changes in
"parameters" analogous to forcing frequency and amplitude. Changes in the
qualitative behavior of the system (how the pendulum bob moves) that occur as
the parameters are varied are called "bifurcations." Much is known about these
bifurcations, but much is still unknown. The investigator proposes to fill in
some of the missing gaps in this area. Results will help explain observed
behavior in any process that can be classified mathematically as a forced
oscillator system.
