
* 9057429
* Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator Award
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1990,06/22/1995
* John Grove,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1996
* USD 237,500.00

The Presidential Young Investigator will conduct research in the area of
computational fluid dynamics; in particular, he will study shock diffractions
and bifurcations as different shocks interact with each other and with fluid
interfaces and vortex sheets. This is very important and timely research, and it
is of sufficient complexity that the PI will employ analytical methods from
geometry and bifurcation theory, in addition to computational techniques. The
goals of the research are twofold. The first goal is to discover different types
of wave patterns that result from the complex interactions of shocks and fluid
structures, while the second goal is to develop numerical methods that allow one
to follow the evolution in time of the waves generated by the interactions. Many
phenomena in fluid dynamics arise out of the interactions of different types of
waves with each other and with internal fluid structures such as interfaces.
What makes these interactions difficult to study mathematically is that they are
described by systems of nonlinear differential equations, and so one must use
computers in order to generate solutions. But this is tricky also, because
computers can often generate meaningless information, unless the numerical
methods used are reliable. The PI will study such problems with "intelligent"
numerical methods. These are methods that have sufficient analytical and
physical theory built into them that they produce sharp approximations to the
correct physical solutions.
