
* 9105437
* Mathematical Sciences: Scientific Computation in Mechanics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, 
* 08/15/1991,04/19/1993
* L. Ridgway Scott,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1995
* USD 195,000.00

An approach to scientific computation is proposed that incorporates research in
numerical analysis, aspects of computer science, and solution of model problems
in mechanics. Three research areas are the focus of the proposal: computational
problems in incompressible fluid dynamics (including free-boundary problems,
problems with variable density and high-order discretizations in three
dimensions), computational chemistry (molecular dynamics simulations), and
automated programming of scientific algorithms on parallel computers. The
overall objective of the proposal is to improve the foundations for software for
solving problems in science and technology that involve large scale,
multidimensional models involving mechanics. The research will involve the
development of new algorithms for several problems too difficult to solve by
existing techniques. It will also include an analysis of each algorithm,
yielding a rigorous justification that it accurately approximates the phenomena
under study. Finally, the proposed research will involve prototype
implementations of the algorithms in computer programs via techniques that can
assure a robust and easliy maintained code. This research will improve
computational modeling of many important industrial processes. One class
involves such diverse things as making photographic film, sewing thread,
extruded metals and Saran Wrap. Another involves biomedical applications, for
example in the development of new pharmaceuticals. Another impacts the analysis
of certain toxic gas spills.
