
* 9200273
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric and Cohomological Methods in Transformation Groups and Representation Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1992,01/07/1994
* Amir Assadi,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1996
* USD 130,800.00

A group of symmetries of a space X induces symmetries on certain algebraic
invariants of X (so-called homology representations). In this way,
transformation group theory (the study of the symmetries of continuous objects,
such as spaces) and representation theory (the study of symmetries of discrete
or algebraic objects) become intimately related. The goal of this project is to
investigate systematically the interactions between the geometry of symmetries
(such as fixed points) and their algebraic manifestations. In particular, the
problem of existence of symmetries of Moore spaces with prescribed algebraic
representations (the Steenrod Problem, posed in the early 1960's), algebraic
surfaces, and certain 4-dimensional spaces all provide concrete problems to
which a general theory should apply. Techniques from topology, algebraic
geometry, and representation theory should interact fruitfully in this endeavor.
Symmetry plays an absolutely fundamental role in science (in fact, in art and
music as well), and we attempt to understand this role through qualitative and
certain quantitative measurements and comparisons. In mathematics, symmetry
plays a fundamental role also, and it has many different but related
manifestations. To have a precise and logical understanding of symmetries of a
mathematical structure, such as a space, we need to discover and quantify its
so-called invariants and other important features. A wide variety of
sophisticated tools of this trade, chiefly algebraic ones, have been developed
over the years in different research projects, and this investigator is adept at
and plans to draw upon a surprising number of them in his current work.
