
* 9201728
* Mathematical Sciences: Parallel, Block and Two-Stage Iterative Methods for Linear Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1992,05/03/1994
* Daniel Szyld,PA,Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1996
* USD 135,000.00

The investigator studies iterative methods to solve linear algebraic systems of
equations efficiently on both sequential and parallel computers. In a large
class of iterative methods, each iteration consists of a solution of another
system of equations. If that system is in turn solved by an iterative method, it
is called a two-stage iterative method. Among the questions to be investigated
are criteria to determine the optimal or near-optimal number of inner iterations
to guarantee overall convergence of the two-stage method. When a matrix is
appropriately partitioned by blocks, and its diagonal blocks are nonsingular,
many of the classical iterative methods can be generalized to treat each
submatrix as a component. On a MIMD parallel computer (a computer that executes
multiple streams of instructions on multiple streams of data), each diagonal
block can be solved by a different processor, using components of previous
iterations as soon as they are available. These are chaotic or asynchronous
parallel block iterative methods. Their convergence properties as well as
implementation details will be studied. Iterative methods for the solution of
the general eigenvalue problem will also be studied. Experiments with these
methods will be performed on different parallel architectures. A large class of
problems in science and enginering is described by linear systems of equations.
These are equations in which the unknown quantities appear in a simple way. An
example of a linear system is the description of the forces on a building
structure. These forces need to be calculated to design the building materials.
The quantities to be calculated, called the variables or unknowns, are the
forces on particular points of the structure. To describe a big structure, such
as a high-rise building or a bridge, many hundreds or thousands of equations are
needed, but because the forces on each point come only from a few neighboring
points, the equations are relatively simple. A simple iterative method to solve
such equations, that is, to find the values of the unknowns, consists in giving
an initial approximation for the values of some unknowns, and then computing the
values of the resulting forces on the other points of the structure. Parallel
computers are simply a collection of computers or processors that communicate
with each other. In the method just described, different processors can compute
the value of the forces on different points simultaneously, using the
information already computed by the other processors. This is repeated until all
values satisfy all equations. This situation, if attained, is called
convergence. Not all iterative methods attain convergence. In this project, the
iterative methods for which convergence can be guaranteed will be studied.
Experiments will be carried out to test them.
