
* 9205300
* Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Solution of Differential Equations in Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1992,05/23/1994
* Douglas Arnold,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/29/1996
* USD 255,000.00

The investigators will develop and implement algorithms for the computer
modelling of water waves, including the breaking of waves. The algorithms will
be based on a boundary integral formulation together with a time-marching
algorithm to advance the free boundary. A number of new numerical techniques,
never before applied to water wave problems, will be used. In particular, a new
fast multilevel technique will be applied to solve the integral equations, which
is the dominant part of the solution process. The investigators will write a
robust and efficient computer program, which will be documented and placed in
the public domain for unrestricted use, e.g., by oceanographers, engineers,
fluid dynamicists, and numerical analysts. The investigators will validate the
code thoroughly both through numerical testing and numerical analysis, and will
compare its results with laboratory experiments. This work will improve the
reliability and efficiency of computer simulations in hydrodynamics, such as
arise in the modelling of off-shore structures, movement of boats through water,
and tidal energy generation. Recent advances in computer algorithms will be
adapted and applied for the first time in these areas, enabling the
investigators to exploit very fast computer hardware. Through the development of
a publicly available computer code this work will contribute to the transfer of
ideas from theoretical mathematical research to technological applications.
