
* 9208072
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: The Homotopy Theory of Arrangements
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1992,09/04/1992
* Michael Falk,AZ,Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 02/28/1994
* USD 4,900.00

The investigator will continue to study the dependence of topological
invariants of the complement of a union of hyperplanes in complex n-space on the
combinatorial structure of the associated arrangement. Invariants to be studied
include the homology of the universal abelian cover, the higher homotopy groups,
the homology of the Milnor fiber, and the cohomology ring. These will be
described in terms of the underlying matroid, the oriented matroid and its
generalization to non-real arrangements, and the bounded complex. The results
will be applied to unsolved problems concerning the matroid stratification of
the Grassmannian, the homology classification of hyperplane complements in terms
of combinatorial invariants, the combinatorial structure of free arrangements,
and the factorization properties of the Orlik-Solomon algebra. The initial focus
of this research will be on complexified arrangements in dimension three. The
main topological tool is the 2-complex model T of the universal cover
constructed by the investigator. The structure of T is determined in a simple
way by the complex of bounded faces of the real part of the arrangement. On the
one hand, this facilitates a geometric analysis of the second homotopy group. At
the same time, this universal cover complex yields an algebraic description of
the homology of abelian covers in terms of modules over polynomial rings. The
study of free arrangements will center on the various notions of formality
introduced by the investigator and his co- workers. The complement of an
arrangement of hyperplanes in n-space is just the collection of chunks into
which n-space falls when cleaved by a number of (n-1)-spaces. This seemingly
innocuous structure has called forth a surprising amount of heavy machinery from
various parts of algebra and topology and led to some gratifyingly attractive
analysis and general combinatorial principles. Although the work is theoretical
and leads to rigorous proofs, at intermediate stages it is useful to experiment
and test examples. Some machine computation is indispensable at this point,
particularly using such symbolic manipulators as Cayley, for which a Sun
SPARCstation is available to the investigator.
