
* 9208048
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Numerical Solution of Functional Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1992,03/30/1995
* Zdzislaw Jackiewicz,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1996
* USD 130,400.00

The purpose of the research is to study the properties of numerical methods for
ordinary and functional differential equations and Volterra integral and
integrodifferential equations. An efficient and reliable general purpose
algorithm for the numerical solution of neutral delay-differential equations and
Volterra integro-differential equations based on variable stepsize variable
order Adams formulas will be developed. The asymptotic behavior of recurrence
relations resulting from application of various numerical methods to Volterra
integral and integro-differential equations with nonconvolution kernels will be
studied. Moreover, convergence, order and stability properties of time-point
relaxations and waveform relaxation Runge-Kutta methods for large systems of
ordinary differential equations will be examined. These methods are appropriate
in a parallel computing environment. Finally, variable stepsize two-step Runge-
Kutta methods for differential equations will be investigated. One of the main
applications of these methods is to provide efficient error estimates for
continuous Runge-Kutta methods. This research is in the area of numerical
analysis, which has applications to a wide variety of physical and engineering
applications.
