
* 9216153
* Mathematical Sciences: Modelling, Analysis and Computation in Viscoelasticity
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 01/15/1993,03/08/1995
* David Malkus,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/1996
* USD 179,514.00

Intriguing phenomena have been observed experimentally in highly elastic and
very viscous fluids, such as polymer solutions and melts. Such non-Newtonian
materials can be modeled mathematically as viscoelastic fluids with fading
memory, which exhibit behavior intermediate between the nonlinear hyperbolic
response of purely elastic materials and the strongly diffusive, parabolic
response of viscous Newtonian fluids. In certain flow regimes, these fluids
exhibit instabilities that severely disrupt polymer processing. Laboratory
observations have found "spurt " instabilities in pressure-gradient driven flows
(Vinogradov et al., 1972), persistent oscillations in flow at fixed volumetric
flow rate (Lim & Schowalter, 1989), and anomalies in step shear strain
experiments (Morrison & Larson, 1991). Many researchers attribute the
observations to "slip" or "apparent slip, " i.e., loss of adhesion of the fluid
to the wall. This project involves the investigation of an alternative
explanation for these phenomena. The hypothesis is that all three have a common
origin in bulk material properties, rather than adhesive properties. To test
this hypothesis, the corresponding one-dimensional shear flows pressure-driven
and piston-driven flow in a slit die, and Couette flow are modeled. The
characteristic feature of the fluid models employed is a non-monotone relation
between steady shear stress and strain rate. Analysis and numerical simulations
show that the polymer system changes state in a thin layer near the wall, giving
the appearance of a slip layer. The structure of solutions of initial/boundary-
value problems for non-monotone models is remarkably rich, and the development
of numerical methods capable of simulating these flow problems has interest in
its own right. The same basic system of time-dependent, quasilinear partial
differential equations is used to model all three experiments; different forcing
terms, as well as boundary and initial conditions, are used in the three cases.
The governing system is globally well-posed in time, in two senses: with respect
to classical solutions arising from smooth initial data, and with respect to
"almost classical" solutions, containing discontinuities in the stress and
strain rate. Calculated solutions are in good qualitative agreement with the
experiments, showing spurt in pressure-driven flow, persistent oscillations in
piston-driven flow, and the development of anomalies in the relaxation modulus
after a step strain. In terms of a reduced approximating system, spurt and its
related phenomena in pressure-driven flow can be analyzed by using phase-plane
techniques. The analysis for piston-driven and step strain experiments is more
difficult because the system is infinite-dimensional. For example, numerical
simulations strongly suggest that there is a Hopf bifurcation in piston-driven
flow, leading to the observed persistent oscillations. In order to compare
predictions to experiment, it is crucial to determine how the amplitude and
frequency of the limit cycle depends on physical parameters. This requires
detailed analysis of the governing equations. This is required in each of the
experiments, and that is the central focus of this research. The theme of this
project has been and will continue to be the use of numerical simulation to
guide analysis of the governing equations and approximations to them, in order
to identify the time-scales, amplitudes, and other characteristic features of
the predictions of the model.
