
* 9217917
* RUI: Finite Type Minimal Surfaces, Analysis and Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 03/01/1993,03/23/1993
* Michael Hvidsten,MN,Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 08/31/1996
* USD 59,473.00

The proposed research project will concentrate on four areas relating to
minimal surfaces of finite type. The first area will involve the development of
algorithms to calculate integral periods that arise in the Weierstrass
representation of minimal surfaces. Determination of these periods is critical
in insuring that finite type minimal surfaces are well-defined. The second area
of study will be to analyze which finite type minimal surfaces are embedded in
Euclidean three- space. Work already completed by the proposer in analyzing
Hoffman-Meeks-Costa surfaces will be expanded upon and the proposer and student
research assistants will study the relationship between finite type minimal
surfaces and the algebraic curves that generate them. A third research component
will be the expansion of the proposer's Mathematical package "Finite Type." This
package will facilitate the general study of finite type minimal surfaces.
Finally, an integral part of the proposed project will be summer research
experiences for one student during each of the 1993, 1994, and 1995 summer
periods. Student research activities will be directly related to one of the
three research areas of the project and will strengthen the student research
program of the mathematics/computer science department at Gustavus.
