
* 9302013
* Mathematical Sciences: Pattern Formation, Turbulence and Singularities in PDEs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/1994,07/12/1996
* Alan Newell,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 195,000.00

9302013 Newell The investigator and his colleagues undertake projects aimed at
gaining a better understanding of turbulence in its many manifestations and at
obtaining macroscopic descriptions for patterns that serve to simplify and unify
the behavior of classes of pattern forming systems in fluids and optics
seemingly unrelated at the microscopic level. In the turbulence studies, the aim
is to understand the origins of short-lived coherent structures and their role
in causing intermittent and non-Kolmogorov-like behavior. It is important first
to gain a clear picture of weak turbulence theories, the reasons for more than
one Kolmogorov finite flux solution, and to understand the roles that these
solutions play in producing inverse cascades and the roles that inverse cascades
may play in originating collapse structures. The principal aim of the studies on
pattern formation is to extend the previous far-from-onset theories to include a
description of pattern behavior when the local wavenumber is driven outside of a
stability band known as the Busse balloon. The results of the research so far
have led to a properly regularized theory of patterns that can handle pattern
singularities such as dislocations and disclinations. Moreover, the latest work
suggests that all point defects of almost periodic patterns are composed of the
two elementary disclinations. Patterns of an almost periodic nature arise all
over the place. One sees them in the sand ripples under an advancing or receding
tide, in geological formations, on the coats of animals, as fingerprints. They
occur in systems driven far from equilibrium by some external stress that acts
to destabilize spatially and temporally uniform states and preferentially
amplify certain shapes and configurations. Geometrical symmetries, such as
rotation in the plane, lead to degeneracies (the wavelength of a periodic
pattern may be chosen but the direction remains undetermined) and the
competition betwee n the various amplified states leads to patterns that often
consist of a mosaic of almost periodic patches separated by grain boundaries,
domain walls and point defects. The goal of this research is to build a
macroscopic field theory for patterns that will unify and simplify the behavior
of systems seemingly unrelated at the microscopic level and that can capture
both the smooth (field) and singular (particle) components of the pattern.
