
* 9307893
* Mathematical Sciences: Large-Scale-Ratio Space-Time Chaos
* DMS,THEORETICAL PHYSICS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
* 07/15/1994,04/24/1996
* Henry Greenside,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 195,000.00

Greenside The investigator undertakes computational and theoretical efforts to
understand extensively chaotic nonequilibrium systems such as those studied
experimentally in fluid, laser, and chemical systems by Ahlers, Behringer,
Gauthier, Gollub, Kolodner, and Swinney. A spatially-homogeneous chaotic system
is defined to be extensive if its fractal dimension grows linearly with the
volume of the system. Theorists hope that extensively chaotic systems may be
amenable to a thermodynamic-like description that characterizes complex systems
through laws relating intensive and extensive macroscopic (coarse-grained)
variables. Specific research problems studied are: the identification and
analysis of simplified mathematical models that have experimentally relevant
features of extensive chaos; a comparison of different spatial correlation
lengths for quantifying extensive chaos; a study of the variation of dimension
density and other intensive variables with system inhomogeneities; the
development and testing of algorithms for estimating fractal dimension densities
from time series; the analysis of the lengthscales and timescales involved with
the transition between non-extensive and extensive chaos; the identification and
testing of Langevin descriptions of extensively chaotic regimes; and the
development of related numerical algorithms and optimized computer codes for
scalable parallel computers such as the Duke 32-node CM-5 computer. Many
nonequilibrium physical systems---both natural and manmade---are complex in that
they evolve nonperiodically in both space and time. An increasingly important
theme in many modern areas of science and technology is how to quantify this
complex behavior. Why do systems become complex as one varies parameters, how
does one complex state differ from another, and how does transport of energy and
matter depend on complexity? Recent experimental advances in the study of fluid
flow, of liquid crystals, of nonlinear optics, and of chemical excitable media
have identified a new and important class of complex systems to understand:
large homogeneous sustained nonequilibrium systems that undergo a sudden change
from a time-independent homogeneous state to a non-transient temporally and
spatially disordered state (spatiotemporal chaos). This research uses a
combination of mathematical analysis and large-scale parallel computing to
explore the properties of carefully chosen models of spatiotemporal chaos. Of
particular interest is to understand how complexity grows with the size of a
physical system (extensive chaos) and whether a thermodynamic-like description
can be found in the limit of infinite system size. An improved understanding of
extensive chaos should improve the design, control, and optimization of
engineering applications, improve the forecasting of nonperiodic time series,
and improve the validation, efficiency, and accuracy of large-scale computer
simulations for complex systems.
