
* 9320597
* Collaborative Research: Modelling the Integration of Multiple Synaptic Inputs
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1994,06/20/1996
* Steven Baer,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1998
* USD 211,000.00

Baer Using theory and experiment, the investigator and his colleague study the
integration of multiple electrical inputs into excitable neuronal structures. A
new cable theory, developed by Baer and Rinzel (1991) to study large populations
of dendritic spines, is adapted to fit the reality of a particular biological
system: the multiterminally innervated muscle fiber of the insect Manduca. The
mathematics involves the formulation and analysis of reaction diffusion models
for multiple populations of spines, to model the amplitude and timecourse of
potentials arising in cylindrical structures (dendrite or muscle fiber)
receiving synchronous input from multiple clusters of synapses. Important
biological properties considered are the amplitude of the quantal currents,
shape of the postsynaptic process, the inherent uncertainty of an input actually
occurring (probability of release), and the precise distribution of voltage
gated channels. Theory is related to experimental data and drives new
experiments. The functions of all excitable cells, both nerve and muscle, are
regulated with precision by transmembrane potentials. This project is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between a mathematician and a neurobiologist to
study, using experiments and mathematical modeling, the spatial and temporal
distribution of electrical potentials in complex neuronal structures. A
mathematical model is developed to simulate amplitude and timecourse of
potentials arising in cylindrical structures (dendrite or muscle fiber)
receiving synchronous input from multiple clusters of synapses. The
investigators use multiterminally innervated muscle fibers to test the
predictions of the model, and conversely use the model to augment their
understanding of synaptic physiology. The multiterminally innervated muscle
fiber allows an unusual array of experimental and morphometric measurements, and
has the added advantage of being the topological equivalent of a dendrite having
clust ers of input spines. Consequently, both the conclusions of the simulations
and the methodology being developed have broad applications to central nervous
system structures.
