
* 9403392
* Mathematical Sciences: Exploitation of Symmetry in Discretization Methods
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1994,02/16/1996
* Eugene Allgower,CO,Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1998
* USD 272,000.00

9403392 Allgower Many problems in science display symmetries with respect to a
group of transformations. The equations describing such problems are then said
to be `equivariant' with respect to this symmetry group. The focus of this
project is to continue to study systematic techniques for exploiting symmetry in
the numerical solution of such equivariant equations. This exploitation leads to
more stable solution methods and to a greatly increased numerical efficiency.
One of the methods studied by the investigators (the symmetry reduction method)
can be viewed as a generalization of Fourier Transform methods (which exploit
symmetry under a cyclic group). Among other projects, the investigators further
develop the symmetry reduction method and study hidden symmetries, optimal
equivariant preconditioners for problems that are only `nearly'equivariant,
domain reduction via symmetries, the numerical solution of nonlinear equivariant
equations and bifurcation phenomena. Preliminary numerical codes are further
developed into a collection of codes for a range of important applications.
Geometric symmetries have always played an important role in theoretical physics
and some branches of applied mathematics. However, exploiting these symmetries
has only lately been developed in the areas of numerical analysis and
computational mathematics. The aim of this project is to use geometric and
algebraic techniques to give efficient algorithms for solving large numerical
problems that enjoy such symmetries. Very large problems are broken down (via
symmetry considerations) into smaller problems that can be handled independently
and more efficiently on modern architectures of high-performance computing.
Problems that are only `nearly' equivariant (i.e., where certain symmetry
structures have imperfections) occur quite frequently in engineering (e.g., in
elasticity or flow problems, or in structural mechanics). An efficient
exploitation of these imperfect sym metries would reduce the computational
effort for solving such problems. This has two direct benefits: firstly, one can
solve moderately sized problems much faster, possibly in real time; secondly,
very large problems that are inaccessible via standard methods can be solved
with this symmetry reduction method.
