
* 9403563
* Mathematical Sciences: Scientific Computing in Mechanics
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1994,09/15/1994
* L. Ridgway Scott,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Scott The investigator develops an approach to scientific computation that
incorporates research in numerical analysis, aspects of computer science, and
solution of model problems in mechanics. Three research areas are the focus of
the project: computational problems in incompressible fluid dynamics (including
free--boundary problems and high-order, mixed method discretizations in two and
three dimensions), diffusion acceleration techniques for particle transport, and
algorithms for parallel computers. This research includes an analysis of each
algorithm, yielding a rigorous justification that it accurately approximates the
phenomenon under study. Finally, the research involves prototype implementations
of the algorithms in computer programs via techniques that can assure a robust
and easily maintained code. In collaboration with specialists in related
disciplines, these computer programs are used to study basic physical phenomena
in a variety of areas. The overall objective of the project is to improve the
foundations for software for solving problems in science and technology that
involve large scale, multidimensional models in continuum mechanics. These
models are the basis for computer simulation used in engineering design in
manufacturing processes, in environmental modeling and the development of
remediation techniques, and in various aspects of biotechnology. The research
involves the development of new algorithms for several problems too difficult to
solve by existing techniques. It emphasizes the efficient use of high-
performance computers in realistic simulations.
