
* 9422280
* Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Eigenvalue Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 05/15/1995,04/10/1997
* Moody Chu,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9422280 Chu PRIVATE This research is concerned with inverse eigenvalue problems.
Both the theory and the practice of constructing a physical model, described
mathematically in the form of a matrix, from prescribed spectral data will be
investigated. This proposal continues and extends previous studies. In
particular, a dynamical system for each inverse eigenvalue problem will be
formulated to ensure that a specific task is taking place continuously. The
dynamics will then be explored using computer experiments, high resolution
graphics and symbolic manipulation, in conjunction with analysis. This study
should lead to fundamental advances in the understanding of inverse eigenvalue
problems. This project is expected to find important applications ranging from
new development of numerical algorithms to theoretical solutions of difficult
problems. Since inverse eigenvalue problems arise from a wide variety of
disciplines, the resulting technology would have impact on a number of
scientific and engineering fields. Inverse eigenvalue problems arise in many
important applications, including control design, vibration isolation, system
identification, exploration and remote sensing, and signal processing. A
significant common phenomenon in all these areas of application is that the
physical parameter of a certain system is to be reconstructed from knowledge or
expectation of its dynamical behavior, in particular its natural frequencies
and/or normal modes. The advances obtained from this proposed work will
contribute to the understanding of issues that arise in several strategic areas,
particularly in the areas of global change, manufacturing, transportation, and
environmental monitoring.
