
* 9423133
* Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Solution of Algebraic Problems Arising in Fluids Models
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1995,06/16/1995
* Howard Elman,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 10/30/1998
* USD 94,000.00

This work concerns the development and analysis of methods for computing the
numerical solution of the linear and nonlinear algebraic systems arising in
models of viscous incompressible fluid flow. The emphasis is on iterative
methods, specifically, preconditioned Krylov subspace methods, for solving the
linear systems arising from discretization and linearization of the steady-state
Navier-Stokes equations subject to incompressibility constraints. Primary goals
include the formulation and analysis of preconditioners that are effective for
large Reynolds numbers, the construction of efficient methods for parallel
architectures, and the study of effects of linearization strategy on performance
and overall costs. The investigator studies these issues for a variety of stable
finite element and finite difference discretization schemes and considers the
influence of discretization on the algebraic properties of the discrete problems
and on performance. The methods are studied and compared using both analytic
bounds on convergence rates and assessment of performance in computational
experiments with benchmark problems. The equations to which these solution
algorithms are applied are fundamental in computational fluid dynamics, for
simulating the effects of flow (that is, estimating quantities such as
velocities, pressures and temperatures) in a wide variety of physical settings.
Examples of areas where they can be applied include vehicle aerodynamics and
aerospace models, models of environmental flows, biomedical models (blood flow),
cooling models for nuclear reactors, and thin film coating (e.g., of adhesives
or optical fibers). Mathematical models of such processes enable the study of
the effects of different physical parameters, for example, wing shape in an
airplane or chemical content of a thin film. Determination of such effects using
purely experimental techniques, i.e., through the construction of prototypes and
scale models, is prohibitively expensive, time consuming and subject to
inaccuracies introduced by the presence of measuring devices. Mathematical
models do not replace experimental work but complement them and allow for
efficient identification of promising prototypes. Accurate solution of the
mathematical models is only feasible, however, if reliable and fast
computational algorithms are available. The goal of the project is to develop
such algorithms for use with these models.
