
* 9424464
* Mathematical Sciences: Classical and Quantum Fluid Transport Models for Semiconductor Devices
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/1995,09/22/1995
* Joseph Jerome,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 09/30/1998
* USD 77,000.00

Jerome The investigator studies semiconductor devices, focusing on the
simulation and mathematical analysis of the hydrodynamic and quantum
hydrodynamic models for such devices. Microwave and multi-species models, and
the decisive role of friction, are emphasized in the classical studies, and
hysteresis, bistable-state analysis, are emphasized in the quantum studies. The
rationale is to establish a way of dealing with various aspects of hot electron
effects in classical structures, and the effects of tunneling and repulsion in
heterogeneous structures, or compound semiconductors. The algorithms to be
employed for the simulations are shock capturing algorithms of finite difference
and finite element type. The multi-species models permit simulation of the
circuit involving the Gunn diode, and its three valley electron carriers, by new
hydrodynamic models. These are compared with the computationally intensive
results obtained by the Urbana group, via Monte Carlo simulation of the
Boltzmann equation. Mathematical and computer models of semiconductor devices
have increasingly necessitated the incorporation of two types of effects: (1)
energetics, often called the hot electron effect, and (2) small scale, or
quantum mechanical, effects. This proposal describes two important models, the
first based upon classical, and the second upon quantum, physics. Although the
basic physical laws have been understood for at least seventy-five years, the
efforts to apply these laws to semiconductor devices in a way that allows for
reasonably efficient modeling and simulation represents an enormous challenge to
scientists, engineers, and mathematicians. An example of classical modeling is
the Gunn diode, which is acknowledged to be of critical importance in microwave
manufacturing applications; such devices appear in the circuitry of the
automobile, for example. Its function depends upon delicate oscillations of
current and voltage, which must be captured by computer models if they are to be
of any usefulness. The principal investigator is open to any collaboration in
the manufacturing sector which might result from this work. A possible
application of the quantum studies is the development (by others) of logic gates
in circuits that do not operate according to binary "off-on" laws, but allow for
multiple states of occupancy. The work described is highly collaborative and
interdisciplinary, including electrical engineers from the University of
Illinois at Urbana. Computational mathematicians from Arizona State and Brown
Universities, and the University of Minnesota, and mathematical analysts from
the Courant Institute and from Stanford University, are involved. The results of
past work have been regularly presented at workshops on computational
electronics, and published in journals of electrical engineering and
computational physics. This practice is continued.
