
* 9500814
* Mathematical Sciences: High Order Methods for Time Dependent Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 09/01/1995,06/24/1997
* David Gottlieb,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 169,755.00

"High Order Methods for Time Dependent Equations" The project entails research
in long term integrations of genuinely time dependent partial differential
equations. It involves the development and application of high order finite
differences and finite element schemes as well as Spectral methods. The methods
to be developed and applied are suitable for problems in several space
dimensions with complicated geometries. A major consideration in developing and
assessing high order methods for long term integrations is their scalability.
Based on the experience gained already in parallelizing ENO codes, a further
effort to parallelize spectral and finite element based ENO codes is proposed.
The research has two components, theory and applications, those components are
linked together. The theory is motivated by the type of applications under
investigation and the applications use the theoretical developments. It has been
shown that in order to numerically simulate complicated flows that change in
time, high order methods are necessary. However those methods, because of their
high accuracy, are less robust. The proposed research deals with the issue of
the successful implementations of high order methods. This involved theoretical
issues (as solving the 100 years old Gibbs Phenomenon) as well as more applied
issues. On the applied side, the problem of mixing enhancement by interactions
of Shock waves and hydrogen jets will be studied. This entails the simulation of
an air shock passing through an hydrogen jet in high Mach numbers. High order
methods are mandatory here since the process of interest is the mixing and
combustion inside the jets. The current codes, Spectral and ENO are to be
modified to handle more general cases. Parallel versions of ENO and spectral
methods are being applied now and will be further modified.
