
* 9501077
* Mathematical Sciences: Characterizing the Dynamics of Spatio-Temporal Data
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/1995,04/23/1996
* Dieter Armbruster,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9501077 Armbruster The apparent spatial coherence of many large-scale systems
with complex dynamics implies that the underlying behavior can be described
mathematically with relatively few degrees of freedom. The goal of this research
project is to elucidate the dynamical mechanisms that underlie such spatio-
temporal behavior by using a qtandard mathematical tool, sometimes called
Karhunen-Loeve (K-L) analysis. In addition it is planned to apply some of the
methods used so successfully for chaotic time series data to spatio- temporal
data. By using K-L analysis to find an approximate low dimensional model of some
of the spatio-temporal behavior, methods that have been developed for chaotic
time series data may be applicable to spatially extended data. In addition, it
is planned to investigate control strategies for spatio-temporally chaotic
dynamics by developing appropriate control mechanisms for suitable low-
dimensional approximations. The apparent spatial coherence of many large-scale
systems with complex dynamics implies that the underlying behavior can be
described mathematically with relatively few degrees of freedom. The goal of
this research project is to elucidate the dynamical mechanisms that underlie
such spatio-temporal behavior. Examples currently under investigation include
the analysis of the onset of turbulence in 2-dimensional fluid flow and the
analysis of the dynamics of cellular flames that is complicated in space and
time. This study is intended to characterize the spatio-temporally complex
motion of the flame cells in order to develop a phenomenological model as a
prerequisite for systematically controlling the behavior of such cellular
flames. The long term potential of this research is considerable. The
experiments on flames are typical of many spatio-temporally complex problems. As
a result of this research, fundamental mathematical insights into the processes
that generate and drive spatio-temporal structures are expe cted. Such insight
is a prerequisite for any advanced technological use of nonlinear dynamics, for
example, to control combustion processes or to suppress and control boundary
layer turbulence along airfoils. ***
