
* 9501030
* Mathematical Sciences:Reconstructions Methods for Inverse Problems in Multiple Dimensions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1995,06/15/1995
* William Rundell,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 52,437.00

Rundell 9501030 Many objects of physical interest cannot be studied directly.
Examples include, imaging the interior of the body, the determination of cracks
within solid objects, and material parameters such as the conductivity of
inaccessible objects. When these problems are translated into mathematical terms
they take the form of partial differential equations, the Lingua Franca of the
mathematical sciences. However, since we have additional unknowns in the model,
these introduce unknown parameters in the equations that have to be additionally
solved for by means of further measurements. In this proposal we deal with the
practical aspects of this from a mathematical perspective: We are interested in
the question of when a unique determination can be made as well as designing
algorithms for the efficient numerical recovery of the unknowns. %%% The
recovery of unknown coefficients from second order partial differential
operators in multi-dimensions will be investigated. Our main goal is to prove
uniqueness results and to develop constructive recovery methods for several
particular cases. In practice, each of these problems reduce to uniquely
recovering a coefficient in an appropriately chosen finite dimensional space
from a finite number of data measurements. This reduces the inverse problem to
the inversion of the data-to-coefficient map in finite dimensions. In addition
to developing reconstruction methods, the stability (or sensitivity) of these
methods to perturbations of the data, as well as their computational cost, will
be studied. ***
