
* 9503478
* Mathematical Sciences: Special Year in Mathematical Biology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI, Population & Community Ecology, COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1995,08/19/1996
* Hans Othmer,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/1997
* USD 309,124.00

Othmer The investigator and his colleagues conduct a special year in
mathematical biology in the Department of Mathematics at the University of Utah.
Cooperating departments include the Departments of Biology, Bioengineering and
Human Genetics and the Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training
Institute. The primary objective of the special year is to train graduate
students and post-docs in the art and science of modeling applied to biological
problems. Each quarter focuses on a specific area of biology in which
mathematics has had a significant impact and in which there are significant new
opportunities: Ecology and Evolution (Fall 1995), Physiology and Cell Biology
(Winter 1996), and Cardiovascular Physiology and Biological Fluid Dynamics
(Spring 1996). The educational program includes (i) a full year course entitled
`Mathematical Modeling in Biology' given by visiting principal lecturers, who
present a case study of applying mathematical modeling to a biological problem
in their area of expertise, (ii) a weekly seminar series given by principal
lecturers, other visitors, and scientists from the University of Utah, (iii) a
quarterly minisymposium in an active research area within the purview of that
quarter, and (iv) a student/post-doc seminar aimed at informal presentation of
ideas, new results, and open problems. The notes from the course will be
published. The goal of the Special Year in Mathematical Biology at the
University of Utah is to train young scientists in mathematical modeling of
biological problems. Graduate students and post-docs are immersed in an
interdisciplinary educational and collaborative environment that brings them
together with leading mathematicians and scientists. Although mathematics has
long provided important insights into biological processes, developments in
biology and mathematics have made the link more important. Basic biological
research has increasing relevance to national priorities such as health care and
environmental protection, and powerful new experimental techniques have made it
possible to observe previously inaccessible mechanisms in physiology, genetics,
and ecology. Expanded access to powerful computers has enabled researchers to
simulate complex and realistic models of ecological and physiological systems,
establishing modeling and computation as a new mode of experimentation in the
life sciences. Unfortunately, the training of most biologists and mathematicians
fails to prepare them for this type of research. The Special Year in
Mathematical Biology prepares young researchers at the pre- and junior post-
doctoral level for these new demands. The speakers and researchers invited to
this Special Year have established records of successfully collaborating with
both mathematicians and life scientists. The program focuses on three active
areas of research in the life sciences: ecology and evolution, physiology and
cell biology, and cardiovascular physiology and biological fluid dynamics. These
areas have been fertile ground for successful collaboration and modeling in the
past. The Special Year introduces young researchers to these successes, involves
them in current research, and illustrates the conceptual connections between the
different fields. These students, and those benefiting from the book developed
from the Special Year, will be the catalysts for further development of this
vital connection.
