
* 9504780
* Mathematical Sciences: Construction of Wavelets on Finite Domans and Applications to Boundary Integral Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1995,07/06/1995
* Yuesheng Xu,ND,North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1998
* USD 74,923.00

Constructions of Wavelets on Finite Domains and Applications to Boundary
Integral Equations Proposed by Charles A. Micchelli and Yuesheng Xu Abstract: It
is proposed to construct wavelets on finite domains and use them to solve
boundary integral equations which are reformulations of boundary value problems
of partial differential equations in the plane or space. Traditional methods
employed to solve the boundary integral equations are Galerkin methods,
collocation methods, and product integration methods by using a standard basis
of piecewise polynomials, B-splines or trigonometric polynomials. These methods
usually lead to full matrices for the discrete equations, which are
computationally expensive. Wavelet bases provide an alternative approach for the
possibility of improving these methods. They often form better bases in the
space of piecewise polynomials or other function classes in the sense that the
coefficient matrices of the linear or nonlinear systems obtained from these
bases are sparse and well-conditioned. This leads to numerically fast algorithms
that preserve the nice features that the traditional methods possess and at the
same time improve upon them. The proposed projects include constructing
orthogonal wavelets, pre-wavelets and biorthogonal wavelets on finite domains in
multidimensional spaces using the matrix refinement equations, designing
decomposition and reconstruction algorithms in terms of the matrices in the
refinement equations, and developing numerically fast algorithms for the
boundary integral equations using the wavelet bases constructed. Partial
differential equations have long been used to mathematically model a wide
variety of physical phenomena that occur in fluid flows, electro-chemistry,
stress analysis in materials and a host of similar practical problems.
Transforming these partial differential equations into boundary integral
equations gives rise to problems that can be analyzed both theoretically and nu
merically. Since the nonlinear equations arising are difficult if not impossible
to completely solve theoretically, a numerical method to these problems is
necessary. Wavelet bases provide an alternative approach to classical methods
and result in mathematical problems for which numerically fast algorithms can be
obtained. This alternative wavelet method preserves most nice features of
traditional methods and in many instances gives substantial improvements.
