
* 9505021
* Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods & Conservation Laws
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1995,07/13/1995
* Randall LeVeque,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 193,910.00

The investigator develops multi-dimensional high resolution finite volume
methods for solving nonlinear hyperbolic systems of conservation laws and
related problems arising in a variety of applications. The public domain
software package CLAWPACK (Conservation LAWs PACKage) he has developed is
extended to handle a wider variety of problems on both Cartesian and curvilinear
grids in 1, 2, and 3 space dimensions. Mosaic composite grids are further
developed to allow body-fitted grids near an irregular boundary to be coupled
with Cartesian grids away from the boundary. Immersed interface methods for
handling discontinuities in the solution or its derivatives are used in
conjunction with multi-dimensional conservation law methods to solve fluid
dynamics and wave propagation problems with material interfaces. These
techniques achieve second order accuracy on uniform Cartesian grids cut by
irregular interfaces. Similar techniques are applied to problems with stiff
source terms arising from chemical reactions or combustion, giving rise to thin
reaction zones that behave macroscopically as interfaces. Specific applications
in a number of areas are studied, including groundwater flow, atmospheric flow,
chemotaxis, and astrophysics. The software being developed is intended for
teaching as well as research purposes, and includes extensive documentation and
applied examples. An accompanying textbook is being written. The investigator
develops computational methods and public domain software for the solution of a
class of mathematical problems that arises in virtually every field of science
and engineering. The partial differential equations considered can, in various
forms, model the motion of liquids or gas (e.g., air in the atmosphere, water in
the ocean, aerodynamic flow around aircraft or through turbines, groundwater or
oil beneath the earth's surface), or the motion of waves in fluid or air (e.g.,
acoustic waves in the air or ocean or in ultrasonic explor ation of the body,
seismic waves in the earth originating from earthquakes or artificially
generated for oil exploration, radar waves). Even the motion of organisms in
ecological modeling or cells in developmental biology follows similar laws. The
methods are based on extensive research over the past 20 years, primarily in the
aerodynamics and weapons development communities. This technology is slowly
being transferred to other areas, but is hindered by the complexity of most of
the algorithms. The software of this project should help speed this process. It
is designed for general use as both a teaching and research tool, with extensive
examples included in many applications areas. Novel methods are also developed
to deal with phenomena occurring on different time scales (e.g., fast chemical
reactions coupled with slow groundwater or atmospheric flow) and for problems in
geometrically complicated regions of space bounded by irregular boundaries or
containing interfaces where material properties change (e.g., between different
types of rock in groundwater flow and seismology, or between bone and tissue in
ultrasound imaging). Close collaboration is underway with researchers in many
areas (particularly groundwater flow and atmospheric modeling), both to improve
and generalize the software and to use it in the solution of specific problems.
An application of great interest is contaminant transfer in groundwater flow,
where linear or nonlinear advection in a porous medium with discontinuous
permeabilities and irregular geometries must often be coupled with stiff source
terms for adsorption and reactions. Accurate models are needed both as an aid to
remediation of polluted sites and to the study of proposed underground storage
sites for nuclear waste. Atmospheric modeling is crucial both in short-term
weather prediction and in long-range global modeling of climate, ozone
depletion, etc. The investigator works with researchers in these areas to
incorporate this software into standard models as well as to develop new methods
where needed.
