
* 9505863
* Mathematical Sciences: A Numerical Simulator for the Taylor-Couette Problem
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1995,07/07/1995
* James Thomas,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 110,000.00

The main objective of this project is to build a numerical simulator for the
Taylor-Couette experimental device which is capable of emulating laboratory
experiments. The project will involve developing a robust numerical scheme
capable of simulating the Taylor-Couette flow over a wide range of parameter
values, including all of the known flow regimes from Couette flow to the pre-
turbulence flows. The emphasis of this project is on the duplication of physical
experiments. In addition, the Taylor-Couette simulator will be used to
investigate some of the mathematical results that have been obtained, especially
those which do not agree with the experimental results. The project will involve
an efficient implementation of a three-dimensional scheme on a vector and/or
parallel computer (using multigrid to speed convergence) along with a full
graphical output package that will both imitate the available experimental
outputs and give additional results (not generally obtainable in physical
experiments) that will show more clearly some of the phenomena and mechanisms
that are involved in these flows. The data generated by the numerical
computations will be analyzed using biologically motivated ``neural'' feature
detectors which provide low-dimensional representations of high-dimensional data
sets. Visualization techniques based on preprocessing the data using neural
networks, self organizing feature maps, in addition to the more standard
Karhunen-Loeve decomposition will be investigated. This emphasis on pattern
analysis will be directed towards validation of the model by directly comparing
large and medium-scale coherent structures which appear both in the numerical
simulator and laboratory experiments. In many areas involving development and
manufacturing, numerical simulation is becoming an integral part of the
development and manufacturing processes. There has been a longstanding popular
argument that one might ``throw away the wind tunnels,.. and perform all of the
experiments on the comp uter.'' However, there have not been many studies which
clearly demonstrate to what extent computer simulations can replace or augment
information obtained experimentally. Large computer codes are used to explain
and predict complex phenomena (say in weather forecasting) that, due to the cost
of running these codes, have never been carefully validated. The instabilities
and flow patterns exhibited by the Taylor-Couette flow have challenged
experimenters and theorists for many years. The results that have been obtained
include a rich assortment of complex flow regimes encountered during the
eventual transition to turbulence. Hence, the Taylor-Couette problem is an
excellent candidate to assess how well a computer model can perform physical
experiments. The Taylor-Couette problem is such that the results are
sufficiently complex to require an accurate numerical model, an efficient solver
and a large number of grid points. Because of these aspects of the problem, the
results will illustrate how well a computer model can simulate a physical
problem over a broad range of parameters, will indicate what numerical
efficiencies are possible on large problems and will clearly illustrate many of
the problems associated with long term numerical simulations that produce large
amounts of data.
