
* 9505110
* Mathematical Sciences: Solutions-Adaptive Grid Partitioning and Variable Ordering for PDEs
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
* 08/01/1995,06/18/1997
* Alex Pothen,VA,Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 141,000.00

Dear Al, Alex has kept me in the loop as you and he have converged on a revised
scope of our proposed investigation into partitioning and ordering methods that
take advantage of knowledge of coefficient magnitude, instead of coefficient
structure only. Thanks for your support of this work, whose outcomes could feed
directly into several other projects. To complete what I believe you need before
processing this grant further, he and I have abstracted the project into the
following two paragraphs for peers and nontechnical readers. I hope it is okay.
Best Regards, David
==========================================================================
Solution-adaptive Grid Partitioning and Variable Ordering for PDEs Alex Pothen
and David E. Keyes The proposers consider grid partitioning and variable
ordering problems that come to the fore in the parallel computation of problems
modeled by partial differential equations discretized on unstructured grids.
Partitioning algorithms that maintain load balance among the processors while
incurring low communication costs for distributed memory parallelism have been
developed in earlier work. Here solution-adaptive partitioning methods are
proposed that strive, in addition, to attain good convergence rates in such data
parallel contexts. Communication volume per iteration may rise, but only
modestly for moderate-granularity parallelism, while the more important number
of message-startups per iteration should not be strongly affected. Solution-
adaptive ordering methods are also proposed for the fast solution of the
problems on the local partitions. Two recently developed classes of partitioning
and ordering algorithms that have proved to be successful in non-adaptive
contexts will feature prominently in both the partitioning and ordering phases
of this proposal. One class consists of spectral algorithms, (i.e., algorithms
that make use of an approximation to a certain eigenvector of a Laplacian matrix
derived from the grid and the discretization sche me), while the second class
includes multilevel algorithms. Both algorithms will be generalized to the
solution-adaptive context. Many computational problems in science and
engineering can be modeled by partial differential equations, and subsequently
solved as a system of algebraic equations defined on an unstructured grid. The
most natural form of parallelism for such problems requires the original domain
to be decomposed into subdomains, which are mapped whole on to individual
processors. Iterative domain decomposition algorithms fit naturally into this
framework, wherein a solution is assembled from subproblems whose boundary
conditions are set by transmitting a limited amount of information between
nearest neighbors. The partitioning and ordering methods proposed herein will be
useful for solution methods of such domain decomposition type, which are
designed with respect for the high communication-to-computation cost ratio in
contemporary distributed-memory computers. The key opportunity to be exploited
in this work is that of synergistically joining two ideas that have matured
separately, and are usually used as ``black boxes''-- partitioning and ordering
based on sparsity structure only, and domain-blocked iteration based on
understanding the physical dependencies reflected in the coefficients. The
software tools developed in this work will be demonstrated for ``grand
challenge'' problems in application areas such as aerodynamics and geophysics.
