
* 9505460
* Mathematical Sciences: A Unified Approach to Discrete Data Representation and Wavelet Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1995,04/28/1999
* Charles Chui,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9505460 Chui Four problem areas concerning discrete data representation and
wavelet analysis are addressed in this project. The first area is to establish a
unified scheme for constructing wavelets based only on nested sequences of
subspaces but not on any two-scale relation. The second area is the study of
multivariate wavelets and frames with matrix dilations. The third area is on
representation of discrete data by radial basis functions (RBF's). The fourth
area is the investigation of adaptive wavelets, based on spline techniques. A
particular interest is in modeling by spline and radial basis functions and in
constructing and analyzing the corresponding wavelets. In view of the fact that
most modeling functions, including all the interesting standard radial basis
functions, do not satisfy a two-scale (or refinement) relation, a unified scheme
for the construction of wavelets that does not rely on such a relation is
developed. This constitutes the first area of the proposed research. The second
area is centered around multivariate wavelets, where the main concern is matrix
dilation. For instance, the boundedness of the affine operator and that of the
corresponding Littlewood-Paley energy functions, for a finite family of square-
integrable functions with zero mean, will be investigated and sufficient
conditions that guarantee lower bounds will be established. The third area is
centered on the study of localized cosine Riesz bases and their corresponding
duals. The duals, or bi-orthogonal bases, must facilitate computational
efficiency. For this and other reasons, spline techniques, such as knot
insertion and knot removal, will be investigated. The final area concerns the
modeling of discrete data. For high dimensions, radial basis functions seem to
be the most efficient tool, and the emphasis will be on various linear and
nonlinear problems involving these functions. The central theme of this rese
arch proposal is the development of mathematical tools for analysis and
synthesis of discrete data in one or higher dimensions, in an Euclidean space or
on a closed manifold such as the unit ball. This proposed research is a unified
approach to represent any discrete data set in an effective way so that
"wavelet" analysis can be readily performed. Both spline and radial basis
functions will be used for data representation. It is well known that spline
functions provide a very powerful tool for data modeling due to their most
desirable properties such as flexibility for adaptive implementation,
computational efficiency, and localization capability. On the other hand, radial
basis functions are more powerful for handling higher-dimensional data sets,
particularly when the data information is taken randomly. Wavelets will be
constructed and wavelet algorithms will be developed by using both spline
functions and radial basis functions. In addition, for analyzing nonstationary
data that change in shape, the investigators will look into the use of localized
cosine transforms by using splines or radial basis functions as envelopes (or
windows). Adaptive algorithms will also be developed. One of the main reasons
for wavelets to be considered as a very powerful tool for data analysis is their
fast algorithms. The research will be focused on constructing wavelets using
both spline and radial basis functions for effective implementation and fast
computation. Software development will be carried out concurrently, and one of
the main goals is to ensure that the algorithms can also be implemented in
hardware. Industrial standards in the hardware prototype development will also
be kept in mind.
