
* 9506452
* Mathematical Sciences: Computational Study of Vortex Sheet Motion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1995
* Robert Krasny,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/1999
* USD 120,000.00

The investigator will develop improved numerical methods for simulating fluid
flow, with emphasis on the vortex sheet model. The approach is based on the
vortex method, in which Lagrangian points carry the vorticity. The working
hypothesis is Prandtl's idea that the vortex sheet is an asymptotic model for a
free shear layer in slightly viscous flow. The first task in this pro- posal is
to develop a fast summation method to study spiral scal- ing properties in the
Kelvin-Helmholtz problem. Other projects are a simulation of splitter plate flow
with realistic boundary conditions, and a comparison of planar and axisymmetric
vortex sheet roll-up. The investigator will compare vortex simulations with
finite-difference solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations and with the
available laboratory experiments. A key concern is to obtain accurate numerical
solutions in order to make precise statements about the validity of the various
modelling assump- tions. Fluid dynamics is concerned with the motion of gas
(e.g. air) and liquid (e.g. water). A key goal is to understand the forces which
act between the fluid and an immersed solid surface. For example, air flow past
the wing is responsible for the lift force which supports an aircraft in flight.
Fluid flow is important in many areas of science and technology, from internal
combustion engines to weather prediction to blood flow. The mathematical
equations which describe fluid motion are difficult to solve, and hence the
investigator is developing numerical algorithms for use on high speed computers.
The goal is to provide insight into the physics of fluid motion, and to create
modelling tools to help engineers solve design problems.
