
* 9527124
* MDC: Computational Optimization research Center
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, THEORY OF COMPUTING, PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
* 10/01/1995,08/04/1999
* Leslie Trotter,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2001
* USD 2,770,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F Tz C| C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t ^ O b j e c
t P o o l Tz C| Tz C| 4 @ = > ? @ A B C D E F G F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; DMS-9527124 Trotter Advanced Scientific Computing
Centers This award covers a broad research program in the area of computational
optimization. The central thrust of the research addresses real-life, large-
scale mixed-inter programming problems arising from important industrial
application areas, such as manufacturing, telecommunications, and distribution.
These problems are of vast importance towards the nation s present and future
economic and technological development. The problems are also extremely
intractable, both from the viewpoint of practical computation, as well as in
terms of theoretical understanding, and they will only become larger and more
difficult in future applications. The computational and methodological
technology for solving integer programming models has made steady advances over
the last thirty years, often following improvements in computing machinery as
much as new theoretical insights. We are now at the starting point of a major
quantum improvement in the technology. Not only are there several new and
promising methodological venues available, but we are witnessin g a revolution
in the computing world, in particular involving parallel computing and operating
systems, with profound implications for science and engineering. It is almost
certain that within a few years all computers will have multiple CPUs, and that
all major scientific and engineering computing will be done on clusters of
multiple-CPU machines. As supercomputing becomes redefined, a push to
parallelize algorithms is starting now, and the end result will be software of
extraordinary complexity by today s standards. However, it is fair to say that
the field of parallel integer programming is, at best, in its infancy. The
research seeks to propel computational integer programming into the realm of
parallel computing, with the objective of effectively handling difficult real-
world problems. The objective will require a multidisciplinary approach. Our
work will seek to extend and develop solution methodologies for integer
programming, in particular involving cutting planes, column generation, and
branch-and-cut techniques. This will be integrated with computational theory
techniques, especially the design of efficient data structures for parallel
integer programming. Finally, there will be a large component of software
engineering, necessary for the implementation of efficient parallel programs.
This work combines the scientific and computational resources of three
participating organizations, Columbia University, Cornell University, and the
IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, to create a collaborative research environment
to attain the goals outlined above. Among the many important advantages of such
a close relationship between university computing research groups and that of a
major hardware producer is the focus on practical ends provided by the
industrial component. Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a
r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( < DMS-9527124 Jocelyn J. Whitehurst Jocelyn J.
Whitehurst @ " C| @ @ " C| @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e r ^ r l l l l l l
l 1 r T I l l l l l l l l l 9 DMS-9527124 Trotter Advanced Scientific Computing
Centers T
