
* 9600146
* Mathematical Sciences: Computational Analysis of Multiple Scales Problems in Wave Propagation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1996,06/21/1996
* Thomas Hagstrom,NM,University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9600146 Hagstrom This project's primary focus is on the development, analysis
and implementation of new and more efficient numerical methods for simulating
wave propagation in the presence of multiple temporal and spatial scales. This
includes the construction of efficient discretization methods and accurate
radiation conditions for solving linear hyperbolic systems, the development of
adaptive spectral methods for problems requiring highly accurate solutions, and
the analysis of splitting schemes for the efficient integration of multiple time
scales problems for partial differential equations. Specific physical
applications to be considered include acoustic and electromagnetic wave
propagation and the challenging problem of simulating dynamic combustion
phenomena making use of detailed models of the physics. Basic analyses of the
governing systems of nonlinear partial differential equations will also be
undertaken. Multiple scales problems are difficult because the uniform
resolution of the smallest scales present would lead to a prohibitively large
computational problem, even for the fastest machines likely to be available in
the coming decades. They are also a common feature of scientifically and
technologically important phenomena in a number of distinct physical settings.
They arise sometimes from the need to solve problems on large spatial domains or
over long time periods, and other times from the appearance of very localized
solution features, such as sharp wavefronts. In the latter case they are
generally associated with singular perturbations of the governing equations.
Singular perturbations may be thought of as small changes in the equations which
can lead to large qualitative and quantitative changes in the solutions. Such
problems can also often be analyzed by non- numerical asymptotic techniques and
in this work asymptotic analysis is used in a number of ways to guide and
complement numerical computations. The translation of theoretical advances into
useful tools, and the consideration of more complicated and comprehensive
mathematical models is emphasized so as to maximize the impact of the research
on other science and engineering disciplines.
