
* 9616205
* Mathematical Science: RUI: Collaborative Research Nonlinear Population Dynamics: Mathematical Models, Biological Experiments
* DMS,Population & Community Ecology, POPULATION DYNAMICS, POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1996,04/29/1998
* Robert Desharnais,CA,California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/2000
* USD 165,000.00

9616205 Desharnais A central question in population biology is that of
understanding and explaining observed fluctuations in animal numbers. The study
of nonlinear dynamics has opened the way to a new phase of population research
in which experiments are focused directly on phenomena such as equilibria,
periodic and aperiodic cycles, and chaos. The investigators undertake a spectrum
of activities essential to the testing of nonlinear population theory: from the
translation of biology into the formal language of mathematics, to the analysis
of mathematical models, to the development and application of statistical
techniques for the analysis of data, to the design and implementation of
biological experiments. Laboratory populations of flour beetles of the genus
Tribolium are used in the experiments. By means of their studies the
investigators provide rigorous experimental tests of nonlinear population
phenomena and behavior. These include: (1) dynamical transitions from stable
equilibria, to invariant loops (aperiodicities), to period locking, to strange
attractors and chaos; (2) transient and intermittent dynamics with aims towards
defining practical concepts of intermittency for use with stochastic population
models and the testing of some of the unusual transient behaviors forecast by
stochastic nonlinear models; (3) the dynamics of meta-populations using beetle
populations linked by migration; and (4) the dynamical behaviors that can be
produced by the interaction of environmental periodicities with nonlinear
demographic effects. The investigators study how biological populations (in
particular, populations of insects) fluctuate in time and how different
circumstances can lead to drastically different, and sometimes unexpected,
changes in these fluctuations. This study is carried out by means of an
interdisciplinary program that integrates the use of sophisticated mathematical
models and statistical analysis with the design and implementation of laboratory
experiments using species of beetles that are economically important insect
pests. The investigators seek to describe and explain a variety of patterns in
population fluctuations, ranging from those that are regular and predictable to
those that are irregular and "chaotic." They seek to understand the
environmental conditions that give rise to these various kinds of population
behavior. This understanding is essential if the impact on biological
populations of environmental perturbations and manipulations (by Man or by
Nature) is to be predicted. These impacts have far-reaching consequences,
ranging from food production and pest control to wildlife management and the
conservation of species diversity.
