
* 9623006
* Mathematical Sciences: On the Nonlinear Dynamics of Interfaces
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM, CFS-Combustion & Fire Systems
* 09/01/1996,07/13/1998
* Michael Frankel,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1999
* USD 55,738.00

9623006 Frankel. The main objective of this research is to study a group of free
interface problems related to solid combustion and exothermic phase transitions.
The one-dimensional evolution exhibits remarkable dynamical wealth, while there
are indications of its essentially finite-dimensional character. The existence
of a finite-dimensional attractor and nonlinear interaction of two free
boundaries in a degenerate Hopf bifurcation will be investigated analytically
and numerically. The Principal Investigator will also study two-dimensional
evolution generated by these free interface problems. A rigorous study
concerning well-posedness for problems with various boundary conditions and
interface kinetics shall be combined with numerical simulation in order to
understand geometry and dynamics of the curved interfaces. An alternative view
of the interface dynamics is provided by coordinate-free surface evolution
equations modeling basic flame instabilities which include the thermal-diffusive
and the hydrodynamic instabilities. Analytical and numerical study of the
surface evolution equations will be directed toward better understanding of
their basic mathematical nature, such as global well-posedness, uniformly
bounded curvature and smoothness of solutions, and some important dynamical
features including exponential growth of length, fingering and self-
fractalization that are exhibited by the solutions. %%% The proposed research is
essentially devoted to the study of evolution of interfaces: the surfaces that
separate the solid and the melted matter as it solidifies, or those that
separate the fuel and the burned products in combustion of gaseous or solid
mixtures of reactants. The latter is also known as high temperature syntheses
and can be employed for manufacturing of new materials. The shape and the
velocity of the interfaces as they propagate through the substance may greatly
effect the structure and the physical prope rties of the resulting products. It
was also demonstrated recently that evolution of flame fronts may be applied to
the nuclear flames in the "supernovae" type stars. ***
