
* 9623092
* Mathematical Sciences: Computational Two-Phase Viscous Drop Spreading
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1996,06/21/1996
* Richard Braun,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9623092 Braun Motivated by the complex transport associated with spreading
process such as the spreading of solder droplets and coating processes, a
research program is proposed on the spreading of a droplet that is covered by a
film. Often in soldering and other processes involving spreading, the drop may
become very thin which indicates the presence of multiple length scales. Based
on the author's previous research, the first approach proposed is a multi-scale
asymptotic analysis (lubrication theory) to derive nonlinear diffusion equations
for the free surfaces; those nonlinear diffusion equations will be solved using
a spectrally-accurate implementation of the method of lines. All quantities of
interest may be computed in this approximation once the required free surfaces
have been found. A second approach is also proposed, via boundary integral
equations, under the approximation of Stokes flow in the drop and film. This
approach relaxes the requirement that the drop and film be thin, but still
requires that the flow be slow. We propose making a direct comparison between
the two approaches in order to evaluate the utility of each in various
situations. The work proposed will develop models only for the fluid dynamics,
and inclusion of reactive effects will be proposed in a subsequent project.
Important processes in manufacturing involve the spreading of a fluid droplet in
the presence of another fluid; one example is soldering, where, in many
instances, the presence of a thin layer of a second fluid, the flux, is required
for the process to work at all. Because the use of lead-based solder is no
longer allowed, understanding of this droplet spreading process for other kind
of solder materials would be very helpful in understanding alternative solder
materials. The work proposed in the project is developing some preliminary
models necessary for the development of a complete model for a spreading solder
drop. The proposed program is to develop theory for the spreading of a droplet
on a flat plate that is covered by a thin film of a different fluid. Computer
codes will be developed that predict how fast the drop spreads, and the shapes
of the drop and the film that covers the drop. In summary, sophisticated
mathematical techniques will be applied to a problem of technological
importance. The computer codes resulting from this project are expected to be
applicable to related wetting problems in different technological areas (e.g.
coating processes) subsequent to the completion of this project.
