
* 9623205
* Mathematical Sciences: Binary Linear Codes: Nonexistence and Classification Theorems
* DMS,ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1996,05/20/1998
* David Jaffe,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 06/30/1999
* USD 34,000.00

9623205 Jaffe This award provides funding for a project involving the search for
and implementation of algorithms for classifying binary linear codes. These
algorithms are codified in a language, under development, which facilitates the
mechanical verification of proofs about binary linear codes. One method is to
take a generalized weight enumerator, and use it to generate a linear
programming problem, as Delsarte did with the ordinary weight enumerator. Thse
linear programming problems tend to be large, and thus are not generally
amenable to hand calculation. One particularly promising weight enumerator is
the split weight enumerator arising from a partition of n, where n is the length
of the code. Using this method and others, many new specific results about
binary linear codes will be proved. In turn, these may suggest new algorithms
and closed-form general statements. This research is about error-correcting
codes, a fundamental topic in mathematical combinatorics, computer science, and
electrical engineering. Such codes are indispensable whenever information must
be transferred across noisy channels from one place to another. For example,they
are used in compact disk players to get digitized music from the surface of the
CD to the inside of the player, and in communications between the earth and
orbiting satellites. Error-correcting codes work by creatively incorporating
redundancy into the transmitted message, to permit the receiver to detect and
correct those errors introduced in transit, which were caused by (for instance)
dust on the surface of the CD or cosmic rays. A code is good if it allows the
detection and correction of many errors without incurring the expense of
excessive redundancy. This award funds both a search for good codes and an
investigation into the mathematical limitations of how good they can be.
