
* 9625190
* Mathematical Sciences: "CAREER Program: Peter Smereka
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1996,05/15/1996
* Peter Smereka,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

Smereka The investigator undertakes a program of research and education under a
Career grant. Efforts are directed toward the study of bubbly fluids. A goal is
to develop effective equations for such fluids. The first step is to derive the
equations of motion for a finite collection of interacting bubbles. The behavior
for an infinite number of bubbles is deduced from kinetic theory, which gives
rise to a kinetic equation that is a coarse-grained description of the mixture.
This procedure has been implemented to derive two sets of effective equations
that describe concentration and sound waves in an ideal bubbly flow. In both
situations it is observed that the spatially homogeneous solution may be
unstable. In the first case the instability results in the bubbles clustering
and in the later case it indicates the bubble oscillations will synchronize to
each other. A damping mechanism similar to Landau damping is found in the stable
case. This is connected to the spectral theory of linear operators with a
continuous spectrum and has no finite-dimensional analogue. The investigator
extends this work to investigate the interaction of acoustic modes with
convective modes. The theory will also be broadened to include the effects of
gravity, liquid viscosity and bubble size distribution. With a view towards a
more general theory of bubbly flow, the investigator examines the effects of a
small, slowing varying vorticity field on an ideal bubbly flow. It is
anticipated that the studies will be performed in collaboration with a graduate
student. In addition to its relevance to engineering problems, this project
contains substantial educational aspects. The student will be exposed to fluid
mechanics, potential theory, Hamiltonian mechanics, kinetic theory, spectral
theory of linear operators, and numerical methods. A new graduate level
mathematics class is also developed on the numerical solution of interface
problems with level sets. The advantage of this approach is that it handles
topology changes naturally and easily. This class is expected to attract not
only mathematics students but science and engineering students as well, because
interface problems have wide-spread interest. An important emphasis of this
project is to further enhance the applied mathematics program in the mathematics
department at the University of Michigan and promote education at the interface
between mathematics and engineering. One aspect of this project is to develop
effective equations for bubbly fluids. A bubbly fluid is a dispersion of gas
bubbles in a liquid and can be found in a variety natural and industrial
settings. The effective equations will give a bulk or coarse-grained description
of this mixture. At the present time computer resources do not exist to
numerically simulate directly a bubbly fluid. For this reason considerable
effort has been made in the development of models for bubbly fluids. The other
aspect of the project is to incorporate applications of mathematics in a
significant portion of mathematics classes. At the undergraduate level, the
investigator plans to develop an enriched calculus course that focuses on
applications for engineering students. The investigator plans to continue
redesigning a senior level partial differential equations class to include more
physics, applications, and computer-related assignments.
