
* 9625865
* Mathematical Sciences: Blocks, Partitions, Asynchronous Parallel Methods, and Applications to Markov Chains and Other Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1996,07/16/1996
* Daniel Szyld,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9625865 Szyld The investigator studies block and asynchronous iterative methods
for the efficient solution of nonsymmetric linear algebraic systems of
equations. One aspect of the project is the study of the application of
threshold partitioning algorithms for sparse matrices. The emphasis of the
project is on singular systems. Singular systems of equations arise in many
applications, including certain types of differential equations modeling
physical phenomena, Markov chains, and queuing models. Markov chains are used,
e.g., to evaluate the performance of computer systems, while queuing models in
particular simulate traffic in telecommunication networks. This project develops
fast methods for solving linear systems of equations, particularly singular
systems. The methods are iterative: starting from an initial guess at the
solution of a system, the method produces a sequence of approximate solutions
that approaches the actual solution. Asynchronous methods for parallel computers
refer to methods in which part of the computation is performed in each processor
in an asynchronous way, i.e., without synchronization between the processors. In
other words, each processor proceeds with its tasks, using the information
available at any given moment without waiting for the other processors to finish
their tasks. Processors do not wait: they keep active computing better
approximations to the solutions. Therefore the overall solution time can be
greatly reduced. The variables of the differential equations, of the Markov
chains, or of the queuing models, may be partitioned naturally into sets of
variables, e.g., by the near-connectivity of the nodes of a network or graph.
This partition induces a particular block structure in the matrix representing
the linear system to be solved. Asynchronous parallel methods are well suited to
deal with these blocks. New partitioning algorithms that take into account the
values of the matrix are explored. The discre tizations of many differential
equations, such as certain convection-diffusion equations, give rise to matrices
with coefficients varying over a wide range of values, i.e., some large and some
very small. These problems are very hard to solve in practice, and most modern
iterative methods fail to converge. The methods that do converge are very
expensive or very slow. Partitioning algorithms that take into account these
values can be used to permute these matrices so that the large coefficients lie
along the diagonal of the matrix. Parts of this permuted matrix, e.g., its
blocks along the diagonal, can be used as an effective preconditioner.
Preliminary experiments indicate that this approach leads to fast convergence.
Thus, the project can provide a method to efficiently solve a class of important
problems in science and engineering.
