
* 9626692
* Mathematical Sciences: Advanced Computational Stochastic Dynamic Programming for Continuous Time Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1996,08/21/1996
* Floyd Hanson,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/2000
* USD 102,000.00

Hanson 9626692 The investigator and associates develop advanced computational
methods to solve large scale dynamic programming problems in uncertain
environments. These methods include parallel computation, graphical
visualization, problem mapping, memory management and data restructuring on
massively parallel and massive memory processors to solve large dimensional
problems that could not be solved by ordinary methods. The objective is develop
fast algorithms for the optimal feedback control of large, general, continuous
time, nonlinear, stochastic dynamical systems, perturbed by both Gaussian and
distributed Poisson white noise. The treatment of the random jumps of Poisson
processes for modeling rare, disastrous events is a special and challenging
feature of this research. The main application of this research is to optimal
remediation for groundwater quality in an uncertain environment. Other
applications are to parameter uncertainty in partially observed control systems,
i.e., the dual control problem, and to just-in-time manufacturing systems. The
numerical approach of the investigators directly treats the partial differential
equation of stochastic dynamic programming. New algorithms, such as spatial and
state finite elements, are used to alleviate both memory and computational
demands. Purely parallel algorithms based on intelligent state space search are
also being developed. The development of graphical visualization and data
management tools are essential for analyzing massive amounts of output in many
dimensions. The investigator and associates are developing optimal solutions to
environmental and manufacturing problems when there is some uncertainty
involved. Examples of the cause of uncertainty in the problem are the unexpected
introduction of pollution and unknown parameters in the case of the environment,
while in the case of manufacturing an example would be the random failure of
machines. The reason for seeking optimal solutio ns is to minimize costs or
wasting precious materials or resources. A large and important application that
the investigator studies is the cleanup of groundwater resources where the
source of the pollution or the underground state is uncertain. Since polluted
groundwater sites can costs from millions to billions and more (there are some
sites for which cleanup procedures are unknown), optimal solutions could save
millions over existing sub-optimal procedures. Similar savings can be obtained
for just-in-time manufacturing systems that are optimally managed, enhancing our
globally competitive capabilities. The investigator and associates develop
advanced computing techniques to compute the optimal solutions using high
performance computing, which is essential when uncertain environments or
parameters make the amount of computation for the solution very large. The high
performance computing involves using massive computers for fast optimal
solutions and graphical visualization to make the immense amount of output
understandable, for instance to the environmental resource or manufacturing
plant manager who would be the prime user.
