
* 9626645
* Mathematical Sciences: Immersed Interface Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1996,08/20/1996
* Randall LeVeque,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 240,000.00

LeVeque 9626645 The investigator and his colleagues develop immersed interface
methods and apply them to a variety of problems. Immersed interface methods are
a class of methods for solving partial differential equations whose solutions
have discontinuities or nonsmoothness across some interface(s). The idea is to
use a uniform Cartesian grid in spite of the fact that the interface may cut
between grid points. The goal of this work is to develop finite difference
methods in two and three space dimensions that give highly accurate solutions at
all grid points while maintaining the efficiency and ease of implementation of
uniform grid methods. Pointwise second order accurate methods have already been
developed for several classes of problems, including certain elliptic,
parabolic, and hyperbolic equations with discontinuous coefficients across fixed
interfaces. Stokes flow and solidification problems with moving interfaces have
also been solved. Extensions to a number of other problems are currently
underway. Many important practical problems lead to differential equations in
regions of 2- or 3-dimensional space that are geometrically complicated, and
that contain interfaces across which the nature of the solution changes. These
equations can rarely be solved exactly, and large-scale computation is required
to obtain well-resolved solutions over multi-dimensional regions. The goal of
this work is to develop efficient computational methods to approximate solutions
of such problems. Several specific problems are studied in depth: (1) One goal
is to develop improved methods for incompressible fluid dynamics in regions with
complicated moving elastic boundaries, based on a method of Peskin's that is
widely used in biophysical and physiological modelling, e.g., of the heart,
blood vesssels, the inner ear, etc. (2) Wave equations in heterogeneous
materials arise in numerous applications, including ultrasound imaging and
therapy, ocean acoustics, and seismic p ropagation in the earth. The "forward
problem" consists of solving the equations forward in time given the material
properties and locations of interfaces. The harder "inverse problem" requires
determining the material properties and locations of interfaces from
measurements made at the surface. Ultrasound imaging requires solving the
inverse problem for acoustics equations. Seismic exploration of the earth,
heavily used in the search for oil, for example, requires solving inverse
problems for elastic wave equations or for simplified travel-time equations. The
methods developed in this work are applied to both forward and inverse problems.
(3) In electrical impedance tomography, an inverse problem is solved for the
electrical conductivity of an object. This technique is used in medical imaging
and is being studied for the purpose of locating unexploded land mines, a major
health risk in many countries today. Inverse problems of this type are being
studied in this work. (4) Porous media equations arising in oil reservoir
simulation and groundwater transport requiremodeling discontinuities in
permeability and porosity at geological interfaces, as well as moving front
representing interfaces between oil and water, for example. Accurate modeling of
groundwater flow is important in studying contamination by toxic wastes and
remediation of contaminated sites. (5) Multi-phase solidification problems
involve moving interfaces between the two phases (e.g. ice and water) and may be
coupled with fluid dynamics effects as well as heat transfer. Practical
applications include studying the effect of ocean currents on ice shelves,
injection molding in manufacturing processes, and chemical etching.
