
* 9627071
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Parallel Solution Methods for Scientific Computation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1996,12/02/1999
* Carl De Boor,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 126,000.00

9627071 Strikwerda The investigator improves, studies, and implements numerical
methods for parallel and distributed computation. The project concentrates on
parallel domain decomposition methods for incompressible viscous flow,
implemented in a distributed environment and applying the methods to problems of
significant interest. The investigator runs a domain decomposition code in a
distributed computing environment using message passing. The code uses the
finite difference method with the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations to
solve for flow in nonsimple geometries. He analyzes the solution of linear
systems by distributed relaxation methods and other methods suitable for
distributed computing environments. He analyzes further recent convergence
results for the GMRES(m) algorithm, a very robust method with wide
applicability. The investigator has recently analyzed parallel computing methods
and shown that synchronous methods are faster than asynchronous methods for a
significant class of methods. He extends this work to a wider class of methods
and use more powerful analytical methods to analyze parallel computations. The
current code uses the PVM library to pass boundary values between domains. This
project studies how best to solve some large numerical problems using parallel
computation. For many of these computations, algorithms can be devised so that
the total effort is split into several large pieces that are linked together.
For example, determining the flow pattern of water past a submarine can be split
into the flow near the front, middle, and rear, as well as the flow farther away
from the submarine. For these four regions, if the solution is known in any
three of the regions, the flow in the fourth region can be determined. This
leads to an iterative method for computing the flow: assuming that the flow is
correct in three regions, a flow in the other region can be computed. This
resulting total flow can then be used to com pute a new flow in each region, and
this process can be continued until it converges to the correct answer. The
computations can be greatly speeded up if they are done for each region
simultaneously, that is in parallel. There are a number of issues related to
this sort of computation. The computation can proceed in a synchronous fashion,
with a new round of updates beginning only after all have finished, or the
updates could be done asynchronously, with a new update for a region beginning
as soon as the previous update for that region is completed. For some problems
it can be shown that the synchronous computations are faster. Some other
iterative methods, in particular one called GMRES, are usually faster than the
simple iteration described above. GMRES uses past information to guide the
computation of the next update toward a better result. The investigator
implements this in parallel and studies the gain in efficiency that results. One
of the project's goals is to determine how to best decompose certain large
problems to better utilize high performance computing environments.
