
* 9704919
* 1997 Industrial Mathematics Modeling Workshop for Graduate Students
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1997,08/11/1997
* Jeffrey Scroggs,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 01/31/1999
* USD 45,802.00

For the 1997 Industrial Mathematics Modeling Workshop for Graduate Students
(IMMW97), an applied scientist or mathematician leads a team of approximately 6
graduate students in the solution of an actual problem from industry. Thus,
applied mathematics graduate students are exposed both to the types of problems
arising in industry and to the team approach of problem solving. This enriches
their graduate educational experience, and can provide valuable training in the
event the students choose a non-academic career. Boeing, Kodak, Michelin, and
the NSA are likely to be represented by the industrial problem presenters at
IMMW97. We strongly believe that workshops, such as the one proposed here, are
one of the best ways to heighten students interest in industrial mathematics, to
improve students vision about the type of mathematics and science that should be
learned, and to accelerate the cross-fertilization between the applied sciences
and mathematics. This workshop is modeled after the successful workshops,
``Industrial Mathematics Modeling Workshop for Graduate Students,'' held the
past two summers at North Carolina State University. Last year's workshop was
organized by Professors Tran, Reitich, and Scroggs. In addition, Prof. Reitich,
in cooperation with Lord Corporation, was one of the problem presenters. This
workshop series started in the summers of 1993 and 1994 at the Claremont
Graduate School. Both of these workshops were organized by Professor Ellis
Cumberbatch of the Claremont Graduate School. This GOALI project is jointly
supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
