
* 9705793
* Finite Element Methods of Least-Squares Types
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1997,07/21/1997
* Pavel Bochev,TX,University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2000
* USD 81,000.00

9705793 P.Bochev The main focus of this research is directed at the design of
fast, robust and accurate algorithms for the numerical solution of nonlinear
partial differential equations. To accomplish these objectives we consider
finite element methods based on application of least-squares variational
principles. Such principles offer significant computational and theoretical
advantages that are not present in other discretization schemes, e.g., mixed
Galerkin methods. Most notably, corresponding least-squares methods are not
subject to stability constraints, such as the inf-sup condition, and lead to
symmetric and positive definite algebraic problems. The principal objective of
the research will be to develop, analyze and implement finite element methods
that can fully exploit the inherent advantages of the least-squares formalism,
especially in the context of realistic applications. Our efforts here will be
guided by the impact of both the mathematical structure of model problems and
the computational features of least-squares principles upon the algorithmic
design of the methods. The research will be carried in the context of systems of
partial differential equations that are compact perturbations of linear elliptic
operators. Least-squares principles for these systems are obtained through
minimization of problem-dependent, norm-equivalent functionals. As a result,
discretization of the associated Euler-Lagrange equations leads to systems of
nonlinear algebraic equations having symmetric and positive definite Jacobians.
These equations are solved using Newton linearization combined with robust
continuation techniques. To address large-scale computations, at each Newton
step the linearized systems are solved using robust preconditioned iterative
methods implemented without assembly of the discretization matrix. Design of
efficient preconditioners for these iterative solvers will exploit novel ideas,
including the use of negative norms in the least-squares functionals. With the
advent of new and more powerful digital computers numerical simulation is
emerging as a viable and cost-effective alternative to expensive field
experiments and tests. However, despite the increased computational power there
is still a real and existing need to develop fast and robust computer algorithms
for a wide range of industrial applications. This is especially true for
applications involving numerical solution of the Navier-Stokes equations. The
tremendous practical importance of these equations stems from their fundamental
role in the modeling of fluid flows arising in such diverse applications as
atmospheric motions, flow of air around aircraft, and lubrication of ball
bearings. At the same time numerical solution of the Navier-Stokes equations in
realistic settings remains difficult and computationally challenging. Indeed,
large-scale solution of these equations in three dimensions required in
applications such as weather forecast, hurricane tracking, and modeling of air
pollution, continues to be an outstanding problem which motivates this research
project. Our principal goal is to develop new, reliable and accurate numerical
algorithms for the Navier-Stokes equations that can be used for computations
carried in realistic settings. To accomplish this we explore alternative ways to
discretize the model problem, i.e., to replace this model by a set of equations
that can be solved on a computer. The research will focus on the development of
novel discretization techniques leading to equations that require less
computational resources and that are easier to solve than the equations obtained
by standard methods. This allows us to develop more robust, faster and easier to
use codes. In addition to fluid flow problems the research will also target
numerical solution of mathematical models arising in elasticity,
electromagnetics and reaction-diffusion applications, among others.
