
* 9706768
* Moving Node Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1997,08/05/1997
* Neil Carlson,IN,Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

9706768 Neil N. Carlson ABSTRACT (Moving Node Finite Element Methods) The
gradient-weighted moving finite element method (GWMFE) is an adaptive method
well-suited to problems which develop sharp moving fronts, especially those
problems where one must resolve the fine-scale structure of the front. Three
works related to the method are planned. First, development of GWMFE in 3-D will
continue. The recently completed scalar code will be extended to systems of
equations and the direct linear solver will be replaced by iterative techniques
based on the work of Miller and Xaba. The code will be applied to a variety of
difficult PDEs and PDE systems: Stefan-type problems, drift-diffusion equations
from semiconductor device modeling, the time dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation,
are some possible examples. A parallel version of the code will also be
developed. Second, a new moving mixed finite element method will be implemented
in 2-D and 3-D. Here, in the spirit of the mixed finite element method, the
diffusive flux is approximated in an independent finite element space (BDM or
RT) and a coupled system of ODEs is then obtained via the same variational
argument used in the moving finite element method. This new method gives a more
rigorous treatment of diffusion terms, and in 1-D gives superior grid
adaptivity. Third, in collaboration with Miller (Berkeley), global adaptivity
will be added to GWMFE in 2-D. This global adaptivity will be achieved through
the periodic addition, deletion, and reconnection of nodes based upon geometric
criteria, which are easily identifiable through simple eigenvalue analysis, and
upon local projection error estimates. This complements the very fine local
adaptivity GWMFE achieves through the continuous motion of its nodes, and is
essential for a robust method. Many physical processes are modeled by partial
differential equations. A solution of such an equation might give, for example,
the concentration of of arsenic in a semicon ductor substrate at each instant of
time and each point in one, two, or three dimensional space. Because it is
generally impossible to find the exact solution of such an equation, approximate
solutions must be sought using some computer-based technique. For a large class
of difficult problems standard techniques are extremely wasteful and
inefficient, making computations in two, and especially three, dimensions very
difficult if not altogether impossible. More sophisticated adaptive techniques
seek to overcome this difficulty. The gradient-weighted moving finite element
method (GWMFE) is one such technique, and it offers some significant advantages
over more conventional adaptive methods. This project seeks to advance GWMFE and
related methods in several directions. First, a full implementation of GWMFE in
the computationally challenging three dimensional case will be completed, and
applied to a variety of challenging problems. Second, a variant of the method
which gives a more accurate treatment of some problems will be investigated. And
last, a complementary global adaptivity will be added to GWMFE in two dimensions
which will substantially enhance the robustness of the method. GWMFE has been
applied to a variety of difficult problems with great success, including
problems from semiconductor device manufacture and device simulation,
groundwater transport and oil reservoir engineering, and time dependent models
of superconductors. Being able to computationally model problems like these is
becoming ever more important to scientists and engineers. GWMFE shows great
promise in making some of these difficult problems efficiently computable in two
and three dimensions, some of which are currently inaccessible with existing
techniques.
