
* 9706949
* Theory and Application of Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1997,04/12/1999
* Jinchao Xu,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 07/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9706949 Jinchao Xu The proposed research is on the development, analysis and
applications of advanced numerical methods for solving partial differential
equations arising in sciences and engineering. The focus of research is on
efficient multigrid and domain decomposition methods and other relevant
algorithms that are suited for parallel and high performance computers. One
major object is to try to make multigrid and domain decomposition methods be
more practical and more easily used. In particular, efficient and practical
multigrid methods will be developed for unstructured grids and also for grids
that are currently available from existing (commercial) finite element software.
Special techniques under development include the agglomeration method and
auxiliary space (grid) methods. Theoretical analysis will also be carried out to
justify the efficiency of various methods and also to motivate the development
of more sophisticated methods. A major portion of the proposed research will be
devoted to the development of efficient multigrid methods for convection-
dominated convection-diffusion problems, Navier-Stokes equations and hyperbolic
equations and also to the theoretical justifications of the efficiency of some
special multigrid methods which use some carefully designed domain decomposition
methods as smoothers. Some of the proposed research will be carried out in
collaboration with computational scientists and engineers to develop practical
and efficient methods for solving some real life problems. Because of the advent
of high performance computers, it becomes more and more feasible to use
computers to simulate real life problems. In fact it has become a more and more
common practice to use computer simulations to replace the traditional and
oftentimes very expensive laboratory experiments. Most of the real life problems
can be modeled and described by the so-called partial differential equations.
These equations can become more and more complicated if we want to have more and
more accurate and more realistic modeling of the real life situations. Hence it
is a constant challenge to develop efficient numerical methods for solving these
equations. The proposed research is precisely for the study of a class of most
advanced numerical algorithms for effectively solving partial differential
equations on parallel and high performance computers. Our research has been
directly tired to various practical applications such as environment protection
and the design of medical material and devise. In fact, for example, one
numerical package that we have helped develop (based on research related to this
proposal) have been adopted by U.S. EPA for environmental assessment and
protection.
