
* 9707015
* A Posteriori Error Estimation and Up-Scaling for Mixed Finite Element Methods
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1997,08/05/1997
* Todd Arbogast,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 07/31/2000
* USD 75,000.00

9707015 Todd Arbogast A POSTERIORI ERROR ESTIMATION AND UP-SCALING FOR MIXED
FINITE ELEMENT METHODS This project concerns the approximation of second order
elliptic and parabolic partial differential equations by mixed finite element
methods on logically rectangular grids. The first objective is to develop a
local a posteriori error estimator or indicator, so that spatial errors can be
localized. We propose to estimate the error by exploiting the equivalence
between mixed and non-conforming methods for rectangular elements. The second
objective is to develop up-scaling or homogenization techniques for highly
variable coefficients and point-like sources, i.e., for resolving fine length
scales in the model system that are below the size of a practical computational
mesh. The error associated with using these up-scaling techniques must be
quantifiable. We propose to base our techniques on the discrete equations, and
use the coarse scale Raviart-Thomas projection operator which preserves the flux
across any element face. The third objective is to demonstrate the applicability
of the techniques in a practical setting; we consider the simulation of
subsurface flow. The first two objectives are complementary. Error estimation
would allow us to refine the mesh where the solution is ill behaved, as near
sharp fronts, local heterogeneity, or sources (i.e., wells), so that
computational effort can be concentrated to resolve the major length scales in
both the data and the solution. Up-scaling would allow us to further resolve
some scales below the mesh size. Our understanding of fluid flow underground is
important to a range of activities, including the clean-up of ground-water
contamination and oil and gas production. Ground-water supplies are increasingly
threatened by contaminants introduced into the environment by improper disposal
or accidental release. U.S. petroleum production has declined markedly in recent
years. These problems can be ameliorated by complex engineering processes that
require careful design and monitoring, which in turn depend on our ability to
simulate on a computer the movement of fluids underground. Our computer
simulations must be sufficiently detailed that we can further predict physical,
chemical, and biological processes and the consequences of human intervention.
Such simulation requires that we approximate accurately the differential
equations governing the movement and interaction of the fluids. It is difficult
to do this for a number of reasons, but the most basic is a lack of resolution:
we can only use data and compute fluid velocities at a small number of grid
points in space. To date there has been no effective way to estimate the error
in the approximation to the fluid velocity. If we knew that our errors were
large, we could take corrective action by increasing the grid resolution, up to
the limits of the computer resources available. Beyond that limit, it is
necessary to approximate certain very small-scale quantities below the grid
scale (such as local variations in rock properties) by replacing them by some
appropriately defined average quantities. We address these concerns in this
proposal, and demonstrate the applicability of our techniques in practical
settings to gain their acceptance by engineers.
