
* 9707006
* Research and Training in Vision and Computational Neuroscience
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1997,08/25/1997
* Amir Assadi,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

Assadi 9707006 Visual perception of surfaces is crucial for 3D object
recognition. All surfaces in natural scenes are endowed with texture. In this
project, the investigator develops new algorithms to estimate shape (geometric
characteristics of surfaces) from texture in natural and synthetic scenes. The
new geometric models use piecewise Riemannian foliations, in the sense of
differential topology, with additional structure. Given a 3D-textured surface,
not necessarily piecewise smooth, one constructs a foliation whose leaves form a
one-parameter family of 2D-textured and piecewise smooth mathematical surfaces
approximating the given object. Together with an objective function defined on
their leaves, such 2D-textured foliations are fundamental geometric objects that
model 3D-textured surfaces in the world. One can use algorithms to recover shape
from texture for the piecewise smooth leaves, e.g. curvature and slant. Several
scene-based methods are explored to construct textured foliations, ranging from
analytic (e.g. Hamilton-Jacobi equations) and topological techniques (e.g.
integrable distributions) to statistical estimation methods. The psychophysical
experiments to test the theory and compare different algorithms are explored
with colleagues who are neuroscience experimentalists. In particular, the
objective function can be numerically approximated based on psychophysical data.
The new models are applied to perception of symmetry. The problem of modeling
computational strategies employed by the visual cortex to estimate shape from
texture, and their comparison with the new computational algorithms, is pursues.
The investigator outlines a concrete training program and research collaboration
with his senior colleagues in vision and neuroscience at UC Berkeley in order to
achieve the cognitive and computational objectives of the project. How do we
see? This simple question does not have a simple answer. Vision is a complex
series of eve nts that begins when light enters the eyes and ends with
perception. People are able to discriminate between objects of different size,
contrast and color with precision. They can estimate curvature and orientation
of surfaces with varying roughness and multitudes of texture, as well as
describe within short time intervals properties of surfaces such as symmetry and
similarity to other familiar objects. The human visual system easily outperforms
any man-made machine. Decades of research in vision demonstrate the wisdom of
the following approach: Key insights generally come from models that are well-
suited for exploring a specific research question. Geometric models coupled with
computational techniques have formed a cornerstone of modern theories of
biological as well as robot vision, and of their diverse applications. In this
project, the principal investigator and his colleagues establish a new link
between advanced geometric theories in pure mathematics (theory of foliations
from differential topology) and visual perception and estimation of shape of
surfaces in natural and synthetic environments. Among applications of the
theory, one could mention: robot motion planning and navigation of manless
vehicles in rough terrain or unreachable environments; visual shape estimation
of images of materials obtained by atomic force microscopy in scientific
research and design of advanced materials; long-term computerized inspection of
surfaces subject to ballistic deposition and erosion in environmental studies
and ecology; and computational inspection of large databases of images from
infrared radio astronomy in order to locate specific features. Just as the
neurons in human visual system perform their tasks in parallel, the above-
mentioned theory lends itself to parallel processing implementation.
