
* 9707494
* Mathematical Sciences: Computations in Fluids and Materials
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1997,08/13/1999
* Michael Shelley,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2001
* USD 231,000.00

9707494 Michael Shelley These projects concern dynamics and pattern formation in
complex fluids, and singularity formation and topological transitions in
Newtonian fluids. The first project considers the hydrodynamics of slender
elastic filaments, such as arise in liquid crystal flows, the dynamics of
phospho-lipid bilayer tubes, and in the dynamics of biological polymers.
Building tractable computational models, that account for hydrodynamic
interactions of the filament with itself, relies on discriminating exploitation
of slenderness. This still gives a computationally intensive problem with high-
order time-step constraints from elasticity, interaction integrals with singular
kernels, and integral equations to be solved at every time-step. The second
project continues towards an understanding of topological transitions of
fluid/fluid interfaces between immiscible liquids. The fundamental questions
are: How does surface tension provoke or mediate transitions? What characterizes
the singularity? What physics needs to be added to follow the transition? And
what is left of the singularity in its aftermath? Building upon previous work on
such singularities in the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability between immiscible
fluids, it is proposed to study, computationally and analytically, singularities
and transitions in jets that separate immiscible fluids, both by using sharp
interface models, and fluid models that have viscosity and allow some
miscibility. The third project studies the effect of shear-thinning, a property
shared with many non-Newtonian fluids and liquid crystal flows, on the
development of the Saffman-Taylor instability. Some of the modelling work has
already been done, yielding a natural non-Newtonian version of Darcy's law,
relating the fluid velocity to the solution of a nonlinear elliptic problem. It
is proposed to now simulate the full nonlinear dynamics of such a bubble
expanding into a shear-thinning liquid. This is a very challenging comp
utational problem as it involves the solution of nonlinear elliptic problems on
an evolving domain. Much of the fundamental dynamics of fluids and materials --
singularity and pattern formation are two central examples -- will be understood
by a progression from mathematical modelling, to developing computational
methods and relevant mathematical understanding, and thence to large-scale
simulation and data analysis through high-performance computing. The three
projects to be pursued here all lie at the intersection of fluid dynamics and
materials science, and all illustrate the above statement. In the first project,
it is proposed to understand and simulate the dynamics of filamentary
structures, as arise in phase transitions of liquid crystalline fluids, the
dynamics of phospho-lipid bilayer tubes, and in the dynamics of biological
polymers. In first example, such filaments are of potential technological
importance in the manufacture of high-strength filaments. The second project
continues towards a theoretical understanding of what drives the break-up into
droplets of a jet of fluid into a second, different fluid (say, oil and water).
While easy and common to observe, such behavior is strongly associated with
surface tension, an effect that is still ill-understood, and yet lies at the
heart of much basic fluid phenomena. This will be studied by a combination of
modelling, analysis, and large-scale computation. The final project concerns the
dynamics of shear-thinning liquids flowing in thin gaps. Such flows are
important to display device design, and to injection molding. Of particular
interest is the instability and pattern formation associated with a gas/liquid
interface which is driven but mediated by surface tension. This is an extremely
challenging computational problem, requiring the development of new simulational
methods.
