
* 9714811
* Joint NCSU-Boeing Academic-Industrial Research Project
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1998,04/01/2002
* Carl Meyer,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 05/31/2003
* USD 293,988.00

The purpose of this project is to build a collaborative structure involving
personnel from Boeing's Mathematical and Engineering Analysis Division (John
Betts and Daniel Pierce) and NCSU's Applied Mathematics program (Carl Meyer,
Stephen Campbell, Ilse Ipsen, Carl Kelley and four graduate students) to
investigate problems of mutual interest which arise in the design and
development of modern aircraft. Modern manufacturing techniques attempt to
utilize sophisticated automatic assembly machines to reliably construct a
product while reducing production cost and time. The problem of modeling the
motion of complex dynamical systems such as robot arms, multi-axis milling
machines and automated assembly tools is a central issue in the effort toward
manufacturing modernization. Complex differential-algebraic equations (DAE's)
are often at the heart of these problems, and the goal is to use these DAE's to
simulate system performance, thereby avoiding ad hoc process design approaches
and circumventing the need to build physical mockups. Notwithstanding recent
advances, computer simulations in these areas are not always performed using the
DAE's because state-of-the-art solution technology for DAE's is not robust and
reliable enough for everyday use. Instead, engineers convert the problems to
initial value differential equation problems and treat algebraic constraints
using heuristics. As a result of this ad hoc process, each problem requires
special treatment which not only translates into increased costs, but extends
product-to-market times. The net result is a degradation in both industrial and
national competitive advantages. This joint academic-industrial research project
focuses on some immediate problems requiring advanced and robust DAE solvers.
Specific applications include Boeing's current tool planning project which is
aimed at optimizing the path of a trim tool in the production of airplane parts,
the solution of an inverse problem that uses measured d ata to determine actual
air pressures, and the trajectory planning problem required for Boeing's high
speed civil transport project. Common to each application are DAE models which
require advances in DAE solution technology before more sophisticated production
engineering computing tools can be developed. The joint research effort will be
facilitated through regular short visits by members of each team to the other
team's site, and it will be further strengthened by installing NCSU graduate
students in Boeing's Mathematics and Engineering Analysis division. Boeing will
allocate a substantial amount of salary support from their research budget to
allow members of their team to engage in this collaborative effort. Boeing will
provide facility support in the way of office space, computing hardware and
software, library resources, etc., while NCSU team members visit Bellevue. NCSU
will reciprocate when Boeing personnel visit Raleigh. Boeing will provide funds
to help support NCSU graduate students working on the project commensurate with
their level of involvement. These funds will provide salary and living expenses
for students while at Boeing. While at NCSU, the graduate students would be
supported by traditional research assistantships through this grant. It is
anticipated that the regular visits the PIs make to the other team's site would
be short (on the order of two to three weeks per visit), but flexibility for
longer visits exists. The NCSU students would stay at Boeing for longer periods
so as to become fully integrated in the applications and research. Students
could be at Boeing from anywhere between a few weeks to several months,
depending on project needs and individual circumstances. Boeing will also grant
a license for use of their nonlinear optimization software for the use of the
team of principal investigators at North Carolina State University. It is
currently estimated that developing a complete solution to the optimization of
the path of tool trim problem could result in a substantial cost reduction of
all Boeing machined tools and parts. It would also allow Boeing to achieve its
targeted manufacturing rates while stabilizing employment oscillations and
improve the quality of its manufactured parts. the savings are expected to be
substantial by the year 2000 when it is hoped that a sizable percentage of the
machining tools at Boeing will be using these methods. In the years to follow,
the cost savings are expected to be truly dramatic. Moreover, this is a
fundamental industrial need, used in manufacturing everything from components of
your car's continuous velocity joint, the mold for your computer's cabinet, to
the booster rockets on the Space Shuttle. The advances made on the machine path
problem would have a very wide ranging impact. This GOALI project is jointly
supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
