
* 9727525
* Copper Mountain Conference on Multigrid Methods, Copper Mountain, Colorado, March 29-April 4, 1998
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/1997,09/16/1997
* Thomas Manteuffel,CO,Front Range Scientific Computations, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

Manteuffel 9727525 The researcher and his colleagues organize a conference
devoted to iterative methods for the solution of linear and nonlinear systems of
equations. Particular themes are nonsymmetric linear systems, globally
convergent algorithms for nonlinear systems, algorithms of optimal order of
work, saddle point problems, and applications on multiprocessor computer
architectures. The mathematical description of real-world problems leads
inevitably to equations to solve. Many times the equations are nonlinear ones,
arising because the underlying problem is nonlinear. Often, however, the
original problem is linear and the mathematical equations are too. Such problems
arise in all areas of science and technology, and are of special interest in
biology, materials, environmental studies, and manufacturing. Progress in these
areas requires solution of more comprehensive modeling equations --- such models
are usually more nonlinear than simpler models ---, or more accurate solution of
existing models --- increasing the size of the numerical problem to be solved.
In certain problems, notably in fluid flow and in elasticity, computational
methods for the equations describing the phenomena yield numerical systems
having a saddle point; the solution is on a surface that looks locally like a
saddle. Computational methods for such problems offer special difficulties. The
conference addresses advances in algorithms to deal with larger numerical
systems, nonlinearities, the amount of time and work needed to get a solution,
saddle points, and the use of multiprocessor computers.
