
* 9802259
* The Numerical Analysis and Application of High Dimensional Higher Index DAEs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, PRODUCTION SYSTEMS, Manufacturing Machines & Equip
* 07/01/1998,07/06/1998
* Stephen Campbell,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2002
* USD 200,000.00

9802259 Campbell A differential algebraic equation (DAE) is a system of
equations relating various quantities with some of their derivatives. However,
unlike with an ordinary differential equation (ODE), the equations do not
directly provide all the derivatives of the state variables. A nonnegative
integer called the index is one measure of how far a DAE is from an ODE which is
index zero. The higher the index the greater the difficulty in working with the
system. Many physical problems are most naturally initially modeled as a DAE
particularly those that are analyzed and simulated using computer generated
mathematical models. Because of the importance of DAEs in applications a variety
of numerical techniques have been developed in recent years to simulate and
analyze DAEs. These techniques, while very useful, are limited to systems with
special structure and low index (no more than three and often limited to one or
two) This project is to investigate the analysis, simulation, and application of
high dimensional, higher index DAEs of unknown and nonstandard structure. Two
applications, of considerable independent interest, will be considered to serve
as both application of, and guide for, the theoretical, analytic, and numerical
work. The first application is the optimization of the path of a trim tool. A
trim tool is a machine used for cutting a part from a piece of metal. Improved
performance of trim tools is of great importance for manufacturing and
industrial competitiveness. The second application is the simulation of densely
packed high frequency circuits for which current industrial simulation packages
are inadequate. The robust solution of these types of problems requires
additional fundamental theoretical results and algorithms for high index high
dimensional DAEs. This project will develop theory and computational algorithms
for high index high dimensional DAEs and apply them to the two applications. For
both of these applications the high fidelity models needed are mixed systems of
partial differential equations, DAEs, and constraints. Their solution will
require examining the interplay between type of model, type of approximation
process, and resulting types of DAEs.
