
* 9802367
* Reliability of Computational Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 08/01/1998,05/04/2000
* Ivo Babuska,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2002
* USD 225,000.00

9802367 Babuska The project will address the following topics: 1) A posteriori
error estimation in the finite element method. It will focus on the error
estimation of the values of engineering interest as error in the solution, the
gradients (stresses) in the entire domain as well as subdomains, the values of
the functionals, etc. The upper and lower a- posteriori bounds will be
addressed. The effectivity and robustness of these estimates will be
theoretically and computationally investigated. The linear elliptic equations
and problems occurring in engineering practice will be focussed on and also the
nonlinear and parabolic ones will be investigated. The results will also be
applied in the adaptive procedure. 2) The generalized finite element method. A
flexible form of FEM allowing one to use special shape functions will be
designed and theoretically analyzed. The classical h- and p- version is a
special case. The method will be implemented in two dimensions and possibly
later, three dimensions as well. This method can typically be applied for
solving problems of heterogeneous material, solutions with boundary layers and
oscillatory character. 3) The problem of composites. This is a multi-scale
problem with particular focus on composite fibrous materials. The main interest
will be on a fiber scale. The study will be both deterministic and stochastic.
The stochastic formulation is essential because the position of the fiber scale
statistical character. The work will be performed in collaboration with the
Aeronautics Institute of Sweden. 4) The p-version of FEM. This work will be
focused on resolving various aspects of the p-version in 3 dimensions although
first the methodology will be used on the two-dimensional setting. The theory
will utilize new functional spaces which are needed for addressing the problems
occurring in engineering. The work is a continuation of the results of results
obtained in the past. The planned research addresses problems with a high level
of importance in the engineering computations. It will focus on the reliable and
accurate a-posteriori error estimations and adaptive procedures in the Finite
Element Method, which are essential for confidence in the computed data. In this
way, various accidents could be avoided. Although the finite element method is a
major tool in engineering computations, various important problems are
practically unsolvable by the standard approach. Hence a new generalized
flexible finite element method will be designed with the goal to increase the
effectivity of the method when solving unusually difficult problems. The problem
of the composite material with the focus on the fiber scale is one of these
types of problems when millions of fibers are present with only statistical
character in regard to knowledge of their position. Here new approaches which
are very tight to the experimental studies are needed and will be addressed.
