
* 9803480
* Generalized Nonlinear Schrodinger Equations and Applications to Superfluid Turbulence
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/1998,10/17/2001
* Paul Roberts,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 03/31/2002
* USD 169,000.00

DMS 9803480 Paul Roberts, Natalia Berloff GENERALIZED NONLINEAR SCHRODINGER
EQUATIONS AND APPLICATIONS TO SUPERFLUID TURBULENCE The proposed research has
three closely related objectives. The first is to develop and study new variants
of the nonlinear Schroedinger equation (NLS) that are more faithful to
superfluid helium. In real helium, even in the low temperature range, normal
fluid is present which is coupled to the superfluid and which, through its
viscosity, provides a high wavenumber energy sink. So the existing models need
to be modified to include the mutual friction with the normal fluid. To evaluate
the energy loss of interactions with the normal fluid one needs the kinetic
coefficients in the Landau two-fluid model. Calculations of these coefficients
are usually performed with a simplistic dispersion relation, i.e., the relation
between the frequency of sound waves and their wavenumber. For example, the
dispersion relation is supposed anomalous and with no roton minimum. We shall
study models in which the interaction potential is nonlocal and which imply the
correct dispersion curve. The second objective is to analyze such dissipative
NLS models from the point of view of dynamical systems. We shall study and
classify attractors, bifurcation sequences, and routes to chaos. The third
objective is to make use of the results to elucidate superfluid turbulence in
the low temperature regime where the density of the normal fluid component is
smaller than the density of the superfluid component and where one may expect
turbulence in the superfluid largely to determine turbulence in the normal
fluid. Our investigations will provide targets for experimental work in the low
temperature range. Such experiments are currently in the planning stage by the
Donnelly group at the University of Oregon. There may be important implications
well beyond the field of liquid helium research: similar ideas may apply to the
newly discovered, high temperature super conductors, to systems of magnetic
spins, to the melting transition of crystals, and to some cryogenic engineering
applications. Superfluid Helium is used as a coolant in superconducting magnets
and infrared detectors, and superfluid turbulence affects the transfer of heat
in such devices. An understanding of superfluid turbulence may make it possible
to design more efficient methods of refrigeration for superconducting devices.
Turbulence in ordinary fluids is one of the most formidably difficult subjects
in physics and engineering. Superfluid turbulence is similar but in some
respects simpler for theoretical study, and it is believed that some of the
models we shall develop will throw light onto turbulent behaviors in ordinary
fluids.
