
* 9803605
* Computation of High-Gradient Phenomena in Solid Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1998,06/25/1998
* Dawn Lott,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hans Engler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 57,550.00

The aim of this research is the development and implementation of effective
numerical methods for the solution of partial differential equations which model
the nonlinear mechanics of solids. The principal investigator will use numerical
methods to study quasilinear partial differential equations governing large
motions of nonlinearly elastic, elastoplastic and viscoplastic materials. The
equations governing the motions of such materials are generally systems of
hyperbolic conservation laws which are ideally suited for numerical study. In
particular, the PI will utilize an efficient numerical scheme based on finite-
difference approximations and inspired by numerical methods from gas dynamics in
order to study antiplane and radial motions of elastoplastic materials, with the
goal of characterizing the formation of shocks. Additional effort will be
directed toward the study of the formation of shear bands in viscoplastic
materials. The principal investigator will study the effects of strain-gradient
regularization on the development and propagation of shear bands in two-
dimensional nonlinear viscoplasticity. This will include studies of problems
where the solutions exhibit narrow shear bands, across which rapid variations in
strain occur. The PI will develop adaptive pseudo-spectral methods to resolve
spatial regions where rapid variations occur during plastic deformation.

The behavior of materials such as rubber, steel, or concrete can be described by
complicated systems of partial differential equations which are in general
difficult to analyze. However, there are certain special situations in which
these equations simplify to a point where they can be both analyzed
theoretically and computed numerically. Examples include the motion of a
material block between a fixed and a moving plane and the compression of a solid
ball of material. As a focus of this project, the principal investigator will
investigate the nature of shock formation and of permanent plastic deformation
on the formation and propagation of shocks for these types of motions. A second
area of research is the formation of shear bands. These are localized regions of
intense shear that form when ductile solids undergo large deformations. Shocks
and shear bands correspond to possible regions in which material failure occurs,
and their accurate determination is therefore very important. The principal
investigator will take advantage of the special form of the equations to apply
high-performance numerical methods that have been developed for applications in
gas dynamics.


