
* 9803442
* Numerical Methods for Conservation Laws
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
* 07/01/1998,06/11/1998
* Randall LeVeque,WA,University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/2001
* USD 244,455.00

Hyperbolic systems of conservation laws arise in many problems where the
conservation of physical quantities such a mass, momentum, and energy are
modeled. These equations must typically be solved by approximate numerical
methods. Discontinuities in the data and/or solution (e.g. shock waves) cause
difficulties in developing accurate and stable methods.

This proposal concerns the development of high-resolution methods and their
implementation as software that can be widely used in solving problems that
arise in many different fields. The P.I. has been actively involved in
developing the CLAWPACK and AMRCLAW software for multi-dimensional hyperbolic
systems. This software is freely available and allows students and researchers
studying a wide range of phenomena to use the technology of high-resolution
methods and adaptive mesh refinement. This software will be further developed
and used to explore a number of particular applications in science and
engineering. One application concerns computing acoustic or elastic waves in
heterogeneous media. Such problems often arise in geophysics and materials
science, for example. Another application is to numerical relativity, where
there is interest in simulating gravitational waves that may soon be detectable
by astronomers. This can be accomplished by using a hyperbolic formulation of
the Einstein equations.


