
* 9803467
* Topology of Nonisolated Singularities and the Geometry of Functions
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1998,05/23/2000
* James Damon,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2001
* USD 84,339.00

9803467 Damon Professor Damon's research will apply infinitesimal methods from
singularity theory (originally introduced by Mather) to investigate the
topological structure of a general class of highly nonisolated singularities
arising as nonlinear sections of varieties. This class includes discriminants of
mappings, bifurcation sets, nonlinear arrangements of hypersurfaces, etc. He
will use analogues of Morse singularities for sections of varieties to derive
general algebraic formulae for certain fundamental topological invariants. He
will also apply these ideas involving sections of varieties to understand the
geometry of functions using the notion of "relative critical sets," which extend
the notion of ridges and "cores" used in computer imaging. He will combine these
geometric techniques with other singularity-theoretic methods developed for
determining generic properties of solutions to partial differential equations.
Together they will be applied to "pixel intensity functions" representing
medical images. In conjunction with Gaussian blurring or nonlinear blurring
techniques, they will associate certain geometric structures that can be used
for addressing various questions in medical imaging. The first part of Professor
Damon's research project will concern qualitative properties of spaces defined
as the set of solutions of specific types of systems of nonlinear equations. The
specific form of the equations will allow the investigator to use methods from
the field of mathematics called singularity theory. Specifically, this allows
the analysis of the set of solutions by perturbing the equations and reducing to
the analysis of certain basic cases. The total contributions from the basic
cases can be determined algebraically, yielding a qualitative understanding of
the structure of the set of solutions. Second, such systems of equations will be
specifically applied to analyze medical images. They allow one to associate to a
medical image a g eometric structure, which captures essential features of the
image. The geometric structure is defined using systems of equations of the
above type, and it even allows one first to remove "noise" from the image by
applying appropriate filters. The basic properties of the geometric structure
obtained from the first part will allow it to be used to address several
questions in medical imaging. ***
