
* 9803568
* Computational Electromagnetic Methods in Nonlinear Optics and Microwave Material Processing
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,10/05/2001
* Cheryl Hile,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2003
* USD 90,000.00

DMS-9803568 Cheryl V. Hile TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION --------------------- The
research in this project focuses on the development of efficient computational
electromagnetic methods that will be utilized to gain a fundamental
understanding of (1) ultrashort pulse propagation in nonlinear optical fibers
and devices and (2) microwave material processing systems. The first project
focuses on understanding the behavior of ultrashort pulse propagation in
nonlinear optics fibers and devices by (1) developing computational solutions of
Maxwell's equations and (2) determining the extent to which asymptotic envelope
approximations can be used to describe these pulses. Specifically, we develop
computational solutions of Maxwell's equations to understand the behavior of
one-dimensional pulse propagation near the zero dispersion wavelength in
dispersion-shifted optical fibers and to understand the behavior of two-
dimensional pulse propagation of ultrashort spatial solitons. In parallel with
this, we derive corresponding envelope equations and determine the extent to
which these more simplified equations can be used to model ultrashort pulse
propagation near the zero dispersion wavelength and two-dimensional pulse
propagation of ultrashort spatial solitons. The second project focuses on the
development of efficient hybrid numerical methods to model microwave material
processing in single- and multi-mode cavity heating systems. We will begin by
developing an efficient hybrid numerical method to model the electromagnetic
interaction of a low-loss ceramic in a high-Q single-mode waveguide applicator.
Finally, we will extend these ideas to create a hybrid numerical method for
modeling high-Q multi-mode cavity heating systems. NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION
------------------------- The research in this project focuses on the
development of efficient computational electromagnetic methods that will be
utilized to gain a fundamental understanding of (1) ultrashort pulse propagation
in nonlinear optical fibers and devices and (2) microwave material processing
systems. Understanding these complex phenomena and processes is essential for
the development of new optical technologies and the industrial production of
high quality materials and products. The first aspect of this project focuses on
understanding the behavior of ultrashort pulse propagation in nonlinear optics
fibers and devices by (1) developing computational solutions of Maxwell's
equations and (2) determining the extent to which asymptotic envelope
approximations can be used to describe these pulses. The second aspect of this
project focuses on the development of efficient hybrid numerical methods to
model microwave material processing in single- and multi-mode cavity heating
systems. These numerical methods will provide detailed knowledge of the
interaction between the waveguide applicator, the electromagnetics fields and
the ceramic in these microwave heating systems. Detailed knowledge of this
interaction will lead to a more complete characterization of the heating process
and thereby help to prevent nonuniform heating and lead to future optimizations
of the heating process.
