
* 9803604
* Inverse Diffraction Problems in Optics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1998,07/16/1998
* Gang Bao,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/13/1999
* USD 79,200.00

9803604 Bao This project will support research on the mathematical issues and
computational methods for solving the following classes of direct and inverse
problems motivated by industrial applications: inverse problems in diffractive
optics, modeling of structure enhanced nonlinear optical effects, and optimal
design problems in nonlinear optics. The main topics of the proposed work
include: Uniqueness, stability, and regularity properties for inverse problems
in optics. Numerical computation of inverse and optimal design problems in
diffractive optics. Modeling of nonlinear second harmonic generation in periodic
structures. Structure enhanced nonlinear optical effects. Well-posedness of a
partial differential equation model in nonlinear optics. Interface least-squares
finite element methods for solving the model problem. Computational methods for
design and optimization in nonlinear optics. These problems arise naturally in
modeling and design of micro diffractive optics. Micro diffractive optics is a
fundamental, emerging technology in which optical devices are micromachined with
very small structural features. Exploiting diffraction effects, diffractive
structures perform functions unattainable with conventional optics. Examples of
current and potential application areas include corrective lenses, electronic
displays, microsensors, lasers, optical storage systems, optical communication
components, and integrated opto-electronic semiconductor devices. The practical
applications and scientific developments have driven the need for rigorous
mathematical models, mathematical analysis, and numerical algorithms to
accurately describe the diffraction of complicated diffractive structures, to
compute electromagnetic vector fields and thus to predict the performance of a
given diffractive structure in linear and nonlinear optical media, as well as to
carry out optimal design of new structures. The research has significant
potential for evo lving new science and providing industry with guidance to
design and fabricate new optical devices.
