
* 9803362
* Hyperbolic 3-Manifold Theory
* DMS,TOPOLOGY, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1998,06/29/2000
* Colin Adams,MA,Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2002
* USD 138,600.00

9803362 Adams Hyperbolic 3-manifold theory has had a tremendous impact on the
field of low-dimensional topology. Outstanding conjectures have fallen, one
after the other, with the application of hyperbolic techniques. There has been a
shift in the entire approach to low-dimensional topology, as researchers now use
rigid geometric arguments to prove topological theorems. The two principal
investigators intend to continue their research, both individually and jointly,
on the theory and computation of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Through a set of
projects, many relying heavily on their ability to compute explicit examples on
a computer, the researchers plan to further the understanding of the connections
between hyperbolic 3-manifolds, the invariants that come out of hyperbolic
3-manifold theory, and the traditional topological invariants in 3-manifold
theory. They will also consider applications of 3-manifold theory to
cosmological models of the spatial universe, working in conjunction with
cosmologists. Undergraduates will be involved in original research projects
related to this research. A 2-dimensional surface may have positive curvature
like a sphere, zero curvature like a flat Euclidean plane, or negative curvature
like a saddle. Almost all surfaces can be given negative curvature, meaning that
locally, they behave like the hyperbolic plane discovered by Lobachevsky, Gauss,
and Bolyai in the last century. An analogous understanding of finite
3-dimensional spaces eluded researchers for decades, but in the mid-1970's W. P.
Thurston conjectured that 3-manifolds, the analog of 2-dimensional surfaces one
dimension up, can be cut into pieces, each of which has one of eight geometries.
He proved the conjecture for vast quantities of 3-manifolds. By far the most
commonly occurring geometry for 3-manifolds is hyperbolic geometry. The
resulting "hyperbolic structures" are rich and have been used to solve a great
many topological and geometrical questions. T he present project continues this
work both theoretically and computationally. The theoretical advances make the
computations possible, and the explicitly computed examples guide the further
development of the theory. In the past year the project has found a new and very
exciting application. The spatial universe within which we live is an example of
a 3-manifold. Data from NASA's Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) may, in the year
2001, reveal the spatial universe to be finite in extent. If so, algorithms from
the present project will be used to determine the exact shape of the universe.
The investigators are currently extending their software to tolerate the high
levels of noise that will be present in the MAP data, and to handle the
spherical and Euclidean cases as well as the hyperbolic one. Preliminary data
suggests the real universe is hyperbolic, but the other possibilities cannot yet
be ruled out. ***
