
* 9805602
* Computational and Mathematical Investigations in Optimization
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT, OPERATIONS RESEARCH
* 07/15/1998,07/27/2000
* Michael Todd,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2002
* USD 359,992.00

9805602 Todd

The goal of this project is to continue a broad set of ongoing studies
concerning optimization algorithms and the mathematical theory underlying them.
The project covers continuous and discrete optimization algorithms, both exact
and approximate, their computational complexity, practical large-scale
implementation, performance guarantees (in the case of approximate algorithms),
and applications in such areas as crew-scheduling, image-processing, facility
location, financial modeling, electrical power systems, and statistical learning
theory.

The research to be conducted can be roughly grouped into three areas. The first
is interior-point methods, including the study of: semidefinite programming,
algorithm design and analysis; infeasible-interior-point methods for both linear
and convex programming, including detection of infeasibility; the complexity of
target-following methods and of semidefinite programming; and methods for large-
scale nonlinear problems arising in image-processing, financial modeling, and
statistical learning theory. The second area of research is combinatorial
optimization, encompassing: investigation of stable-set and crew-scheduling
problems; the study of linear congruence relations and their use in branch-and-
cut methods; analysis of inconsistent linear inequality systems, with
applications in computer vision, data compression, and statistical discriminant
analysis; and design of approximation algorithms for facility location problems.
The third is concerned with numerical linear algebra, and will study: methods to
solve the linear systems that arise at each iteration of an interior-point
semidefinite programming algorithm in a stable manner; and special methods for
obtaining accurate solutions to ill-conditioned linear systems arising in
electrical power systems.

This research will lead to improved algorithms to find exact or approximate
solutions to large-scale optimization problems arising in industry, finance, the
military, science, and engineering. Emphasis is placed on the interplay between
practice and theory.


