
* 9806408
* Experimental Low-Dimensional Geometry and Topology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/1998,08/12/1998
* Jonathan Poritz,DC,Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2001
* USD 89,950.00

Poritz 9806408

The principal investigator employs computer visualization tools to aid in the
study of a number of questions in low-dimensional differential and algebraic
geometry and topology. In particular, these questions have to do with
fundamental domains for discrete groups of isometries of various three-
dimensional geometries, moduli spaces of polygons in each of the three-
dimensional space forms, and direct constructions of families of
compactifications of semisimple Lie groups of low dimension. Interactive
software has been developed to explore fundamental domains on the sphere at
infinity for cyclic groups of isometries of three-dimensional hyperbolic space
and this is extended to the interior of hyperbolic space, other groups and other
geometries. Moduli spaces of polygons are investigated to determine aspects of
their own geometry and because of their relationship to moduli spaces of vector
bundles over punctured Riemann surfaces and some symplectic and geometric-
invariant theory quotients. Images have also been made of moduli spaces of
certain algebraic compactifications of the group of isometries of the hyperbolic
disk and further images are generated of moduli spaces of other algebraic
compactifications as well as of the compactifications themselves. An important
component of this project is the direct involvement of undergraduate students:
while the mathematics is of various levels of abstraction, the computer tasks
are accessible to serious students and provide them with an unusual opportunity
for hands-on involvement in current mathematical research.

The fantastic interactive three-dimensional graphics that can be seen in many of
today's commercial computer games are the result of the phenomenal advances that
have occurred in recent years in the sophistication of computer software and the
speed and power of computer hardware. But in a larger sense they can be
attributed to the increase of engineering knowledge based on hard science and,
ultimately, on deep mathematical understanding. It is thus somewhat surprising
that these computational and graphics tools have been used very little in pure
mathematical research. The principal investigator uses interactive computer
visualization to perform mathematical experiments in a variety of different
fields that all have some component relating to two-, three- or four-dimensional
geometry; as this is pure mathematics, experimental evidence must then be
justified in a purely abstract setting. An important part of this project is the
direct involvement of undergraduate students: here again it is possible to take
advantage of the very high level computer abilities that many undergraduates now
possess to create the software that drives the mathematical explorations, while
at the same time giving these undergraduates the extremely rare opportunity to
have immediate experience of current mathematical research.


