
* 9807666
* The Role of Bacterial Chemotaxis in the Biodegradation of Naphthalene in Porous Media
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
* 09/01/1998,08/24/1998
* Michael Aitken,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 215,000.00

Aitken 9807666 There is considerable interest in methods of remediating
contaminated soil and ground water by in situ processes, particularly if
remediation can be accomplished through natural processes such as biodegradation
by indigenous microorganisms. To properly evaluate and develop in situ
bioremediation methods, it is important to understand the dominant physical,
chemical and biological processes. Biological processes are perhaps the least
understood of these. The investigator and his colleagues focus on the potential
role of bacterial chemotaxis in the biodegradation of common soil pollutants in
porous media. They study the biodegradation of naphthalene, a common soil
pollutant, by Pseudomonas putida G7 in a model porous medium consisting of
uniform glass beads. The effect of chemotaxis is evaluated by comparing the
rates of mineralization of naphthalene by the chemotactic wild-type strain and
by an immotile or non-chemotactic mutant strain with the same inherent kinetics
of naphthalene degradation as the wild-type. A mathematical model is constructed
that incorporates the most significant chemical and biological phenomena in the
experimental system. The model is used to quantify the chemotactic and random
motility coefficients of the organism as a function of the size of the glass
beads, and to evaluate the relative influences of random motility and
chemotactic motility in naphthalene biodegradation. Chemical contamination of
soil and ground water is an enormous problem in the U.S. The cost of cleaning up
contaminated sites can be reduced dramatically if the contaminated materials do
not have to be excavated or pumped to the surface for treatment or disposal;
consequently there is great interest in taking advantage of processes referred
to as "natural attenuation." Many bacteria found in the subsurface are known to
be able to degrade a variety of chemicals, but the behavior of bacteria in soil
is relatively poorly understood. A commo n property of many bacteria is
chemotaxis, an ability to move in response to the presence of a chemical.
However, the potential role of chemotaxis in the biodegradation of pollutants in
soil has not been explored before. It is likely, for example, that bacteria able
to swim towards the sources of chemical contamination are able to degrade the
contaminants faster than those bacteria unable to do so. The investigators in
this project conduct experiments with a simulated soil environment and
mathematical modeling techniques to evaluate the potential role of chemotaxis in
the biodegradation of a pollutant found at many contaminated sites. An improved
understanding of the role of chemotaxis will permit better characterization of
the feasibility of natural attenuation processes, and may permit the development
of strategies to accelerate the in situ treatment of contaminated sites that
take advantage of bacterial chemotaxis.
