
* 9807172
* Parallel Algorithms for Incomplete Factorization Preconditions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,07/15/1998
* Alex Pothen,VA,Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 07/31/2001
* USD 69,009.00

9807172 Pothen Preconditioning is a technique for improving the convergence of
iterative methods for solving large, sparse systems of linear equations. The
most robust preconditioners available to date are based on computing incomplete
factors of the coefficient matrix, i.e., factors that include only a small
subset of the nonzero elements created during the factorization. New algorithms
for computing incomplete factor preconditioners for unsymmetric and symmetric
matrices on serial and parallel computers will be designed and implemented in
this project. These algorithms have two phases: in the first symbolic
factorization phase, the positions in which the incomplete factors have nonzeros
are identified, and data structures for the incomplete factors are set up. In
the second numerical factorization phase, these data structures are used to
compute the numerical values of the preconditioners in time proportional to the
number of arithmetic operations. Without the first symbolic factorization phase,
the second phase cannot be implemented efficiently. The new symbolic
factorization algorithms rely on a structure theory developed for identifying
the positions in which the incomplete factors have nonzero elements. The nonzero
elements in the incomplete factors are identified from the path structure of a
graph model of the problem. Two graph reduction techniques, transitive reduction
and symmetric reduction, are used to reduce the data needed to predict the fill,
and thereby to obtain fast symbolic factorization algorithms. The new algorithms
can be proven to require less time than the currently used algorithm, and
preliminary implementations show that they are faster by an order of magnitude
or more in problems with high fill. Methods for solving large, sparse, linear
systems of equations are workhorses for solving partial differential equations
from scientific and engineering models. Hence these fields will benefit from the
algorithms and software developed in this pro ject. These preconditioners will
be used to solve specifically the Helmholtz problem in acoustics and Maxwell's
equations in computational electromagnetics. The software developed from this
project will be integrated with the PETSc (Portable, Extensible Toolkit for
Scientific Computing) package from Argonne National Laboratories for wide
dissemination.
