
* 9807491
* A Posteriori Error Estimates for Discontinuous Finite Element Methods Applied to Problems in Geosciences and Medicine
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, Hydrologic Sciences, Engineering of Biomed Systems
* 10/01/1998,08/13/2000
* Bernardo Cockburn,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2001
* USD 180,225.00

Cockburn The investigator and his colleague Bernardo Cockburn, in a
collaborative project, develop adaptive numerical methods for problems with
moving interfaces and long-time dynamics. These problems incorporate multiple
temporal and spatial scales. Finite element methods have long been used for
solving partial differential equations. Recently, methods using discontinuous
approximating spaces have become popular, especially for nonsteady convection-
diffusion problems. Two such methods are the local discontinuous Galerkin method
(LDG) and the Godunov-mixed method (GMM), developed by the investigators and
their collaborators. These methods have the advantage that they are based on
local conservation and approximate shocks and sharp gradients with no spurious
oscillations, which is important in many convection-diffusion applications. They
also lend themselves to parallel computation. Both methods have been implemented
computationally, and a priori error estimates have been derived; however, no
adaptive strategies based on these methods have been developed. It has long been
recognized that adapting the finite element mesh and time-step during a
simulation is desirable for obtaining an accurate solution. In order to
successfully adapt the mesh to guarantee that the actual error is below a given
tolerance, it is essential to develop a posteriori error estimates that measure
the actual error as a funtion of the mesh, time step and the computed solution.
While a substantial literature exists for such estimates for steady problems and
conforming finite element spaces, little research has been done for nonsteady
problems and discontinuous methods. In this project, the investigators and their
colleagues develop a posteriori estimates for the LDG and GMM methods for
convection-diffusion equations, with emphasis on three important applications:
shallow water flow, chemically reactive transport in porous media and surface
water, and the modeling of brain tumor cell growth and treatment. The basis for
these estimates is the so-called approximate adjoint equation methodology;
however, other ad-hoc methods which may potentially be more efficient are also
investigated. These estimates are novel for the applications as well as the
numerical methods.

The applications of interest are important to industry, government laboratories
and departments, and state agencies. Modeling of flow patterns in shallow water
systems (e.g. bays and estuaries) is important for understanding, for instance,
the environmental impacts of oil spills and the economic impacts of dredging,
and can also be useful in tracking storm surges during hurricanes and other
extreme weather events. Modeling of transport of chemical species in groundwater
and surface water is important for understanding waste disposal and pollution
remediation. The modeling of brain tumors can be useful in predicting tumor
growth and examining potential treatments. These applications, though varied,
share common mathematical characteristics and can utilize similar numerical
simulation methodologies. Lacking for these applications and methodologies are
sound, mathematically based tools for controlling and adapting the simulations
to meet specific accuracy criteria of interest to the user; that is, criteria
which can be used to determine whether a numerical simulation actually reflects
physical reality. The goals of this project are to develop such criteria for
making the simulations efficient, accurate and physically realistic, and to
train future researchers in the underlying mathematics, computational science
and multidisciplinary aspects of the applications.
