
* 9870274
* Numerical Continuation for Nonlinear Problems with Symmetry Structures
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1998,07/29/1998
* Kurt Georg,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2002
* USD 130,000.00

DMS 9870274

Abstract

Numerical Continuation for Nonlinear Problems with Symmetry Structures

Kurt Georg and Eugene L. Allgower

This investigation deals with the study and development of numerical
continuation methods which intrinsically exploit symmetries. The integration of
techniques for exploiting symmetry in the solution of linear systems, which have
recently been developed by the investigators, into a numerical continuation
method will provide a practical and efficient tool for detecting symmetry
pattern breaking bifurcations while tracing a branch, and for following
bifurcating branches for secondary and multiple bifurcations. The continuation
methods which will be studied and developed will concentrate upon the handling
of large systems of equations such as those stemming from discretizations of
systems of partial differential equations and integral equations. Several
techniques for numerically handling bifurcations will be investigated. These
include the normal form equations of center manifold theory and the Lyapunov-
Schmidt reduction. By applying symmetry reduction methods developed by the
investigators, block diagonalizations are obtained which greatly facilitate the
bifurcation analysis. Among the applications to be treated will be: nonlinear
elliptic equations such as those which model the buckling of shells with
symmetries, equations for spherical convection which model planetary
atmospheres, Ginzburg-Landau equations modelling the dynamics of travelling
waves, and nonlinear boundary integral equations which are discretized via
boundary element methods. Integral equations of the latter kind arise in a
natural way from exterior boundary value problems. It is anticipated that the
programs which will be developed will be disseminated via anonymous ftp in the
same manner as the investigator's programs for numerical continuation and
symmetry reduction methods have been done.

Numerical continuation for large structured systems, which will be studied in
this investigation, has a broad field of important applications. In particular,
numerical continuation can be used to computationally simulate how the variation
of inherent control parameters causes qualitative changes in a physical system.
Such parameters may represent loading, speed, temperature, viscosity, aspect
ratio, etc. The determination and analysis of critical values of control
parameters is of great significance to the scientist and engineer, because at
these values decisive phenomena occur: stability can be lost, structures can
break or go into resonance, ingnition takes place, atmospheric flow patterns
change, etc. Mathematically, critical values of control parameters in physical
models are characterized by bifurcation points. Numerical continuation methods
can be used to detect and calculate bifurcation points. The investigation will
concentrate on phenomena taking place in regimes which have geometric symmetry
structures. The consideration of such structures enhances the scientific
understanding, but can also be exploited for more precise and efficient
calculations. The computer visualization programs which will be developed will
assist researchers and students to simulate, study, and gain insights into the
pattern changes of physical phenomena under the variation of parameters.
