
* 9870091
* Analysis of Fluid Motion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1998,09/01/1999
* J. Thomas Beale,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

DMS-9870091 J. Thomas Beale Abstract The purpose of the proposed work is to
analyze the errors in numerical methods for the time-dependent motion of water
waves, to design improved methods, and to verify the reliability of the proposed
methods with error estimates, convergence proofs, and computational tests. The
methods of interest are called boundary integral methods. They have been widely
used in ocean engineering as well as in applied mathematics. The motion of the
water surface is tracked by markers representing material particles which are
moved according to a velocity field computed from quantities on the surface. The
velocity is expressed in terms of singular integrals, since the governing
equations are formulated through potential theory. The evolution has the
character of nonlinear, nonlocal wave motion on the boundary. Numerical
instabilities have long been observed in such methods, but analysis of the two-
dimensional case has shown that they can be ruled out by proper design. The
first goal of the proposed research is to develop stable, convergent numerical
methods for the simulation of exact, time-dependent, three-dimensional water
wave motion which is periodic in the horizontal directions. Thus the full
nonlinear motion will be dealt with, but interactions with solid objects will be
neglected. The method of calculation of the singular integrals is a primary
issue, one which may have relevance to other problems. A second goal is to deal
with the errors from edges where a solid object meets the water surface.
Practical predictions of the motion of fluids and solids are often made by
numerical solution of the equations which express the basic physical laws of the
motion. Methods of the type studied here have been used in ocean engineering in
order to predict the motion of large water waves, the interaction of water waves
with ships or stationary objects, and the force exerted by a wave on a wall or
object. Calculations of these probl ems and others have encountered numerical
instabilities; that is, because of the numerical approximation, small scales may
grow in a way unrelated to the physical problem. Mathematical analysis can be
used to understand such errors and to design improved methods. Previous work for
two-dimensional waves (those not varying in the third direction) has identified
the sources of errors for this special case. The purpose of the present work is
to carry out such analysis in more difficult and realistic cases where the
sources of errors are likely to be more serious. It is hoped that improvements
in the numerical methods could contribute to reliable predictions of water wave
motion.
