
* 9870384
*  Application of Distributed Adaptive Mesh Refinement Techniques to Problems Involving Diffusion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/1998,08/25/1998
* William Allard,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

A number of physical problems involve localized phenomena that move in time,
such as fluid fronts, interfaces and shocks. Often, these phenomena are not
captured well by finite difference methods on uniform grids. The investigators
work on three classes of such problems: flow in porous media, particularly
chemically enhanced aquifer remediation; thin film flow with fluid fronts due to
vanishing diffusive fluxes; and excitable media, particularly the modeling of
the propagation of electrical impulses in the heart. All three of these problems
involve diffusion; the diffusion can be nonlinear, subdiffusive or
superdiffusive. The investigators develop efficient multilevel iterative methods
and adaptive mesh refinement tools to solve these problems on parallel processor
machines. The power of computers has dramatically increased since they were
introduced a half century ago, and this improvement in performance continues at
a breathtaking pace. Nonetheless, although the public is generally unaware of
this, the computational resources required to simulate many phenomena, like the
weather, greatly exceed those currently available. One way to obtain a lot of
computer power is to arrange for many computers to work simultaneously on a
problem. However, it is a daunting task to program these computers so that they
will correctly produce the desired simulation in a timely fashion. In this work,
the investigators develop effective methods to use many computers working
together to simulate the flow of contaminants in the ground, the behavior of
thin films, and the electrophysiology of the heart. Groundwater contamination is
a significant environmental problem. Thin film problems arise in lubrication and
in manufacturing processes. A fundamental understanding of the electrical and
muscular behavior of the heart is important and could lead to better control of
the mechanisms of arrhythmia.


