
* 9870420
* Numerical Modeling of Problems in Liquid Crystals
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1998,07/16/1998
* Eugene Gartland,OH,Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Engler
* 06/30/2001
* USD 68,502.00

This grant supports ongoing research in the area of numerical modeling of basic
and applied problems that arise in the physics of liquid crystals. The work is
interdisciplinary in nature, involving collaborations with physicists in the
Liquid Crystal Institute at Kent State University as well as with computer
scientists and applied and computational mathematicians at Kent, Purdue
University, and the Courant Institute. The emphases of the work will be in three
project areas: (1) numerical modeling of equilibrium orientational properties of
confined liquid crystal materials, (2) developing and utilizing modern CS
problem-solving environments (for rapid prototyping of such numerical codes and
packages), and (3) numerical modeling of the interaction between a laser beam
and the liquid-crystal medium through which it is propagating (to investigate
and validate modeling and asymptotic analyses performed on such a system by a
group at Courant). Liquid Crystals are materials capable of existing in states
(call "mesophases") in between solids and liquids. They enjoy properties of
both. They are fluid; yet their molecules tend to orient themselves in certain
preferred ways (depending on inter-molecular forces, geometry, conditions at
boundaries, external applied electric or magnetic fields, and the like). They
have significant commercial importance because of applications in the display
industry. Modern liquid crystal devices (with microscopic geometry and
interfering neighboring effects) now require considerable two- and three-
dimensional numerical modeling for analysis and design. The proposed work will
contribute to the advancement of the general state of the art for this type of
scientific computing while numerically modeling specific systems of current
interest.
