
* 9872890
* KDI: Towards Ideal Data Representations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COLLABORATORIES, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT, KDI OPPORTUNITY FUND
* 10/01/1998,09/17/2002
* Amos Ron,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2003
* USD 2,570,000.00

9872890 Ron Advances in communication, sensing, and computational power have led
to an explosion of data. The size and varied formats for these datasets
challenge existing techniques for transmission, storage, querying, display, and
numerical manipulation, to the point where limits on their accessibility and
portability may severely restrict their usefulness for human knowledge. This
often leads to the paradoxical situation where experiments or numerical
computations produce rich, exquisitely detailed information, for which, at this
point, no adequate analysis tools exist. In order to address this challenge, the
investigator and his colleagues develop a new technology for data representation
based on the two basic principles of multiscale decompositions and redundant
representations. Multiscale decompositions arrange data into strata reflecting
their relative importance. This allows for rapid access to good coarse
resolution of the data while retaining the flexibility for increasingly fine
representations. Redundant representations allow for a multitude of data
decompositions. While this on the surface appears contrary to the need for
efficiency, the redundancy gives the flexibility of choosing `best
representations' from a unified family of representers and thereby provides
efficiency and robustness. The proposed research is expected to deliver major
results for: (i) accurate representation of image and acoustic data, (ii)
parsimonious representation of high dimensional data, (iii) parsimonious
representation of images and volumetric objects with singularities along curves
and surfaces, (iv) acceleration of scientific/engineering computations. The KDI
initiative takes place at a time when intellectual and commercial life are
beginning to feel the effects of a revolutionary combination: sensor ubiquity,
computational ubiquity, and internet connectivity. A clear priority in all
fields of commercial, engineering, and scientific endeavor must be to identify
and exploit the opportunities available in this new era. The center of the
effort should be the intensive development of new schemes for representing
digitally acquired data, and for rapidly manipulating those representations. In
fact, advances in this central area have tremendous repercussions, accelerating
progress in every other area. For astronomers straining to detect faint
gravitational signals coming from the farthest reaches of the universe, or
looking back in time to the earliest moments after creation, searching for
temperature fluctuations that would give clues about the central theories of
physics; for geophysicists looking for subtle deformations in the earth's inner
structure for clues about our seismic future; for engineers developing new
medical imaging devices; even for Hollywood entrepreneurs wanting more realistic
computer graphic simulations for mass entertainment -- data representation plays
a key role. To this end, this project assembles a team of experts to address
issues of developing new data representations and new methods of analysis and
manipulation. The premise of this venture is that significant advances in data
representation require an interdisciplinary effort, meshing the skills and
knowledge of theoreticians and practitioners from varied fields of research that
involve large datasets. Thus, the proposed research team consists of
mathematicians, statisticians, computer scientists, and engineers with extensive
skills and experience in the development and use of representations for
datasets. A primary component of the project is the set of application areas in
image and signal processing, large scale computation, and computer graphics. The
project produces conceptual deliverables in the form of new methods for storing,
compressing, denoising, and querying data. It also produces concrete
deliverables in the form of algorithms and software for use in the scientific
and commercial sector. The project serves as a national center for data
representation. Interaction between the project and other national and
international centers treating datasets is cultivated. The project also provides
a national resource for theoretical advances, techniques of implementation, and
software development.


