
* 9873275
* KDI: Multiscale Modeling and Simulation in Scientific Inference: Hierarchical Methods for Parameter Estimation in Porous Flow
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MECHANICS, Hydrologic Sciences, KDI OPPORTUNITY FUND
* 05/01/1999,09/10/1998
* John Trangenstein,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 04/30/2003
* USD 2,300,000.00

Trangenstein 9873275

The investigator and his colleagues develop new spatial models and numerical
methods for flow in porous media. Conventional simulation models for these
problems require very high-dimensional parameters as inputs, yet the
determination of these parameters is radically ill-posed. Reliable and relevant
additional data sources are scarce. The problem is multi-scaled, since fine-
scale variations in the defining parameters can have key large-scale effects.
Hence this project will develop models and numerical methods on a hierarchy of
scales. However, the relationship between different scale sub-models goes beyond
simple averaging. The investigators develop statistical models, methodology and
computation for data synthesis and high-dimensional inference and predictions.
Computations for fluid flow incorporate hierarchical simulation involving
adaptive mesh refinement and streamtube methods. The large size of the
computations requires distributed computing and the construction of a network of
workstations running custom software. The methods are validated against new
analytical work in stochastic partial differential equations. Finally, the
resulting methodology is applied to field studies of contaminant cleanup
involving surfactants and to oil production problems.

Uncertainty in porous flow has a large impact on society and the economy. For
example, the cost of discovery and efficient production of petroleum affects the
cost of transportation and energy production. Also the cost of location and
removal of contaminants from ground water affects the cost and quality of safe
water resources. One goal of this project is to develop new statistical and
computational methods to assess and reduce the uncertainty in modeling flow in
porous media. This goal requires new research into modeling, uncertainty,
computation and data measurement. To address this wide range of issues, this
project involves a collaboration of applied mathematicians, statisticians and
engineers. As a result, this project is directed toward the Knowledge and
Distributed Intelligence area of interest at NSF, and especially the New
Computational Challenges aspect of this initiative. In order to assign
confidence to computer simulations, the statisticians in this project develop
concepts, models and methods to integrate data and to incorporate and measure
uncertainty. Together, the statisticians, applied mathematicians and engineers
use a variety of sophisticated analytical and numerical techniques to reduce the
size and cost of the computations. The engineers apply the resulting methods to
various field studies, and communicate the results to their industrial
affiliates. Even with these new concepts and algorithms, the size of the
computations is so large that many computers have to work on the problem
simultaneously. The applied mathematicians build a network of workstations using
fast communication boards to perform these large calculations, and dedicate this
machine to these calculations and to student instruction.
