
* 9873326
* KDI: Multiscale Physics-Based Simulation of Fluid Flow for Energy and Environmental Applications
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, PMP-Particul&MultiphaseProcess, ESD-Eng & Systems Design, Hydrologic Sciences, ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM, KDI OPPORTUNITY FUND
* 10/01/1998,09/11/1998
* Mary Wheeler,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2002
* USD 1,700,000.00

Wheeler 9873326

Fluid flows at and below the earth's surface are the cause and cure for problems
of water and soil pollution, while petroleum and natural gas production depends
on flows in the subsurface. In these problems, the length scales of practical
interest range from tens of meters to kilometers. However, the behavior at these
scales depends critically on physics occurring at much smaller length scales. A
wide disparity in time scales also exists in these problems. Moreover, different
physical processes occur simultaneously in different parts of the domain. In
this project, the investigators and their university, government and industrial
collaborators develop much-needed scientific understanding of small-scale
phenomena from theory and experiment, and also develop new computational tools
and strategies for incorporating this understanding at the practical scale, for
handling multiple types of physics across subdomains, for remote collaboration,
and for visualizing and manipulating the results. The project focuses on better
understanding of small-scale phenomena (e.g., multiphase interfacial area,
hysteresis, dispersion, and discrete fractures in porous media), interdomain
coupling by means of multiblock or multiphysics methodologies (e.g., coupling of
surface water and groundwater environments), the development of accurate and
efficient algorithms and prototype simulators, and methods for viewing results
interactively and with collaborators off site. The algorithms and simulators
developed include novel mortar type spaces for coupling domains, and
sophisticated, adaptive, finite element, finite volume and time-stepping methods
for modeling nonlinear advective, diffusive and reactive processes. The
algorithms are implemented on parallel computing platforms. Interactive steering
and visualization are coupled closely to the simulators. Important work related
to this project are laboratory experiments and field data for critical
evaluation of the simulators, demonstration of prototypical simulators on
petroleum engineering production models and environmental subsurface and surface
flow applications, and educational and professional outreach and training
through workshops, video and web-based technologies.

This project concerns computer simulation and prediction of the movement and
interaction of fluids in surface waters and subsurface groundwater and petroleum
reservoirs. The focus is on fundamental multiscale and multiphysics applications
(i.e., physical processes occurring together at different length and time scales
and different physical processes occurring in different parts of the spatial
domain). The motivation behind this work is the need to better understand and
quantify the effect of small-scale processes on larger, field-scale processes,
and to understand how different physical processes occurring in close proximity
affect each other. The investigators study these problems through the
development of appropriate mathematical models, numerical algorithms,
computational science and visualization tools, and laboratory experiments. This
work is carried out in collaboration with other university researchers and
government and industrial partners. Educational outreach and training of future
scientists and engineers is an important part of this effort. The applications
of interest include petroleum and natural gas production, groundwater
contamination and remediation, surface water circulation and pollution, and the
interaction between surface and groundwater environments. These applications
have significant environmental and economic impact.
