
* 9874015
* OPAAL: Optimized Meshless Algorithms for Seamless Integration of CAD, Simulation and Design
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, , , 
* 10/01/1998,02/28/2002
* Weimin Han,IA,University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/2002
* USD 1,600,169.00

A major bottleneck in integration of finite element or finite difference-based
Computer Aided Engineering (CAE) tools with industrial Computer Aided Design
(CAD) and Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAM) tools is the generation of well-
shaped meshes that are consistent with complex CAD models and which provide
computational accuracy and efficiency of numerical solutions, particularly for
nonlinear simulation and design of manufacturing processes. A meshless-based
numerical method is planned to provide seamless integration through CAD
geometry, simulation, and shape design optimization. The method can be directly
linked to CAD geometries since the shape/interpolation functions in the meshless
method are formulated independent of the background integration zone. The
meshless method will provide a higher rate of convergence and alleviate many
numerical difficulties with respect to mesh distortion and moving continuities
encountered in conventional finite element methods. A meshless formulation for
linear and nonlinear problems involving elastic and inelastic materials and
contact conditions will be developed. Efficient computable error estimates will
be derived for the meshless formulation. Nodal integration methods will be
formulated to enhance efficiency, and adaptive meshless methods will be
developed for controlling accuracy and efficiency in large deformation problems.
Development and implementation of the meshless methods will be accomplished
using scalable and portable high-performance algorithms optimized for use in
parallel processor computer environments. New, fast graph partitioning
techniques and hierarchical methods for subdividing the domain will be used to
gain maximum benefits in computational speed and efficiency from parallel
processor computers. A meshless shape design sensitivity analysis method that
exploits the CAD-linked geometries will be developed for rapid, robust design.

The objective of the planned research is to achieve technology solutions that
promote seamless and substantive interaction between diverse design and
engineering analysis disciplines throughout the production process, from concept
development to manufacturing. The technology developed under this effort will
remove major impediments to comprehensive collaboration between product
designers and engineers by maintaining a high degree of coherence between CAD,
CAE and CAM modeling and simulation, as well as by significantly enhancing the
speed and relevance of design information which designers and engineers exchange
during all stages of the product development process. Achieving the meshless-
based integration of CAD, engineering simulation, and design will have
substantial positive impact with respect to cost reduction, mature design
development, and reduced time-to-market by enabling more extensive use of
accurate and reliable simulation-based engineering and design methods in lieu of
costly and time-consuming prototype design, test, and evaluation. The
application of the meshless technology is also designed to take maximum
advantage of high-performance computer capabilities that are in widespread use
in industry. The research program to be carried out under this effort will
expedite validation of meshless methods and technology transfer to industry. A
partnership with Ford Motor Company has been established under which Ford's
Research Laboratory will commit to an open exchange of data and expertise, as
well as personnel resources for testing and validating meshless methods and
their implementation on high performance computer platforms. Planned internship
programs, graduate and undergraduate student participation, academic seminars,
creation of new academic courses, reports and publications, and an international
workshop will provide a range of options for practical and effective
dissemination of the results and technical accomplishments of this effort.

Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division of Mathematical
Sciences, the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and by DARPA.
