
* 9875856
* CAREER: Adaptive multilevel finite element methods with applications to biomolecules and gravitation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1999,08/05/1999
* Michael Holst,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 200,000.00

Holst 9875856 The investigator designs and analyzes effective numerical
techniques for solving certain classes of nonlinear elliptic and parabolic
partial differential equations on complicated domains, arising in mathematical
biology and gravitation. The work focuses on adaptive multilevel finite element
methods, a powerful class of numerical approximation techniques for dealing with
irregular domain geometries, degenerate coefficients, and complicated
nonlinearities, in an optimal or nearly optimal way. Specific target
applications for this work are the nonlinear Poisson-Boltzmann equation arising
in continuum models of biomolecules, the Hamiltonian and momentum constraints in
the Einstein equations, and some related elliptic and parabolic equations that
arise in the topological classification of surfaces in geometry. While this work
has a large theoretical component, to have an impact in biology and physics
requires a substantial amount of software development, as well as
interdisciplinary collaboration with scientists in the relevant areas. The
required implementations are developed by the investigator and his students as
class library extensions to his software package MC (Manifold Code), and the
resulting software is made available to researchers in the biology and physics
communities. This project is an NSF CAREER grant. The computational methods
developed in this project have a direct impact on the modeling capabilities of
rational drug design researchers using structure-based models of biomolecules.
The Poisson-Boltzmann equation is a well-established model for electrostatic
interactions of biomolecules, allowing one to predict the effectiveness of a
candidate drug molecule in negotiating the onion-like layers of the
electrostatic field on its journey to bind to the active site in a target
biomolecule. For example, through the use of these types of structure-based
numerical models, one can predict the effectiveness of a candidate HIV
proteinase inhibitor in binding to the active site in the HIV proteinase.
However, the Poisson-Boltzmann equation presents severe technical difficulties
for solution by numerical methods on computers. By developing improved
multilevel numerical techniques to reduce the computer time required to solve
the Poisson-Boltzmann equation, and at the same time producing more accurate
solutions through the use of adaptive finite element methods, the investigator
gives drug designers access to models that produce more accurate results in less
time. In addition, a critical ingredient for the success of this and related
projects is the education and training of the next generation of computational
mathematicians. Therefore, a fully integrated involvement in undergraduate and
graduate computational mathematics education is an integral part of the project.
In particular, the investigator develops two new project-oriented,
interdisciplinary, computational mathematics courses at UC San Diego, modeled
after a successful experimental course he taught at UC Irvine in 1997-1998. This
project is a National Science Foundation CAREER grant. NSF strongly encourages
the early development of academic faculty as both educators and researchers. The
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a Foundation-wide program
that provides for the support of junior faculty within the context of their
overall career development. It combines in a single program the support of
quality research and education in the broadest sense and the full participation
of those traditionally underrepresented in sciences and engineering. This
program enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation places on the
development of full, balanced academic careers.
