
* 9905454
* Propagation of Uncertainty in the Field Extrapolation of Laboratory Experiments: Application to Dioxin Contaminated Sediments
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
* 09/01/1999,08/20/1999
* Pierre Goovaerts,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

9905454

The investigators develop a Monte-Carlo based approach to account for major
sources of uncertainty that affect the extrapolation ("scaling up") of
laboratory results to the field. These include the uncertainty attached to the
parameters of laboratory-based predictive models, and the uncertainty about the
spatial distribution of environmental factors that are inputs to these numerical
models. The methodology is applied to the simulation and mapping of dioxin
degradation (dechlorination) in general, and 2,3,7,8-TCDD fluxes in particular,
in estuarine sediments. The project involves the development of models relating
the dioxin dechlorination rate to various input variables (salinity and
respiratory conditions, dioxin concentrations, methane production, sulfate
reduction), the geostatistical modeling of uncertainty about the spatial
distribution of input variables through multivariate nonparametric stochastic
simulation, and the analysis of uncertainty propagation through Latin hypercube
sampling of the probability distributions of model parameters and input
variables. These risk assessments are accounted for in decision-making
processes, such as identification of locations of largest uncertainty where
additional samples should be collected, and in the long-term prediction of
temporal trends in dioxin concentrations.

Dioxin-contaminated sediments pose serious threats for the environment and can
entail costly clean-up to maintain the nation's waterways. To avoid
unnecessarily stringent remediation efforts, it is critical to map these
contaminated sediments and to predict the current concentrations and how they
could evolve in the near future. Much research has been devoted so far to
laboratory experimentation, which allowed a better understanding of the
mechanisms governing the degradation of these contaminants under relevant
ambient conditions as a function of sediment biogeochemistry. Extrapolation of
these results to the field is not straightforward because of the spatial
variability of the contaminant concentrations and of the environmental factors
(e.g. salinity, respiratory conditions) controlling their degradation. This
research develops a methodology to simulate the spatial distribution of dioxin
concentrations and their degradation in time. Multiple equally-likely scenarios
are generated to assess the uncertainty arising from our imperfect knowledge of
degradation mechanisms and of the spatial distribution of contaminants, in
particular when sampling is sparse. The approach is illustrated for the Lower
Passaic River/Newark Bay estuary because there is an extensive temporal and
spatial data base for this estuary. Success of this research will help
scientists and engineers to meet the increasing challenge to combine various
sources of information acquired at field and laboratory scales with different
levels of uncertainty (measurement and prediction errors). It may prove useful
in determining long-term risks posed by dioxin-contaminated sediments, and aid
in the development of risk-based sediment management strategies.


