
* 9970480
* Research in Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/01/1999,07/23/2001
* Nolan Wallach,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2003
* USD 188,073.00

Abstract Wallach

This project aims to use the methods of analysis, homological algebra and
geometry in order to study the structure and applications of representations of
real reductive groups. In particular the principal investigator plans to
continue his development of what he calls "transfer" between real forms of
reductive groups over the complex numbers. A new ingredient involves determining
explicit multiplicity formulas (analogous to Blattner's formula) for restriction
of representations of semisimple groups to symmetric subgroups (noncompact). The
theory also provides a new method for proving the unitarizability of
representations that are difficult to analyze analytically. This work uses basic
invariant theory and computationally intensive algebraic geometry. For the
latter, Matt Clegg and the author will be completing the code for the Groebner
array which is now in place. This hardware has also been helpful in solving
several problems in combinatorics, representation theory, and quantum computing.

The relatively inexpensive access to fast computational tools has changed the
landscape of "pure mathematics". In fact, it has blurred the distinction between
pure and applied mathematics. Mathematicians can now do experiments involving
massive calculations to help predict the form of theorems to be proved by
mathematical reasoning. This proposed research will make use of these tools. It
will also work to enhance the usefulness of massive calculations whose output
can be mathematical objects that are described by files that are billions of
bytes long . Although the basic research aims of this project are outside the
scope of short term applications the methodology is expected to lead to
practical applications. For example, methods to help in deciding which aspects
of an immense file that describes a complicated object are most important
without having the ability to read the full file.
