
* 9971800
* Fast, High Order Vortex Methods Based on Deforming Basis Functions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,07/27/1999
* Louis Rossi,MA,University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* John C. Strikwerda
* 07/31/2001
* USD 71,000.00

9971800

This project expands and enhances existing knowledge of a new category of vortex
method based on deforming basis functions. Vortex methods approximate the
vorticity field of a flow as a linear combination of localized basis functions.
These basis functions move with the flow velocity at the basis function
centroid, and the velocity field is calculated from the vorticity field through
a Biot-Savart integral. For flows dominated by isolated regions of vorticity,
vortex methods offer considerable advantages because they are naturally adaptive
in the sense that computational elements are dedicated exclusively to regions
that have vorticity. Most vortex methods use rigid, axisymmetric basis functions
though there are some exceptions. This project studies vortex methods that use
basis functions which deform with local flow deviations, and builds upon the
recent development of a high spatial order vortex method based on deforming
elliptical Gaussians. Elliptical Gaussians are special in the sense that they
represent self-similar, exact solutions to the relevant advection-diffusion
equation. To implement such a scheme, one must develop methods for evaluating
the Biot-Savart integral for an elliptical Gaussian and identify the relevant
convergence parameters for the method as a whole. Though a two-dimensional
scheme has already been developed, the Principle Investigator will enhance this
method by developing a fast summation algorithm. The Principle Investigator will
extend this method to three dimensions, providing a crucial link between vortex
stretching and the geometry of vortex filaments. The new method will be used to
perform careful calculations of a variety of problems including vortex dipole
collisions and jet transients. Finally, the Principle Investigator will extend
this approach to moisture transport through unsaturated porous media.

This work provides a means of quickly and accurately calculating fluid flow
properties on a wide range of problems including but not limited to aerospace
applications, industrial processes, ocean currents and atmospheric flows of all
sorts. The Principal Investigator will also extend these concepts along new
lines to develop methods that can accurately calculate the motion and diffusion
of moisture and contaminants in unsaturated soils. This type of method, called a
"vortex method", is unusual in that these schemes are naturally adaptive.
Naturally adaptive methods dedicate computational resources exclusively to the
dominant regions of the flow. These methods simulate flows by calculating the
evolution of the local angular momentum in the fluid. Often, the angular
momentum is restricted to a small fraction of the total volume of the fluid. For
instance, weather systems are driven by a collection of storm systems that
represent concentrated regions of angular momentum. Using such a method, one can
reconstruct the entire flow field based solely on the evolution of the angular
momentum which means that the computer only need perform calculations over a
small area to capture the entire flow field. Vortex methods have the added
advantage of being easily parallelized on multiple processor computers so that
one can take full advantage of supercomputing facilities and networks of
connected computers. Also, the Principal Investigator will apply these
techniques to an entirely new type of problem involving flow through unsaturated
porous media such as dry soils, clays or concrete. Similar to vortex methods,
this new technique takes advantage of the fact that the movement of moisture is
dominated by narrow "preferred paths" occupying a relatively small fraction of
the total domain of interest. These paths are created by moisture-media
interactions, and the computer need only dedicate its resources to those regions
containing moisture. Finally, many aspects of these activities make excellent
undergraduate research projects. These research activities will enhance
students' interests and knowledge in mathematics, environmental science and high
performance computing. Thus, in addition to its scientific merits, this project
will give students at the University of Massachusetts Lowell meaningful research
experiences and enhance collaboration across several disciplines.
