
* 9971813
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Two Extended Systems: (i) Nonlinear Dispersive Waves, (ii) Primary Visual Cortex
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/1999,04/25/2003
* David McLaughlin,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 304,202.00

McLaughlin 9971813 The investigator and his colleagues study complex nonlinear
dynamics for two extended systems: (i) Nonlinear Dispersive Waves and (ii)
Primary Visual Cortex. Project (i) concerns the random behavior of nonlinear
waves -- specifically chaos for near-integrable soliton partial differential
equations. For these equations temporal chaos is now rather well understood;
however, far less is known about the more severe behavior of spatial-temporal
chaos. Both its onset, as well as the description of its macroscopic temporal
evolution, are studied through a combination of asymptotic averaging and
numerical experiments. Project (ii) is to develop a theoretical and
computational model of the primary visual cortex (V1). A point neuron model of
V1 is developed, with a realistic coupling architecture between cortical
neurons. The model is constrained, whenever possible, by physiological and
anatomical measurements. It has a multi-layered architecture and focuses upon
dynamical behavior of the cortical network. Nonlinear systems can have solutions
that behave randomly, even though the system itself is strictly deterministic.
When these systems describe waves that are extended spatially, this chaotic
behavior is not well understood today. Such extended waves are prevalent
throughout nature -- including the turbulent behavior of air masses and ocean
currents that influence both weather and climate. Clearly, the prediction of
dynamical behavior for such chaotic waves has fundamental importance. The
investigator carries out mathematical studies of fundamental chaotic behavior
for idealized nonlinear wave equations. The brain is an extremely complex
extended system whose dynamical response to stimulation is a central problem for
modern neural science. He and his colleagues, an interdisciplinary group of
neural scientists and mathematicians at New York University, are developing a
computational model of area V1 of the Primary Visual Cortex of the Macaque
monkey, the first cortical region along the visual pathway at which cortical
processing of visual information is thought to occur. Their numerical
experiments are designed to simulate specific laboratory observations of V1 --
with the results of both numerical simulation and laboratory experiments under
continual comparison. It is easier to identify possible mechanisms for cortical
processing through numerical experiments than in the laboratory experiments.
Such interdisciplinary collaborations between experimental biologists and
computational applied mathematicians unveil how the cortex processes visual
information, and will lead to a deeper understanding of the functioning of the
brain. The project is supported by the Applied Mathematics program in the
Division of Mathematical Sciences and by the Computational Neuroscience program
in the Division of Integrative Biology and Neuroscience.
