
* 9972622
* Numerical Analysis of Large Eddy Simulation
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1999,07/16/1999
* William Layton,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2002
* USD 105,000.00

9972622

This proposal is to begin the mathematical development of large eddy simulation.
Large eddy simulation (or LES) tries to predict the motion of the large
structures in the turbulent flow of a fluid. LES has been highly developed by
the engineering computational fluid dynamics community since its inception in
1970. The present proposal is to provide a mathematical and numerical analytic
foundation for the field. In particular, it includes: modeling-derivation of
improved space filtered flow models, asymptotics- improved boundary conditions
for such models, analysis-rigorous analytical study of the modeling error,
numerical analysis-derivation and validation of algorithms for space filtered
models, direct simulation- a new approach to LES of direct simulation of large
eddies, simulation- computational testing and benchmarking of the models and
algorithms under study.

Understanding turbulent flow is central to many important problems including
environmental and energy related applications (global change, mixing of fuel and
oxidizer in engines and drag reduction), aerodynamics (maneuvering flight of jet
aircraft) and biophysical applications (blood flow in the heart, especially the
left ventricle). Turbulent flow is composed of coherent patches of swirling
fluid called eddies. These range in size from large storm systems such as
hurricanes to the little swirls of air shed from a butterfly's wings. Large Eddy
Simulation (LES for short) seeks to predict the motion of the largest and most
important eddies uncoupled from the small eddies. This uncoupling is important
because the large eddies are resolvable on a computational mesh (a collection of
chunks of the physical problem) which can be handled by a supercomputer. The
proposed research centers on modeling the large eddies (such as storm fronts,
hurricanes and tornadoes in the atmosphere) in turbulent flow, predicting their
motion in computational experiments and validating mathematically the large eddy
models and algorithms developed. Current approaches to LES seem to be presently
confronting some barriers to resolution, accuracy and predictability. It seems
likely that many of these barriers can be traced to the mathematical foundation
of the models used, the boundary conditions imposed and the algorithms employed
for the simulations. The research undertaken is to develop these mathematical
foundations as a guide for practical high performance computation. This research
promises to make it possible to extend the range of accuracy and reliability of
predictions important to applications, such as those described above, where
technological progress requires confronting turbulence.
