
* 9972490
* Preconditioning Techniques for Algebraic Equations Arising from Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,01/08/2002
* Dianne O'Leary,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2003
* USD 130,000.00

Elman

This project concerns the development, analysis and testing of techniques of
numerical linear and nonlinear algebra for solving systems of equations arising
from discretization of a collection of partial differential equations. The
emphasis will be on preconditioning strategies and their combination with Krylov
subspace iterative methods for linear and nonlinear systems. These ideas will be
applied to several examples of differential equations, primarily coming from
models of fluid dynamics. Our focus will be on two types of problems, the saddle
point problems produced by direct discretization of the primitive formulation of
the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, and the convection-diffusion
equation. These have been chosen because they are used in numerous engineering
models of fluid flow, and because they contain challenging mathematical and
computational qualities that make them difficult to solve. In particular,
accurate discretization in two and three dimensions leads to large sparse
systems of algebraic equations that are nonsymmetric, and for the first problem,
nonlinear and indefinite. In addition, they have associated with them
fundamental parameters such as Reynolds numbers and discretization mesh widths
that, for the solution of problems of practical interest, cause many algorithms
to converge slowly and require large-scale systems to attain accuracy. Our goals
are to extend and analyze certain preconditioning techniques designed for saddle
point problems. Plans include demonstration of the effectiveness of these
preconditioners for general mixed finite element discretizations, development of
rigorous mathematical techniques for analyzing convergence, demonstration of
their usefulness in realistic settings involving general meshes and domains, and
incorporation of fast algorithms for the convection-diffusion equation into the
solution process.

The purpose of developing computational algorithms is to enable the efficient
numerical solution of differential equations used in mathematical modelling. The
use of such models is becoming an increasingly important component in
manufacturing and design (for example, of aerospace vehicles, automobiles,
cooling devices for nuclear devices) and in enhancing our understanding of
critical natural phenomena (for example, blood flows and dispersal of
environmental pollutants). Understanding these phenomena through purely
experimental techniques is prohibitively expensive or impossible, whereas the
use of mathematical models introduces a basic understanding of the physics by
providing approximations to quantities such as flow rates and pressures. This
leads to the identification of promising design features, such as wing shape in
airplane manufacturing. (For example, many of the design decisions for the
Boeing 777 jet were made using computational studies.) Accurate solution of the
mathematical models is only feasible, however, if reliable and fast solution
algorithms are available. The goal of this project is to develop such
algorithms.


