
* 9973926
* Noninvertible Dynamical Systems: A Computer-Assisted Study
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1999,10/27/2003
* Bruce Peckham,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 140,000.00

The investigator studies the dynamics and bifurcations of discrete-time systems
featuring nonunique reverse-time behavior. He and his colleague investigate two-
dimensional endomorphisms and aspects of three-dimensional endomorphism
dynamics, and develop scientific computation, stability, and visualization tools
necessary for these studies. The basic tool for the study of noninvertible maps
is the notion of a "critical set": the locus of points where the linearized map
becomes singular. Understanding the forward and backward iterates of the
critical set is the key to understanding the full dynamics of noninvertible
maps. Because trajectories backward in time are not unique, definitions (e.g.
unstable manifolds of saddle points) and computations (e.g. stable manifolds of
saddle points) involving backward iterates must be extended from the
(invertible) diffeomorphism case to the (noninvertible) endomorphism case. The
interactions of these sets and the system attractors with the critical set give
rise to a class of important dynamical phenomena distinct from those arising in
diffeomorphisms, and the dependence of such interactions on parameters gives
rise to new bifurcations. Current computational tools used for simulation,
computation of invariant sets, and study of bifurcations are correspondingly
extended, and new tools are constructed to deal with multiple backward
trajectories and their consequences. The possible geometric explosion of the
number of distinct preimages of a point (or a set) requires new programming
approaches, and scientific visualization becomes crucial in numerical
exploration of global dynamics and their parameter dependence. Thr project
involves work in software development, numerical investigation, and mathematical
analysis. The interplay of all three is necessary to have any hope of
understanding the dynamics of nontrivial systems. The investigator plans a
systematic computer-assisted study of the dynamic behavior of noninvertible
maps, carried out in a continuous dialogue between computation and theory, and
with illustrative and technologically relevant applications in mind. The
investigator and his colleague continue studying the dynamical behavior of
typical systems of equations that are used to model a variety of physical,
chemical, and ecological systems. The goal is to study changes, or
"bifurcations," in the qualitative behavior of these systems as parameters are
changed. The class of models being studied is called "noninvertible discrete
dynamical systems." A discrete dynamical system is one which provides a rule for
predicting some quantity or quantities at some point in the future (say, one
year from now) based only on the value of that quantity now. By iterating the
rule, we can predict what the quantity will be at any year in the future. When
the rule can be "inverted" to produce a rule to go backward in time, the system
is called invertible. Otherwise it is noninvertible. The project includes
software development, numerical investigation, and mathematical analysis. The
behavior of these systems is typically so complicated that there is no hope of
understanding them without the aid of computers. On the other hand, computer
investigation alone, without the acompanying mathematical analysis, generally
leads to a very incomplete understanding. Consequently, all three activities
must be done in concert with each other. With respect to all three activites,
there has been much previous work on one-dimensional (the dimension is the
number of quantities that is being monitored) invertible and noninvertible
systems and on higher dimensional invertible systems, but work on two-
dimensional and higher noninvertible systems is still in relative infancy. It is
this area on which they focus. Advances will lead to a greater understanding of
this class of models, and therefore the phenomena that are modeled by them. In
the process, they develop software tools that are of use to others for continued
study of these systems, as well as tools for scientifically visualizing objects,
whether they come from dynamical systems applications or from any area of
science, engineering or mathematics.
