
* 9973071
* A Computational Framework for Multi-Rigid-Body Dynamics with Contact and Friction
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ROBOTICS
* 09/01/1999,08/05/1999
* Mihai Anitescu,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2002
* USD 75,000.00

This research investigates fundamental challenges in creating multi-rigid-body
simulation environments that have a robust and realistic behavior for a large
class of configurations and interactions. The problem specifically targeted by
this proposal is the difficulty, due to the apparent lack of solutions of the
resulting model, in consistently formulating and efficiently solving the
constrained Newton laws of mechanics when Coulomb friction is involved. Recent
results, partly developed by the author have shown that a well-defined numerical
approach is possible in an impulse-velocity complementarity formulation. The
proposed research addresses the need to integrate recent developments in the
study of models of friction with advanced numerical integration and optimization
techniques. The complementarity formulation will play a central part in this
project but alternative methods will also be explored. The algorithms developed
will accommodate numerical issues rarely approached in a complementarity setting
such as stiffness and constraint drift control. Several specialized optimization
methods will be designed to address distinguished problems that appear in a
constrained simulation, such as constraint stabilization in presence of contact
degeneracy.

This research will overcome essential difficulties in all areas of investigation
that depend on the correct simulation of the motion of objects in contact with
friction such as robotics, virtual reality, biomechanics, manufacturing design.
In all these areas, contact with friction is a fundamental component, whether it
is related to the user pushing or pulling a stack of virtual objects in
frictional contact with one another in virtual reality, to a robot grasping and
manipulating a load, or to the correct simulation of human walking where
friction is necessary to prevent slipping. Yet in spite of the omni presence of
contact and friction in everyday life its simulation has proved to be very
difficult, partly because of the lack of a consistent and efficient theoretical
and computational framework. It is the aim of this proposal to extend the recent
results in frictional contact modeling in directions that will answer the
requirements of high-quality, high-performance multi-rigid-body dynamics
simulation for use in robotics, virtual reality, manufacturing design and other
fields. This will enable the development of software that will become an
important component of the manufacturing infrastructure of the future.
