
* 9973032
* Efficient Description, Modeling, and Recognition of Natural Imagery via a Local Basis Library
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1999,08/24/1999
* Naoki Saito,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 70,100.00

9973032

The investigator develops adaptive, hierarchical, and computationally efficient
algorithms for description, modeling, and recognition of natural imagery by
tightly combining computational harmonic analysis techniques and the insight
derived from the study of biological vision systems. The specific study aims are
to: 1) Investigate the elementary image features that efficiently characterize a
given image class, and develop computationally efficient stochastic image models
using these features for simulation; 2) Develop hierarchical algorithms to
extract high-level complex features by integrating the elementary features for
building better stochastic models; and 3) Investigate the effectiveness of such
stochastic models for recognizing and classifying different image classes.
Throughout this study the investigator fully utilizes the so-called local basis
library as a basic tool to extract elementary features that are the expansion
coefficients (or nonlinear functions of such coefficients) of an image with
respect to the bases contained in this library. This local basis library
consists of a collection of the local basis dictionaries (such as wavelet
packets, local cosine, local Fourier, and brushlets) whose basis elements are
localized in both space and spatial frequency. Each dictionary in turn contains
a huge number of orthogonal or biorthogonal bases, and is equipped with a fast
numerical algorithm to select a best basis tailored to a given task and to a
given set of images by optimizing task-specific criterion. In Aim 1, the
investigator specifically selects the local features from the library by
explicitly reducing the redundancy and statistical dependence among them, and
investigate the importance of the sparsity and statistical independence for
image representation and description. Then, he analyzes the effectiveness of
such features by constructing simple stochastic models by assuming mutual
independence or pairwise dependence among them. In Aim 2, the investigator
integrates local features studied in Aim 1 to extract high-level complex
features by applying the localized versions of the Karhunen-Loeve transform
directly on those local features, and incorporates such features into the
stochastic models. In Aim 3, the investigator examines the effectiveness of
combining the localized versions of the linear discriminant analysis and the
models obtained by Aims 1 and 2, for extracting the key discriminant local
features.

Results of the project will be useful for those who routinely work on image-
based diagnostics such as radiologists and geologists. Radiologists use very
subtle features of mammograms to determine whether the patients have benign or
malignant tumors. Exploration geologists use images of multiple scales ranging
from actual rock samples to seismic images to determine whether a specific
subsurface layer contains oil or gas. Although these experts have highly trained
eyes and have accumulated large databases of images in their minds through
training and experience, their diagnostic rules are often of qualitative nature.
The investigator believes that the above feature extraction tools will help
these experts move their diagnostic methods from a qualitative regime to a
quantitative one. In fact, given a specific class of images (e.g., a collection
of mammograms representing malignant tumors), the above algorithms may allow
these experts to build stochastic models that specify the statistical dependency
of critical features of the images and to create new sample images from these
models. This ability to create new simulated images at will is indispensable for
assessing the variability of the features and images. If an expert can give a
correct diagnosis for these simulated images, then this implies that the
implicit diagnostic rules in their minds are encoded as an explicit stochastic
model built on features computed by these feature extraction tools. This may
lead to the development of a distributed digital image diagnostic system, where
imaging devices and the diagnostic engines/knowledge bases are remotely located.
One can easily imagine the usefulness of such systems in medicine, geophysical
exploration, and other fields requiring image diagnostics.


