
* 9973291
* Numerical Methods for Multimaterial and Multiphase Flows
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,05/06/2005
* Smadar Karni,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 139,171.00

9973291

This proposal concerns the development and implementation of algorithms for
compressible multimaterial and multiphase flows. In both types of flows, a major
numerical stumbling block is accounting correctly for thermodynamical relaxation
processes and equilibrium between the fluid components. Failure to do so is the
reason why state-of-the-art single fluid algorithms often do not work in
multifluid flows. Karni was among the first to realize that the key to robust
multifluid algorithms is good control over the pressure field, and has been
active in developing and implementing algorithms for complex multimaterial
flows. It is proposed: (i) to develop multimaterial algorithms for stiff fluids
with surface tension. Numerical issues such as stiffness, singular source
treatment, interface sharpening and efficient time integration will be studied.
Comparison with asymptotic theories and experiments of oscillating bubbles will
be conducted; (ii) to extend multimaterial algorithms to multiphase flow models,
in particular to the 2-velocity 2-pressure multiphase model which is
sufficiently general and is time hyperbolic. Numerical aspects such as global
conservation, positivity, efficient integration of stiff source terms will be
addressed. The methods will be validated against numerical benchmark tests.
(iii) to use multimaterial computations to 'validate' multiphase flow models by
numerical averaging. Studying mean flow properties might provide numerical
Hugoniot curves for the multiphase (nonconservative) systems, and might shed
light on the controversial issue of constitutive closures. This part will be
done in collaboration with H.M. Glaz of the University of Maryland.

Multimaterial and multiphase flows are flows consisting of several 'pure' gas or
liquid components. For example, hydrogen and air, air in water, liquid droplets
in air or even dust in air. Depending on the application, the interest may be to
follow the motion of the interface that separates the different fluids and study
its dynamics and stability. For example, computing the dynamics of a an
oscillating gas bubble in water is useful for understanding the propagation of
sound waves underwater, and for studying underwater explosions. In order to burn
fuel efficiently in combustion chambers one needs to understand mixing
processes, which in turn are governed by the dynamics of, say, a hydrogen jet in
air. In some other applications, the number of interfaces may be huge and
following the dynamics of individual interfaces is not only impossible but is
also not interesting. For example, in bubbly liquids such as soda cans, in
liquid suspensions such as in sprays or in dusty gases, the motion of a single
bubble or droplet is not of interest. Rather, the interest is in understanding
how the fluid mixture behaves 'on average'. Both types of flows lead to
mathematical models that need to be solved on computers, and are computationally
very intensive. They are also not easy to compute. The 'average' models are also
mathematically less well understood. Experiments, while available, are difficult
to conduct and are restricted by the accuracy of the instruments and their often
large margins of error. Computer simulations provide therefore a complementary
tool which may shed light and give insight into the complex problems of
interest. The past few years have seen a growing interest in developing methods
suitable for computing multimaterial/multiphase flows and in their efficient
implementation to studying complex flow phenomena. This project concerns further
development and implementation of such methods.
