
* 9973373
* Numerical Methods for Digital Signal Reconstruction
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1999,08/23/1999
* Thomas Strohmer,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2002
* USD 81,000.00

The investigator develops efficient numerical methods for multi-dimensional
signal reconstruction using tools from harmonic analysis such as local
trigonometric transforms and wavelets. The reconstruction problems that are
considered range from approximation of nonstationary signals from scattered data
to recovery of missing data in digital image sequences. Successful solution of
these reconstruction problems requires a priori information about the signal,
otherwise these problems are ill-posed. Often this a priori knowledge can be
derived from physical properties of the process, for instance in terms of the
"local frequency behavior" of the signal. Local trigonometric transforms and
wavelets have become powerful methods for analysis, compression and denoising of
digital signals. The investigator derives a mathematical framework for the
application of these concepts to signal and image reconstruction (beyond the
well-traversed area of denoising). The design of these reconstruction methods is
accompanied by the development of multi-level regularization techniques in order
to provide a flexible framework for the incorporation of different kinds of a
priori knowledge about the signal. The investigator applies the new numerical
methods to the approximation of geophysical signals from scattered data and to
error correction in received coded bit streams. This project is motivated by a
number of multi-dimensional signal reconstruction problems arising in areas as
diverse as exploration geophysics, medical imaging, and telecommunication. In
order to optimally compress, transmit or analyze an incomplete or distorted
signal, it is necessary to first reconstruct the original signal from the
available data. This reconstruction process includes the restoration of lost
data as well as the recovery of a signal from scattered noisy measurements. The
mathematical framework being developed here allows the design of flexible and
robust algorithms for the reconstruction of multi-dimensional signals. Due to
huge amount of data and possibly required real-time processing the
reconstruction algorithms must also be fast and efficient. The derived numerical
methods are important for reliable error correction in data transmission, for
efficient reconstruction of geophysical signals, and for other applications.
