
* 9973310
* Collaborative Research: Large-scale Optimization: Matrix-free Algorithms, Data Parallelism, and Applications in Seismic Inversion
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1999,08/27/1999
* Anthony Kearsley,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2002
* USD 58,500.00

In this collaborative interdisciplinary project, the investigators Mark
Gockenbach, Anthony Kearsley, and William Symes develop and implement algorithms
for large-scale optimization problems that arise in a variety of applications,
focusing on techniques particularly suited to parallel architectures, and apply
the methods to the seismic velocity estimation problem. Large-scale optimization
problems often present difficulties to standard algorithms and software. Many of
these difficulties arise in the seismic velocity estimation problem. First, the
sheer data volume makes it impractical to explicitly form and factor matrices,
as required by many standard optimization algorithms. To address this, a new
matrix-free Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) algorithm is developed, based
on recent advances in matrix-free algorithms for the so-called trust region
subproblem. Second, the data structures and interfaces required for seismic data
processing are not easily adapted to those required by "off-the-shelf"
optimization software. The Hilbert Class Library (HCL), an object-oriented
optimization package, can solve optimization problems involving data structures
and interfaces of arbitrary complexity. The SQP algorithm, along with the
necessary seismic data structures and simulators, is implemented in HCL. Third,
large-scale simulations often require the use of parallel computation. The use
of parallelism in simulation and optimization is addressed through the
development of HCL classes that automatically distribute data over a network of
distributed workstations. The above innovations in optimization methods and
software are used to study in detail a new formulation of the seismic inverse
problem. The investigators have recently introduced this formulation in order to
overcome certain optimization-theoretic difficulties inherent in standard
formulations. Optimization problems arise in science and engineering, where one
often wishes to find the best design, the best mathematical model, the best
strategy, and so forth. Large-scale optimization problems, which involve many
variables, present special challenges, including the choice of algorithm, the
representation of data, and the interface between optimization software and
programs written by the application scientist. This project addresses these
challenges in the context of an important application, seismic exploration. The
investigator and his colleagues develop new optimization algorithms to identify
geological features of the subsurface of the earth. Included is a general method
for solving large-scale optimization problems; this algorithm is applicable to
other science and engineering problems. Moreover, they also develop an
innovative software package, called the Hilbert Class Library (HCL), that allows
optimization algorithms to be used with problems of arbitrary complexity; the
software adapts to different data structures and software interfaces. Finally,
they extend HCL to automatically take advantage of parallel computers, making it
easier to take advantage of high performance hardware. The seismic exploration
problem is important to the petroleum industry; a precise knowledge of
geological structures is essential for efficient utilization of petroleum
reserves. In addition, the HCL software addresses the important issue of
technology transfer as it pertains to numerical algorithms; too often
algorithmic advances are unavailable to application scientists because
optimization software and application software have incompatible interfaces.
