
* 9973048
* Adaptive Methods for Systems of Reaction-Diffusion Equations in Three Space Dimensions
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1999,07/06/1999
* Peter Moore,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jong-Shi Pang
* 02/28/2001
* USD 73,914.00

9973048

Systems of reaction-diffusion equations occur frequently in scientific and
engineering applications. Some important examples include the bidomain model
with the Beeler-Reuter ionic membrane kinetics in cardiac electrophysiology, the
Brusselator model of the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction and Turing models of
pattern formation Adaptive finite element methods are particularly well-suited
to these problems and indeed have proved effective in solving a wide variety of
partial differential equations without requiring user intervention. This
proposal aims to develop software for solving reaction-diffusion systems in
three dimensions efficiently and accurately. Adaptive codes depend on two
building blocks, a posteriori error estimates and adaptive grid strategies. The
finite element method will employ hp-adaptivity where h and p will be allowed to
vary in different directions (anisotropic refinement). A new data structure for
storing anisotropic grids will be implemented. The adaptive strategy will be
coupled with new a posteriori error indicators based on successful indicators
developed by the proposer for linear elements. The large system of linear
equations arising from the temporal and spatial discretization process will be
solved using preconditioned GMRES. An adaptive preconditioning selection
strategy will be used to choose the appropriate preconditioner during program
execution.

Many physical and biological processes can be modeled by reaction-diffusion
equations. Some important examples include pattern formation in biological
systems and voltage propagation in the heart. Specifically models for voltage
propagation in the heart aid in understanding the onset of cardiac arrhythmias
and may lead to better therapies. These models involve a large number of
equations over both simple and complex geometries. The goal of this proposal is
to provide researchers, such as biomedical engineers, with the accurate and
efficient computational tools necessary in order to analyze their models in the
case of simple geometries. These tools can then be used in solving problems on
more complex geometries. This work is being carried out in conjunction with the
work of a biomedical engineer at Tulane University.
