
* 9973108
* A Qualitative and Quantitative Study of Self-Adjoint and Non-Self-Adjoint Sturm-Liouville Problems
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1999,07/28/1999
* Anton Zettl,IL,Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2003
* USD 130,000.00

Zettl

Technical description. In a series of papers over the last five years or so, the
three authors of this proposal, together with a number of collaborators,
embarked on a systematic study of the dependence of the spectrum of self-adjoint
Sturm-Liouville problems on the problem. This project is a natural continuation
of the above work. It is planned to enlarge the class of self-adjoint problems
covered (e.g. by including the so called "left-definite" problems) and,
especially, extend the above work to the non-self-adjoint case. The latter case
is formidable: there is no general theory that can be compared with the well
developed theory for the self-adjoint case. A new approach introduced by the
authors for the self-adjoint case, using tools from algebraic geometry, has
yielded considerable insight for this case and is expected to do so also for the
non-self-adjoint case.

General description. Sturm-Liouville problems have a celebrated history dating
back to the seminal papers of Sturm and Liouville in 1836-37. Thousands of
papers have been written on these problems by mathematicians and by scientists,
and engineers. Yet the field is still intensely active today with dozens of
papers published every year. These problems have a wide range of applications in
pure mathematics, applied mathematics, quantum mechanics, the sciences and
engineering. For example, they can be used to study the spectrum of the hydrogen
atom, eddies in the atmosphere, neutron transport, etc. etc. The main purpose of
this project is to study, both qualitatively and quantitatively, some major and
difficult classes of such problems about which little is known.
