
* 9975354
* Computation in Nonlinear Filtering
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1999,07/15/1999
* Stephen S. Yau,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Fogwell
* 06/30/2002
* USD 155,000.00

9973247

We suggest problems in computational and applied linear algebra that come under
three headings. (i) Under the first heading come two problems on parallel
computations. The first concerns a divide and conquer approach to the problem of
computing the mean first passage matrix for Markov chains, work that was started
in the case when the process is a random walk with an underlying cutpoint graph
structure, e.g., a tree. The second problem is to investigate the speed-up due
to the addition of processors, when the number of blocks (natural partitions) is
kept fixed, in a model of asynchronous iterations. One factor here is the type
of coefficient matrix to which the model is applied. (ii) Under the second
heading comes a problem encountered when working on convergence of infinite
products of matrices. It is known that in iterative methods for computing a
solution to singular systems, e.g., in computing the stationary distribution for
a Markov process, the magnitude of the subdominant eigenvalue determines the
asymptotic rate of convergence. We have noticed that for random stochastic
matrices the subdominant eigenvalue seems to decay exactly as the square root of
n. We suggest investigating this behavior. (iii) Here we suggest two problems on
approximating the algebraic connectivity of a graph which is the second smallest
eigenvalue of its Laplacian matrix. Estimates of this quantity are used in
various graph-based algorithms such as the spectral separator method. In the
first problem we suggest investigating bounds derived from the generalized group
inverse of the Laplacian which seems to yield good lower bounds. In the second
problem we propose studying the algebraic connectivity of random graphs on n
vertices. Throughout the proposal we give examples from the literature for the
applications of the problems set forth.

Because many practical problems are very intricate, we need to build models to
represent them and then develop a way of understanding and handling the models.
Such modeling frequently results in large arrays of numbers or, what is often
associated with the arrays, a system with many equations and many unknowns. The
numbers in the array can be of a random nature if the model represents a
physical situation (scientific, economic, social or statistical) in which there
is some randomness involved. If the model represents a more deterministic
physical situation, there will be definite numbers with some relations between
them. Once we have a model, there may be many parameters and features which we
need to measure and compute. This proposal suggests seven problems. Two of the
problems concern certain high-performance computing with these models. The
computations are to be performed in parallel so as to achieve speed-up of the
computation and, if possible, a reduction in the number of computations. Two
examples of questions are: If a problem partitions naturally into a number of
subproblems which are called blocks, and if we begin to increase beyond the
number of blocks, the number of computers/processors applied to solve in
parallel the entire problem, do we necessarily continue to increase the speed of
calculations, or is a point of saturation reached after a while and what do we
do then? A common situation in which such a problem arises is in data-fitting,
sometimes known as the least-squares problem. Another problem for computation in
parallel is in physical systems which have states with a probability of going
from one state to another. An example is various types of population
concentrations such as urban, suburban, rural, etc. with a probability of moving
from one type of region to another. We may be interested in the distribution of
the population in the different conurbations after a short term. It turns out
that such predictions may be done in parallel under certain underlying
assumptions.
