* 9100439
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Differential Equations and Control; High Order Homogeneous Approximations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Henry Hermes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1994
* USD 30,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will continue his study of vector
fields that are homogeneous with respect to a dilation in order to apply these
results to the approximation of solutions of nonlinear differential equations
and control systems. In particular, he will study the existence of
asymptotically stabilizing feedback controls for nonlinear systems via
homogeneous approximations, and then he will attempt to construct such feedback
controls for systems that are small- time locally controllable about their
uncontrolled rest state. The construction of asymptotically stabilizing feedback
controls remains one of the fundamental problems of control theory. Control
systems are a common feature of modern everyday life. Think of the thermostat in
your home that controls the furnace or the air-conditioner. Many of these
control systems are governed by linear equations, and for them there is now an
extensive and nearly complete theory. On the other hand, many technologically
important control systems are nonlinear, that is, the process to be controlled
is governed by a nonlinear equation or system of equations. For nonlinear
control systems the theory is far from complete. In this project the principal
investigator will seek approximate solutions of nonlinear control problems by
means of sophisticated methods based upon linear system theory.