* 9100943
* Cobalt Macrocycle-Catalyzed Electrochemical Coupling        Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Albert Fry, Wesleyan University
* Continuing grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 12/31/1994
* USD 232,100.00

The electrochemical reduction of geminal dihalides in the presence of
electrophilic reagents has several disadvantages (poor chemoselectivity and
stereoselectivity) for the synthesis of mono-and bis-substituted materials. The
process will be catalyzed with cobalt (I) macrocyclic complexes, including
vitamin B12, cobalt bis-salicylideneethylenediamine, and cobaloximes. The
strategy is to reduce the cobalt species to the reactive Co(I) state, which is
expected to undergo rapid oxidative addition with a geminal dihalide in the
medium. The resulting adduct, a Co(III) species, will be reduced in situ to
eject the desired carbanion for reaction with an electrophile in the medium. In
effect, the cobalt macrocycle will catalyze the reduction of the geminal halide
to the corresponding alpha-halocarbanion. The catalytic process is expected to
occur in far higher stereoselectivity and chemoselectivity than the direct
electrochemical process, and permit conversions not possible at all by the
direct process. Furthermore, by carrying out the electrolysis at potentials
where oxidative addition to Co(I) takes place but the Co(III) adduct is stable,
it will be possible to make radicals by thermal or photochemical decomposition
of the latter. A number of synthetic applications, including reductive
electrophilic substitution on geminal dihalides (including both open chain and
cyclic systems), synthesis of substituted cyclopropanes, arenes, and polycyclic
systems, and synthesis of alkenes, based on these principles, will be
undertaken. These principles will be further extended to electrocatalytic
generation of carbanions from substrates other than alkyl halides. The Organic
Synthesis Program is supporting this research to develop cobalt macrocycle-
catalyzed electrochemical coupling reactions. This research will lead to a new
and novel route to synthetically useful reactive intermediates that can be used
to synthesize the increasingly complex substances needed in our economy.