* 9100846
* Undergraduate Research in Development Regulation
* BIO,BIO
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1994
* Susan Singer, Carleton College
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 04/30/1994
* USD 85,700.00

This award provides support to continue a 10-week summer research experience for
nine undergraduates from Carleton College and other regional colleges and
universities. Pre-participation reading requirements will provide students with
an adequate foundation for meaningful scientific investigation. During the
summer, students will work in a one-to-one relationship with a research
supervisor in the laboratory. Weekly seminars will provide students with the
opportunity to discuss research plans and results as well as to delve into
primary scientific articles. To further focus and unify the student
participants, a theme of development regulation has been selected. Projects will
include investigations of: the mechanisms of action and the chemical
characteristics of apossibly-steroid pheromone produced by Oedogonium,
regulation of floral development in pea, structure- function relationships in
the repressor protein of bacteriophage P1, structure and function of the
glucocorticoid receptor in rat liver, development of synaptic connections in
Xenopus, variation of sex expression in composites, role of song communication
in coordination of parental care in cardinals, and effect of gregarine parasites
on population biology of capitellid polychaetes. Students will present their
results during a fall poster symposium. Opportunities to complete research and
writing during winter break will be available.