* 9100014
* Mathematical Sciences: The Markoff Spectrum and Higher      Dimensional Approximation Constants/Conference at BYU;      May 20-26, 1991
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1991,11/30/1991
* Andrew Pollington, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1991
* USD 8,000.00

The seminal work of A.A. Markoff in 1872 described the degree of
approximability of badly approximable real numbers in terms of a sequence of
quadratic forms and their homogeneous minima. The study of this - the first
Markoff Chain - and of the corresponding theory for other real numbers and forms
has made considerable progress over the last twenty years. One direction has
been to study the structure of the spectrum itself. A second direction has been
to increase the understanding of the relevance of hyperbolic geometry and the
connection with the algebra of the free group on two generators. Much of the
detailed technical calculations rely on the cutting sequences of the geodesics
which in turn are related to the so-called two-distance sequences arising in the
study of quasi-crystals. This grant will partially support a six day workshop on
the Markoff spectrum and higher dimensional approximation constants to be held
at Brigham Young University in May, 1991. The workshop will facilitate the
exchange of information and will encourage the research of about thirty
mathematicians working in several related areas of mathematics connected with
Diophantine Approximation. Recent results in this area make such a workshop most
timely.