* 9100511
* US-Italy Workshop/Seminar on Intelligent Structural Systems;Como, Italy; June 26-28, 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1991,01/31/1992
* Y. Wen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 01/31/1992
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support a three-day workshop on intelligent structural systems
in Como, Italy toward the end of June 1991. The workshop is being organized by
Professor Yi-Kwei Wen of the University of Illinois at Urbana and Professor
Favio Casciati of the Universita di Pavia, Italy. The objective of the
workshop/seminar is to review progress to date and propose directions for
further research in various areas including the utilization of knowledge-based
expert systems for the monitoring, control and assessment of structural systems.
The main thrust will be on the utilization of recent analytical/numerical
methods, high-tech hardware, and expert systems to ensure better performance of
existing and next generation structural systems. Construction (including
buildings and structures and other civil works) is probably the largest industry
in the world. Recent reports indicate that the investment in this area amounts
to 10% of the world's gross domestic product. Structures generally have longer
service life, and are not as easily replaced compared with any other kinds of
commercial products. Yet technology to monitor and maintain the health of the
buildings and structural systems has been practically non-existent compared with
other major commercial products such as automobiles. There have been recent
developments in the areas of analytical/numerical modeling and response analysis
of structural systems under loadings, including the effect of uncertainty in
both loading and resistance. At the same time, new technologies and hardware
have been invented that make real time sensing, monitoring, assessment and
control of structural systems possible and feasible. By exchanging information
and promoting the introduction of new ideas and concepts, this workshop has the
potential to lead to new developments, applications and implementation of
existing technologies.