* 9100117
* Cooperative Research in Transmetalation Mechanisms          (U.S.-Middle East Cooperative Science; Science in DevelopingCountries).
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Geoffrey Davies, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 09/30/1993
* USD 19,750.00

Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Geoffrey Davies,
Northeastern University, and Professor Adnan Ali, Abu-Dis College of Science and
Technology, Jerusalem, West Bank. This collaborative effort relates to the metal
exchange of polynuclear materials. The proposed new work will build on the past
efforts of both investigators including the creation of larger and more diverse
multi-metal molecules at lower cost, and the use of these molecules as sources
of new metal alloys and chemical catalysts to be used in still newer systems.
Development of the transmetalation phenomenon will lead to the establishment of
new areas of study in organic and organometallic chemistry. The purpose of the
Science in Developing Countries Program is to advance the exchange of
international scientific knowledge and to contribute to the scientific
infrastructure of developing countries. This proposal meets those criteria.
Scope: These international collaborators are in the process of developing new
approaches to handling metals that can very possibly lead to new and unexpected
products of unique character for use in both the laboratory and the public
sector. An additional benefit of this research is the provision of a wealth of
learning opportunities for students pursuing degrees in organic chemistry.
Another value of this research is in the advancement of the scientific and
technical knowledge of the research teams and their impact within their
respective institutions.