* 9100622
* Program for Undergraduate Research in Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Charles Lochner, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* AMAR BHALLA
* 09/30/1994
* USD 105,000.00

This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site grant. The award
permits undergraduate students to participate in a research program in the
materials field under the supervision of faculty members actively engaged in
research. The REU Site at the University of Arizona is designed to integrate
undergraduate students into already active and stimulating research groups in
Materials Science and Engineering. Recruiting for students places high emphasis
upon hispanic and other minorities as well as females, and places additional
emphasis on attracting students from the surrounding Community Colleges, such as
Pima Community College. Funding provides for support of six students. The
program begins with a five week summer instructional program at the University
of Arizona Materials Laboratory, and then progresses into the academic year with
more emphasis on research. Skills taught in the summer portion include
laboratory safety, mixing chemicals, running characterization instrumentation,
analysis of data, and report preparation. Students who show highest aptitude and
desire will continue to pursue their research participation during the academic
year with matching funding support from the University of Arizona. Students
present their results in a seminar, and are encouraged to publish the results in
the appropriate scientific literature. The topics selected for the research
include laser processing of sol-gel coatings, structure of thin ceramic films,
strengthening of inorganic glass by alkoxide coatings, and processing of glass-
ceramics from lunar resources. The program enhances current research activities
as well as adding to the number of scientifically trained individuals. It is
hoped that this hands-on experience will serve as a stimulus to attract and
retain highly-gifted students into careers in teaching and research.