* 9100507
* REU Site in Experimental Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1994
* Thomas Borkovec, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 10/31/1994
* USD 123,492.00

This award provides funds to continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Site in the Department of Psychology at Pennsylvania State University for
another three years. Eight undergraduate psychology majors with an interest in
the biological aspects of experimental psychology will be recruited to
participate in this program at the completion of their sophomore or junior year.
An effort will be made to attract women and minority students using the
techniques and contacts which have enabled staff to train over 43 minority
Ph.D.s since 1969 and ten minority students in past REU programs. The students
selected will work as apprentices with one of eight members of the faculty, all
nationally known for their research and all highly experienced at preparing
undergraduates who have gone on to graduate school. This faculty has received a
major equipment grant from the U.S. Department of Education that has provided
facilities for research and training. The program is designed to have the
students work full-time for eight weeks in the summer, gradually exposing them
to all aspects of psychophysiological research and to selected aspects of
perception and cognitive and physiological psychology. Students will design an
independent research project during the latter part of the summer and complete
it with the help of their Penn State mentor during the following academic year.
At the end of the spring semester, they will present their research results at a
department colloquium. Every effort will be made to encourage and assist
students to gain admission to graduate programs.