* 9100235
* U.S.-U.K. Workshop on Rehabilitation Robotics, Cambridge,   England, April 1991
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Richard Howell, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1992
* USD 10,960.00

This award will support US participation in a US-UK workshop on the topic or
rehabilitation robotics, to take place in Cambridge, England in April 1991. The
co-organizers are: Dr. Richard Howell, Ohio State University and Dr. Ray Gosine,
Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge. The rapidly expanding
research area which has been termed "rehabilitation robotics" is dedicated to
the development of functional robotic assistive tools for use by severely
physically disabled individuals in home, work or educational environments. As a
new area of endeavor, rehabilitation robotics is composed of information from
the disciplines of engineering, rehabilitation, education and computer science.
The task of merging these disparate areas into a cohesive effort is made more
difficult by the few operational research projects from which to draw
information, and which are quite isolated from one another throughout the world.
The proposed workshop will feature an international gathering of research
scientists in rehabilitation robotics, who will present summaries of current
research efforts and discuss a series of topics focusing on the disabled use of
robotic devices. The topics will include: the user interface, safety issues in
robotic environments, the needs and perceptions of the users, and user
acceptability of robotic devices. In addition, sessions are proposed on the
current progress in hardware and software, and aspects related to
commercialization of robotic systems.