* 9100679
* Dissertation Research: Speciation Processes in Serpentine   Endemics: A Molecular Systematic Study of the Streptanthus  glanduloses Complex (Cruciferae)
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Michael Mayer, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 11/30/1993
* USD 9,100.00

Rare and endemic species provide unique opportunities to study the principles
and processes of speciation. The Streptanthus glandulosus complex (Cruciferae)
is a group of serpentine endemics, most of which are rare or threatened. This
complex represents a particularly striking example of the role of substrate in
the divergence of populations and taxa. These annual plants occur on serpentine
soils in disjunct populations in the Coast Ranges of California from Tehama
County to San Luis Obispo County, isolated by intervening regions of unsuitable,
non-serpentine habitat. this isolation, accompanied by inbreeding, may have
resulted in the many different phenotypes identifiable among populations within
each species. The phylogeny of the group is unknown and taxonomic delimitations
are disputed: from three varieties of one species to 13 distinct species have
been recognized. Thus, the S. glandulosus complex not only requires systematic
study but it also offers an excellent forum in which to study speciation
processes in serpentine endemics. Based on interpopulational crossing
experiments, Kruckeberg (1957) showed a negative correlation between
interfertility of populations of the complex and the distance by which they were
separated. We propose to build on Kruckeberg's classic studies of isolation by
distance using a combination of enzyme electrophoresis and restriction site
analysis of chloroplast DNA to examine genetic divergence, systematic
relationships, and evolutionary processes. The specific objectives are : (1)
assess allozymic and cpDNA divergence among populations and correlate genetic
divergence with geographic patterns; (2) construct a phylogeny of the complex
using cpDNA restriction site data and use the phylogeny to evaluate putative
examples of paleoendemism and neoendemism, recent derivation of restricted taxa
from more widespread ones, and recurrent adaptation of serpentine tolerance; (3)
estimate levels of interpopulational gene flow using allozymic data; and (4)
compare levels of allozyme variability in restricted and widespread taxa. The
integration of interfertility, allozymic, and restriction site analyses of the
S. glandulosus complex offers an almost unparalleled venus from which to study
speciation processes, and will provide the information necessary for sound
management of the complex.