* 9100640
* Mathematical Sciences: A Research Initiation for UndergradesVia Differential Equations and Iterated Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Willie Taylor, Texas Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1993
* USD 80,000.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates project will be supported by this
award. Ten students will work on problems of mathematical analysis under the
direction of two faculty advisors. The principal investigator and the visiting
faculty member were both heavily involved with the REU program conducted last
year at TSU. Again too, there will be joint activities with the University of
Houston. Included will be a weekly visit to the UH campus to access the
facilities of the Nonlinear Dynamics Laboratory. In addition, a Careers Day and
panel discussion will be repeated. Visitors from the surrounding community such
as Exxon and the Johnson Space Center as well as other academic institutions
will meet with students to discuss career opportunities. The research will focus
on two primary topics. These are oscillation theory of ordinary differential
equations and iterating of mappings and chaos, sometimes referred to as discrete
dynamical systems. These topics are particularly good; one can involve students
almost immediately with important and intelligible problems with a strong
geometric flavor. Students will be encouraged to prepare reports on their
accomplishments and present them at professional meetings. In particular, they
will be invited to attend the annual meeting of the Research Association of
Minority Professors held each year in Houston.