* 9100818
* REU Site:  Training Students to Use Computer Simulations as Research Tools
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/1992
* USD 42,000.00

This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site grant. The award permits
undergraduate students to participate in a research program in the materials
field under the supervision of faculty members actively engaged in research.
Recruitment of students places strong emphasis upon females, with sources being
University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, Chatham College, Seaton
Hill College, and Carlow College. The latter three are female colleges in the
Pittsburgh area. Students who succeed in the summer program can then continue to
participate informally during the academic year if they desire. The award
supports up to six students. The goal of the research is to allow students to
create "electronic laboratories" in which they can model behavior of complex
molecular fluids. Models used include Monte Carlo computer simulations of
aggregation and adsorption of thin films of polymers on surfaces and interfaces,
and subsequently to relate the microstructure of the polymer chains to the
macroscopic properties of the films. The program lets students begin with
existing models and progress to independent research where they generate models
themselves under the supervision of a faculty member. The program enhances
current research activities as well as adding to the number of scientifically
trained individuals. It is hoped that this hands- on experience will serve as a
stimulus to attract and retain highly-gifted students into careers in teaching
and research.