* 9100091
* Repair and Rehabilitation Research for Seismic Resistance ofBuried Water and Sewer Lifelines
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Isao Ishibashi, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1993
* USD 88,230.00

The objectives of this proposed research are to: (1) provide the effective
guidance for repairs and rehabilitation of buried lifeline structures for
seismic resistance; (2) provide technical information for realistic evaluation
of the vulnerability of existing buried lifeline structures under various
seismic environments; and (3) develop and document cost-effective methodologies
for repairing and strengthening such vulnerable structures. Buried lifelines
which include water, sewer, gas and oil pipelines have been damaged heavily by
earthquakes including the 1985 Mexico City Earthquake, the 1987 Whittier,
California Earthquake and the most recent Loma Prieta Earthquake of October 17,
1989. Existing buried lifelines are unsafe even under moderate earthquakes.
Because of the importance of lifelines to the health, supply, and safety of the
public, lifeline earthquake engineering needs greater attention. Since there is
still no codified seismic provision to design buried lifelines, most water and
sewer pipelines, including relatively new ones, have been built with minimum
earthquake protection. Damages to water and sewer pipelines during earthquakes
are unavoidable and economical loss can be substantial. Effective repair methods
under emergency situations and for a permanent basis are to be addressed by this
project. Due to the fact that the replacement of all existing water and sewer
pipelines is very expensive, if not impossible, the development of effective
rehabilitation techniques and strategies to be developed by the proposed
research is urgently needed.