* 9100731
* Undergraduate Research in Biology
* BIO,BIO
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Stephen Davis, Pepperdine University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1993
* USD 92,740.00

This award provides funds to the Natural Science Division at Pepperdine to
continue an already active program of undergraduate research in biology by
teaching students the common elements of the research process and increasing
their appreciation for the diversity of biological subdisciplines. In addition,
the program provides a mechanism whereby students from traditionally under-
represented groups in science will have the opportunity to experience biological
research. The program will begin each summer with a 6-day research orientation
workshop at the Murchison Science Center during which students will be
introduced to the uses and limitations of specific research tools and techniques
and immersed in the research process (literature review, hypothesis formulation,
and hypothesis testing). After the orientation workshop, students will pursue
individual research projects under the direction of faculty in either cellular
biochemistry, behavioral ecology, plant anatomy or plant physiological ecology.
All research projects will be designed to provide students with insight into how
scientists formulate research questions, design experiments, collect and analyze
data, and communicate their results to the scientific community. Over the course
of the summer, visiting scientists will hold special research seminars in each
research area, giving students an opportunity to discuss their own data with
other scientists. Each research group will hold weekly literature seminars to
discuss current journal articles pertaining to their research interests. The
program will conclude each year with a student research symposium in early
August.