* 9100128
* Dissertation Research: The Impact of Seasonality and Food   Habits on Maternal-Child Nutritional Well-Being and Health  Among Highland Basotho
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1993
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 02/28/1993
* USD 10,500.00

Highly seasonal ecologies can severely impact the nutritional well-being and
health status of individuals. Two groups which are particularly at risk are
mothers and their infants and young children. In order to survive in such
situations socieities develop a variety of coping mechanisms that may buffer
against the deleterious environmental conditions. The proposed research will
undertake to determine the effects of seasonal food supplies on the health of
mothers and young children in the highlands of Lesotho, a southern African
country with highly seasonal food supplies. Data will be gathered on seasonal
ecology, household demographics, financial reseources, various aspects of diet,
health and nutritional variables. Samples will be drawn from both the general
population and a subset of those who attend a local health clinic. It is
hypothesized that women who show the greatest variability in weight will have
the children with the poorest nutritional status and that those with the
greatest dietary variety will maintain higher anthropometric status as well as
the lowest incidence of infectious disease. It is also hypothesized that ther
will be more dietary diversity in families in which both parents are present
and/or maintain an extrended family structure. Such research will provide
valuable information on the relationship of seasonal stresses and biosocial
responses.