* 9100841
* Behavioral Basis of Shared Paternity in the Striped-backed  Wren
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1991,06/30/1992
* Walter Piper, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1992
* USD 19,759.00

A successful animal (in the evolutionary sense) is one that behaves so as to
maximize the representation of its genes in future generations. Therefore, an
animal can be successful either by raising its own offspring, as usually occurs,
or by helping to raise offspring that are closely related to itself, as occurs
in most "cooperative breeders." For example, adult helpers at the nests of mated
pairs of birds are often helping their parents raise offspring that are their
own full siblings. In the stripe-backed wren of Venezuela, males and females
raised in a given social group become helpers in the same group when they
mature. Since the mortality rate is high and dominant females that die are
replaced by immigrant females unrelated to the group, helpers often help raise
juveniles that are their half siblings. Thus, the death of a dominant female and
her replacement by an immigrant is a significant event for a male helper. His
mother's death (1) suddenly decreases the genetic benefit he enjoys by helping
to raise offspring of the dominant pair (since the female is no longer his
mother) and (2) creates an opportunity for him to reproduce non-incestuously by
mating with the new dominant female. Recent behavioral research revealed that
male helpers routinely pursue and attempt to court dominant females unrelated to
them and are only kept from mating with dominant females by dominant males. DNA
fingerprinting, a molecular technique used to assign parentage, has shown that
15% of all juveniles from groups that contain male helpers unrelated to the
dominant female are offspring of male helpers and dominant females. The
remaining 85% are offspring of the dominant pair. Dr. Piper's research project
will compare in more detail the behavior of male helpers that are sons of the
dominant female and those that are unrelated to her. Specifically, he will
examine the tendency of male helpers to associate with dominant females, the
treatment of male helpers by dominant males, and the amount of parental care
given by male helpers. This study will increase our understanding of helping
behavior and incest avoidance in cooperatively breeding animals and, more
generally, will give insight into the evolution of helping behavior.