* 9100491
* Mathematical Sciences: Undergraduate Research in applying   Algebra and Scientific Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Myoung An, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1992
* USD 30,000.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates project supported by this grant will
follow a three-stage approach. The format does not follow the traditional summer
schedule. Rather, students will first complete two six-week cycles of study and
research during the academic year. They will concentrate on understanding the
structure of crystallographic groups. The work will cover the necessary concepts
in modern algebra and number theory which form the basis of X-ray
crystallography. Matrix groups, subgroup structure , normality and quotient
structure will be analyzed first. Particular crystallographic groups will be
taken up next and students will learn how to extract relevant properties from
these structures. The second cycle involves activities related to the study of
crystallographic groups on certain rings. This will involve the development of
computational techniques for matrix manipulation. Students will learn the
orbital decomposition of rings and the concept of fundamental region. They will,
at this stage, be introduced to the Center for Large Scale Computation to
observe research activities on the applications of computation in research,
design of algorithms and scientific computing. The third stage involves
independent work and will take place immediately after the close of spring
semester. Students will use computers to determine fundamental regions and the
permutation matrices mapping one region onto another. They will investigate the
efficiency of the permutation relative to specific computer architectures. Time
will also be spent developing algorithms and implementing theoretical ideas to
the computational environment, where properties overlooked in the theoretical
phase become evident.