* 9100033
* Gel-Processing as a Route to High Performance Oriented Electronic and Optical Polymer Materials: Design and Synthesis on the Supramolecular Length Scale
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Dale Pearson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* John C. Hurt
* 05/31/1993
* USD 1,300,000.00

This award is for the renewal of research previously supported under a Materials
Research Group grant (DMR 8703399) at the University of California - Santa
Barbara. The research of the group focuses on the design and synthesis on the
supermolecular length scale of multi-functional, high performance electronic and
optical polymer blends using gel processing. The morphology of these gels is
being determined using x-ray diffraction, optical, scanning, and electron
microscopy, mechanical, and electrical measurements, optical spectroscopy,
luminescence, and photo-induced absorption. Polymers being investigated include
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, polyvinyl alcohol, polyacrylonitrile,
unblended conjugated polymer systems, and phase-segregated highly oriented
polymer blends such as polyaniline/poly(p-phenylene terephthalamide). Materials
are being processed into fibers, thin films, and conducting foams taking care to
control the morphology, phase stability, and spinodal decomposition. The
research is multi-disciplinary, combining condensed matter physics, synthetic
chemistry, theory, and polymer science. This grant provides the ideal mechanism
to train students to synthesize, process and characterize polymers, with the
interaction of all of the scientific approaches and methods used to study
polymers.