* 9100479
* Mathematical Sciences: Research Experiences for             Undergraduates in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Daniel Maki, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1993
* USD 99,998.00

A program of Research Experiences for Undergraduates involving 10 undergraduate
students will be supported by this award. The activity will run for eight weeks
during the summer of 1991. Students will be assigned individual faculty advisors
and will work on projects closely allied with those of interest to the advisor.
To foster interactions between students, they will be housed together. In
addition, frequent progress reports will be given by students to the entire
team. There will be a rich variety of research topics. These include work on
modeling uncertainty in economics, the wave and Euler partial differential
equations, the geometry of orbits of linear groups and computer gaming. All
students will be briefed on the use of mathematical software available, such as
Mathmatica, Macsyma and Maple. Reports at the conclusion of the project will be
required. All of the faculty are currently involved in high-level mathematical
research; this should add considerable currency to the impressions made on the
undergraduates. It should be pointed out that the Mathematics Department of
Indiana University has a long history of conducting summer programs designed to
give mathematics majors research experience. They started in the early 1970's,
continuing until 1981 with support from the NSF Undergraduate Research
Participation Program.