* 9100404
* Carbonyl Coupling Reactions Probe Oxide Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Mark Barteau, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 09/30/1994
* USD 280,000.00

This research examines the active site requirements for carbonyl coupling
reactions on titania surfaces. The goals are to identify the active sites for
ketonization of carboxylic acids, aldol condensation, and carbonyl metathesis,
and to develop these reactions as probes of the chemical and physical properties
of metal oxides. The influence of surface structure on reactivity is examined on
both stable and metastable oxide surfaces. New oligomerization reactions that
can be carried out even under ultrahigh vacuum are explored, thereby
demonstrating the application of surface-science approaches, including electron
and ion spectroscopies, to oligomerization, polymerization, and metathesis
catalysts. Site requirements for intramolecular coupling reactions analogous to
observed intermolecular reactions are probed using difunctional carboxylic
acids, alcohols, and aldehydes. Structures of reactive surfaces and associated
adsorbates are imaged by scanning tunneling microscopy. Although this effort
addresses fundamental questions, it should improve understanding of many
important industrial processes, ranging from Ziegler-Natta polymerization (used
to make polyethylene and polypropylene) to the synthesis of complex
biomolecules. The results could also have a major impact on the design of sensor
and separation devices.