* 9100963
* NSF - REU in the Space Vacuum Epitaxy Center (SVEC) at the  University of Houston
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1995
* Hung-Dah Shih, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 09/30/1995
* USD 114,000.00

This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site grant. The award permits
undergraduate students to participate in a research program in the materials
field under the supervision of faculty members actively engaged in research. The
grant involves research experiences for six undergraduate students at the
University of Houston, Texas Southern University, University of Houston-Downtown
Campus, and Sam Houston State University. Texas Southern is a historically black
university. The goal is to have half of the students involved be minority.
Students from the various campuses meet monthly to discuss progress and present
results in seminars. Students first attend training classes to acquire required
skills specific to individual research projects, such as operation of equipment
and safety procedures. Thereafter, students elect to participate on individual
research projects under supervision of a faculty member. Typical topics for
research include: electron transport in semiconducting and superconducting
materials, study of thin films using energy dispersive spectroscopy in a
scanning electron microscope, chemical beam epitaxy of thin films,
characterization of thin films using infrared spectroscopy and electron spin
resonance. The program enhances current research activities as well as adding to
the number of scientifically trained individuals. It is hoped that this hands-on
experience will serve as a stimulus to attract and retain highly-gifted students
into careers in teaching and research.