* 9100510
* The Preparation, Structure, Dynamics, and Reactivity of     Thermally Stable Group IV Early-Transition Metal Allyl      Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Michael Silver, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 10/31/1994
* USD 126,000.00

Dr. Michael E. Silver of the Chemistry Department, Hope College, is being
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program for work on
the synthesis and characterization of early transition metal allyl compounds.
Specifically, compounds containing the moiety Cp(allyl)M, where M=Zr or Hf, will
be synthesized. The allyl ligand will be methylated to improve stability of the
product. The compounds prepared will then be used to synthesize early-late
transition metal bimetallic compounds. In one attempt, the Grignard reagent
prepared from the allyl species will be reacted with late transition metal
carbonylates. In another, late metal hydrides will be used. The allyl species
will also be used to study fluxionality of the allyl group. %%% The goal of the
research is to enhance the catalytic reactivity of the early transition metal
center by associating it with a late-transition metal. Although this strategy
has not successed previously, positive results would have implications for the
development of useful industrial catalysts. It is anticipated that the project
will result in the synthesis of novel organometallic species and the work will
be of considerable educational value to the undergraduate students who will
participate in the program.