* 9100925
* Dissertation Research: The Phylogeny of the Creodonta and a Study of their Carnivorous Adaptations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1993
* William Clemens, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1993
* USD 13,092.00

For the first half of the Cenozoic, members of the order Creodonta were the
predominant terrestrial carnivores in North America, Eurasia, and Africa.
Creodonts exploited many of the same adaptive zones as later members of the
Carnivora and Marsupialia, and they exhibit many of the same morphologies.
Although they had a wide distribution and great ecologic importance, the
phylogeny and major locomotory and feeding adaptations of creodonts remain
largely unstudied. This study will be the first comprehensive assessment of
creodont phylogeny and evolution in the context of phylogenetic systematics. It
will address the questions of creodont monophyly, their relationship to the
Carnivora, their phylogenetic position within Eutheria, and the position of
several problematic taxa within Creodonta. Furthermore, this phylogenetic
information will be used to examine the origin of morphologies convergent with
those seen in other carnivorous mammals. Creodonts had three relatively separate
radiations. These, along with the radiations of Carnivora and carnivorous
marsupials, provide an excellent chance to look at the phenomena of convergent
evolution and community structure in terrestrial ecosystems of the Tertiary.
Data will come from original analysis of museum specimens and from the published
literature. In the phylogenetic analysis dental, cranial, postcranial, and
inferred anatomical characters will be used.