* 9100362
* Solidification of Binary Mixtures in a Pourous Media in the Presence of Double Diffusive Convection
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1995
* S Chellaiah, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* DEBORAH KAMINSKI
* 12/31/1995
* USD 92,496.00

It is known that the freezing of saline soils or of soils saturated with
herbicides, fertilizers or various contaminants may result in the exclusion and
concentration of the solute or contaminant at the freezing front. Solidification
of industrial coatings and ingots is also associated with segregation at the
freezing front, dendritic crystal growth, the formation of a mushy zone, and
density-driven convection, suggesting that an analogy exist between the freezing
of saline soils and the solidification of castings. In castings, the
redistribution of the solute by the interdendritic liquid flow causes
nonuniformities (segregation) in alloy composition and affects the physical and
mechanical properties. This research proposal outlines a fundamental study of
flow and heat transfer processes in a system involving the solidification of
salt solutions in a porous medium. A rectangular test cell containing an aqueous
salt solution and metallic or nonmetallic spheres with solidification beginning
at one vertical wall would be studied. Specifically this research project will
1) record the transient and spatial variation of temperature within the system,
2) photographically record the freezing process to provide qualitative and
quantitative information, 3) develop a mathematical/numerical model of the
solidification process in the presence of double-diffusive convection and 4)
compare the predictions of the model with the corresponding experimental data.
An understanding of the role of interdendritic liquid flow in the porous media
can aid in predicting segregation processes in freezing soils, and also in the
control of the quality of castings.