* 9100418
* RUI: The Subperiodic Subgroups of the Crystallographic SpaceGroups
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Daniel Litvin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/1993
* USD 60,000.00

This RUI grant will be used to determine the group theoretical and
crystallographic relationships among the subperiodic subgroups of the
crystallographic space groups and between the subperiodic subgroups and the
crystallographic space groups to provide a systematic, unified theory of these
groups. A standard representative group which emphasizes these relationships
will be chosen from each class of subperiodic groups. A process called scanning
will be developed and used to determine the orientation and origin of the
subperiodic symmetry group of all planes and lines in crystals. Atom
arrangements invariant under subperiodic groups will be tabulated in the format
of the International Tables for Crystallography. Lattices of normal subgroups of
the subperiodic groups, which provide a basis for the derivation of the images
of the irreducible representations of the subperiodic groups, will be determined
and the irreducible representations of the subperiodic groups derived. The
subperiodic groups will also be related to the irreducible representations of
the three- dimensional crystallographic space groups. The results of this
research will be published by the International Union of Crystallography. Parts
of the research are being conducted in collaboration with Dr. V. Kopsky of the
Institute of Physics of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. %%% Group theory
is important in representing mathematically the symmetry inherent in perfect
crystals. Much can be learned about the physical properties of crystals by
understanding their intrinsic underlying symmetries. The various types of
symmetry allowed for three-dimensional crystals is tabulated mathematically in
tables which are of importance to crystallographers and other scientists
interested in the properties of crystals. In the present research the comparable
properties of the subperiodic subgroups of the crystallographic space groups
will be studied and tabulated. These subgroups are of interest to scientists
interested in one-and two-dimensional properties of crystals such as surfaces or
planes and chains. The results of this research will be published as tables by
the International Union of Crystallography for use by all researchers.