* 9100132
* Biological Conservation and Human Ecology:  Conflict or     Compatibility Between Wildlife and Pastoralists in          Sub-Saharan Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1996
* James Ellis, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1996
* USD 305,000.00

This project involves the multidisciplinary research of anthropologists and
ecologists in a conservation park in Tanzania, Africa. The central question of
the project is whether subsistence pastoralists can coexist with large African
mammals in a conservation park. The question of compatibility between
pastoralists and wildlife in Africa, or indeed between humans and other species
in any part of the world, has major implications for the future of global
biological diversity and how we go about the business of biological
conservation. If we assume incompatibility, this obligates us to continue to use
the "park" model of conservation, where people are excluded from exploiting
those areas set aside for biodiversity preservation. If we assume compatibility,
a "regional conservation model" may be adopted which incorporates both
environmental conservation and maintenance of biological diversity as well as
providing opportunities for human development and welfare. The project will
investigate these issues by measuring human land use and biological conservation
in three different land-use regimes in the Ngorongoro Conservation Area,
Tanzania. Specific studies will include land use patterns; human nutrition,
economy, and demography; livestock nutritional ecology, production and
demography; wildlife diversity, density and habitat use patterns; and vegetation
and habitat mapping. This research should contribute valuable knowledge to
inform policy makers on strategies of biodiversity conservation.