* 9100844
* Acid and Aluminum Effects on Sodium Homeostasis in Freshwater Zooplankton
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Karl Havens, Kent State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 01/31/1993
* USD 25,000.00

Lake acidification strongly affects zooplankton, microscopic animals which
consume algae and are a major food source for fish. Acidification selectively
eliminates large zooplankton, which are the most effective grazers of algae and
the preferred food source for fish. The small zooplankton which dominate in acid
lake are ineffective in both roles. The objective of this study is to determine
why some zooplankton are acid-sensitive, while others are acid-tolerant. The
hypothesis to be tested is that high acidity and aluminum (a toxic element which
becomes concentrated in acid lakes) hinder normal osmoregulation (water and ion
balance) in acid-sensitive zooplankton, but not in acid-tolerant zooplankton.
When animals cannot osmoregulate, they lose essential ions like sodium.
Consequently, they experience dysfunction of their nervous and muscular systems
and die. Experiments will be performed in which several common North American
zooplankton (including both acid-sensitive and acid- tolerant species) will be
exposed to lakewater at various combinations of acid and aluminum levels,
covering the range which occurs during lake acidification. After exposures of
varying duration, animals will be removed from the treatments, weighed, and
their body sodium content assayed using a standard technique called neutron
activation analysis. Mortality rates will also be determined, and vital staining
will be done to determine the extent and location of aluminum binding to
tissues. Statistical analyses will quantify the effects of pH and aluminum on
body sodium content of the test animals, and the effects of sodium losses on
their survival.