* 9100684
* Dissertation Research: Growth of the Human Fetal            Craniofacial Complex Characterized in Three Dimensions
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1991,01/31/1992
* Joan Richtsmeier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 01/31/1992
* USD 9,821.00

The description of human anatomical growth and development is a longstanding
interest of physical anthropology. Not only is this of interest vis a vis modern
humans, but also as a means of describing the altering patterns of growth which
have occurred over evolutionary time. The complex changes in morphology which
proceed in the development of an individual are by no means easy to describe or
quantify. The objective of this proposal is to characterize the growth of the
basicranium and face of modern humans during fetal and early post-partum
periods. This will involve two stages. Data on the alterations in the positions
of a series of cranial landmarks will be generated through the use of computed
tomography. Once available, the data can then be analyzed using two mathematical
models: Finite Element Scaling Analysis and Euclidean Distance Matrix Analysis.
These models will allow the PIs to more fully describe the alterations in the
shape of the human skull over the the fetal period. Additionally it will be
possible to start to describe the range of variation in normal human growth
during this period. Ultimately, such data will allow for discussion of the
variation in growth patterns seen throughout the primates.