* 9100820
* Study of the Magnetic Properties of Rare Earth Doped        Fluoride Glass Systems:  A Search for Spun Glass
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1993
* David Hall, SUNY College at Brockport
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1993
* USD 42,000.00

This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site grant. The award permits
undergraduate students to participate in a research program in the materials
field under the supervision of faculty members actively engaged in research.
Students are recruited from the student body at the State University of New York
at Brockport, Erie Community College, and Monroe County Community College.
Strong emphasis is placed on recruitment of under-represented minority and
economically disadvantaged groups. Students are trained in operation and
construction of scientific instruments typically used for research in low
temperature physics, planning of experiments, analysis of data, familiarization
with the scientific literature, report writing, and oral presentation of
results. Funding is provided for participation by four students. Research is
performed on magnetic properties of rare earth doped fluoride glass systems with
interest in spin glass systems. The research is performed in teams of two
students and one faculty member, and continues throughout the year. Students
present their results at national conferences in low temperature physics. The
program enhances current research activities as well as adding to the number of
scientifically trained individuals. It is hoped that this hands- on experience
will serve as a stimulus to attract and retain highly-gifted students into
careers in teaching and research.