* 9100209
* Interactions of Toxic Trace Metals with Multi-Component     Biofilms:  A Mechanistic Approach
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Michael Shuler, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 12/31/1996
* USD 514,462.00

Interactions of Toxic Trace Metals With Multi-Component Biofilms: A Mechanistic
Approach. This is a renewal award for support of research conducted under NSF
Grant No. 86-17408 on the adsorption behavior of cadmium and lead in water
solution to solid surfaces that had become coated with biofilms. Results led to
development of a mechanistically-based, structured model that can be used to
predict the behavior of these metals in an experimental system consisting of a
single bacterial species, its extracellular polymer and a solid surface under
conditions of constant pH and ionic strength. The objective of the renewal
project is to extend this approach by introduction of ferric iron as a competing
trace metal to provide a degree of complexity more analagous to conditions found
in the natural environment where adsorption of metals to solid surfaces is of
environmental significance. Results of this research are expected to develop
knowledge of factors that influence the formation of biofilms on solid surfaces
including fixed-film, biofilm reactors that are used for the treatment of
wastewaters. Insights obtained during this project are expected to lead to
improvements in the engineering design of fixed-film processes for wastewater
treatment and may be applied to obtaining a better understanding than now exists
of mechanisms for biofilm formation in sediments underlying natural surface
waters and in subsurface formations that affect the movement of groundwater
pollutants.