* 9100036
* Purification, Characterization, and Molecular Cloning of    A Viral Protease Inhibitor
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1995
* Chao-yun Shih, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1995
* USD 361,623.00

Proteolytic cleavage of precursor proteins by virus coded proteases is a common
protein synthesis strategy utilized by many animal and plant viruses for
synthesis of functional viral proteins. Prevention of these cleavage processes
may offer a specific means for controlling replication of these viruses. The
proposed project is designed to investigate a protease inhibitor which Southern
University biologists found to exist in cowpea embryos. This inhibitor can
completely prevent proteolytic processing of the precursor proteins of cowpea
mosaic virus (CPMV) in an in vitro protein synthesizing system. The plan is to
develop a purification procedure for complete purification of the inhibitor, to
characterize the inhibitor biochemically, to compare the activity of the
inhibitor to the activities of synthetic peptides, to determine the existence or
absence of this inhibitor in CPMV resistance and sensitive cowpea plants, and to
determine the amino acid sequence of the inhibitor using DNA cloning and
sequencing methods. The long range goals of this research are to gain a complete
understanding of the structural and functional properties of this inhibitor, and
to use this inhibitor as a model for examining the possibility of utilizing
protease inhibitors as antiviral agents for prevention or treatment of viral
diseases. Besides the research goals, an additional objective of this proposed
project is to present an opportunity to minority students and faculty of
Southern University and other minority institutions to receive research training
and to gain experience in modern molecular biology techniques, including genetic
engineering techniques. This objective will be accomplished through seminars and
workshops.