* 9100952
* Mathematical Sciences: Cooperative Game Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/1991,02/28/1993
* David Housman, Drew University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/1993
* USD 73,830.00

A team of six students will be supported by this Research Experiences for
Undergraduates award. They will work under the supervision of the principal
investigator, assisted by several faculty members of the mathematics department.
The program will run for eight weeks concentrating on problems of cooperative
game theory. A well-trained mathematics student can understand the basic
concepts with only a short period of preparation. Some preliminary reading will
be assigned before the students arrive at the site. Several areas in which there
is ample potential for the development of sound research projects will be
presented to the students. They include value axiomatics, application of values
to real life cost allocations, value computation of the nucleolus of a game and
multi-alternative voting power indices and matroidal simple games. Ample
computational support for the project will be provided by the college. Efforts
will made to have students attend part of the annual international conference on
game theory held at Ohio State University during the summer. Visits to the NSF
center, the Advanced Research Institute for Discrete and Applied Mathematics at
nearby Rutgers University are also expected. Final reports are expected at the
end of the program. The most promising will be revised where necessary for
journal submission.