* 9100975
* CRB:  Patterns of Recruitment, Early Growth and Survivorshipof two Opportunistic Corals, Pocillopora verrucosa and P.   eydouxi, on a Disturbed Coral Reef.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 11/30/1993
* USD 90,220.00

The conditions that favor successful colonization of new areas by sessile
plants and animals must be elucidated before community dynamics and structure
can be fully understood. This study investigates habitat-specific factors that
potentially affect the demographic patterns of recruitment, early growth, and
survivorship of two species of opportunistic corals, Pocillopora verrucosa and
P. eydouxi, that are recolonizing a disturbed coral reef environment. The
importance of competition with filamentous and fleshy algae and protection from
grazers on the distribution and survivorship of coral spat and young corals will
be assessed with field surveys and manipulative experiments. Habitat- specific
demographic parameters will be determined for three patch types (areas of high
cover of filamentous algae, areas with high density of fleshy algae, and areas
of heavy grazing and high cover of crustose algae) in both back-reef and fore-
reef habitats. Coral reefs are extremely important habitats in the world's
oceans. This is the first study of recolonization of a disturbed reef to
emphasize the role of the mosaic nature of the landscape on establishment and
growth of young corals. Algal cover is an important variable on disturbed or
degraded reefs that may affect recovery of the hard coral community.
Understanding this interaction and the underlying processes in community
recovery is essential for management and conservation of coral reef systems.