* 9100716
* MAB: Comparison and Management of Montane Ecosystems in the Peninsular Range of the Californias
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1990,09/30/1992
* Michael Barbour, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 09/30/1992
* USD 49,802.00

This project will continue and expand a comparative study of similar, but
geographically isolated, semi-arid montane ecosystems in the Peninsular Ranges
within the Californian Biogeographic Province. The Parque Nacional San Pedro
Martir (SPM) in Baja California, Mexico, and the Mt. San Jacinto State Park (SJ)
in southern California have experienced profoundly different management regimes
during the 20th century. SJ has been subject to a fire suppression policy since
1900 and to an exclusion of domestic livestock since 1930; in contrast,
wildfires remain uncontrolled in SPM but livestock grazing intensity is
extremely high. The project will evaluate the result of the differing management
strategies on these two ecosystems. Included will be continuing documentation of
past and current human use of the two areas, reconstruction of the probable
vegetation patterns of the sites prior to European exploitation (based on
diaries from the Spanish mission period of the late 18th century), and
perfection of computerized geographic information systems for the two areas. The
researchers will characterize elevational, latitudinal and longitudinal
gradients in both areas and will utilize satellite remote sensing data to
reconstruct regional fire histories. The research will provide for an
understanding of the controls of biodiversity and of sustainable development in
these important habitats and may be of use in analyzing the probable of global
environmental change.