* 9100448
* Shipboard Technician Support
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Donald Keach, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/1994
* USD 509,515.00

The University of Southern California will support shipboard technician
activities associated with the R/V VICKERS, a 220-foot research vessel that is
owned and operated by the University. USC has been converting the VICKERS to a
research vessel from a tuna clipper over the past five years. Nearly all of the
ship's operating schedule during 1991 is in support of NSF- sponsored research
projects. Some extra effort will go into setting up new scientific equipment and
getting the ship ready to do science. The Shipboard Technician Program has two
components: an at-sea component and an ashore component. The at-sea component
consists of instructing scientific personnel in the use of shared shipboard
equipment; maintenance, repair, and calibration of scientific instrumentation;
instruction and supervision of deck operations; and providing logistics
assistance to on-coming and off-going scientific parties. On shore activities
include the maintenance, repair, and calibration of shared use seagoing
equipment and assisting scientific personnel in preparing for field work on the
vessel. Shipboard technicians funded by this award have broad responsibilities
for providing the coordination and assistance needed for the successful
completion of research projects at sea. The level of activity and amount of
support are closely related to the size and capability of the vessel, and its
scientific outfit and capability.