* 9100013
* CRB:  Biological Diversity, Economic Risk Aversion, and the Management of Commercial Mixed-Species Forest Stands
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Robert Lilieholm, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/1993
* USD 37,876.00

Increasing concern about the reduction of many plant and animal species in many
locales have led to reexamination of the criteria by which many sites are
managed. Forest management practices, for example, are under review in order to
determine whether mixed-species stands provide superior habitats. Much more
uncertain, however, are understandings about the economic implications of mixed-
species rather than single-species management practices, and almost not
attention has been focused on how to reconcile both economic and ecological
approaches. This project will consist of an application of modern stock-
portfolio theory to problems of mixed-species stand management. Special
attention will be given to assessing the degree to which stock- portfolio
management practices can integrate financial risk-aversion and biological
diversity considerations in commercial forest management practices. Theoretical
developments will be tested using a mathematical programming model of the
Blodgett Forest Research Station in the Sierra Nevada of California to evaluate
the range of opportunities for economic risk reduction through species
diversification. This project will provide valuable new insights into procedures
for integrating advanced financial analysis procedures and ecological
consideration into management of natural resources. In addition to its focused
and theoretical contributions, it will demonstrate the potential for research
that seriously addresses major problems using both social scientific and natural
scientific perspectives.