* 9100892
* Physics Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the      Pennsylvania State University
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Moses Chan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1994
* USD 146,132.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site will be carried out in the
Physics Department of The Pennsylvania State University at the University Park
campus during 1991- 1993. The REU site will involve 14 students in research
projects each summer, 10 funded by NSF and 4 by Penn State. Students will be
involved in a wide range of frontier research projects, consistent with the
department's excellent record of undergraduate research in all areas of physics.
As an REU site, the Penn State Physics Department will mount an aggressive
campaign to recruit students into the program, with a wide recruitment area
covering Pennsylvania and surrounding, mid-Atlantic region states. Efforts to
encourage minority student enrollment include a special recruitment agreement
with the Physics Department at Morehouse College, Georgia and making use of
contacts with other predominantly minority universities and colleges in the
region. There will be special seminars and background courses for participating
students in order to broaden and reinforce their knowledge of physics and to
encourage interaction with faculty. Valuable skills, such as machine shop use
and scientific computing, will also be taught. Extra-curricular activities will
be organized to encourage students to interact informally with faculty and
graduate students. Throughout the program emphasis will be placed on encouraging
students' interest in careers in physics.