* 9100922
* A Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Developmental    Biology
* BIO,BIO
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1992
* David Kirk, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1992
* USD 44,693.00

This award provides funds to the Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences at
Washington University to continue a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site
that was established last year. Twelve undergraduates, from a diversity of
collegiate and ethnic backgrounds, will be recruited to spend 8-12 summer weeks
engaged in developmental biology research with faculty mentors who will be
selected, on the basis of mutual interests, from the about 30 developmental
biologists on the faculty. These staff members have active, well-equipped and
funded research groups working on a wide range of developmental problems,
ranging from mating and zygote formation in Chlamydomonas, through organ-
specific gene expression in transgenic plants, and control of germ cell
differentiation in nematodes, to formation of patterned connections in the
mammalian CNS. The emphasis of the program will be on getting each student
actively engaged in increasingly independent research in one of these productive
laboratories. However, to help the students view their own research in a broader
scientific and professional context, four supplementary activities will be
provided: (1) Five days during the early part of the program will be devoted to
introducing the REU students to some of the major research models and methods of
contemporary developmental biology, and hands-on laboratory experiences. (2) In
each odd-numbered week a member of the participating faculty will present an
informal research seminar and discussion, designed specifically for these
students. (3) In even-numbered weeks, the students will participate with
Washington University graduate students, postdocs and faculty in an ongoing
Developmental Biology Journal Club. (4) At the end of the summer, a weekend
retreat will be held at which students in this program, together with other
summer undergraduate research students, will present the results of their summer
research either orally or as poster papers. A number of social activities,
designed to bring the students and faculty together more often on an informal
basis, will also be sponsored by the program and the Division.