* 9100473
* Dissertation Research: Ecologial Constraints and            Relatedness Asymmetries in Augochlorella striata            (Halictidae: Hymenoptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1992
* George Eickwort, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 04/30/1992
* USD 5,940.00

Workers in eusocial Hymenoptera colonies (relatedness asymmetry present) are
predicted to favor a more female-biased sex-ratio as compared to the sex-ratio
favored by workers in parasocial colonies (relatedness asymmetry absent).
Experiments on the primitively eusocial sweat bee Augochlorella striata, with
random assignment of colonies to a eusocial and parasocial condition confirmed
the predicted female-bias in eusocial colonies, but were unable to test the
hypothesis that worker reproduction of males is greater in parasocial than in
eusocial colonies. The determination of maternity of males by means of a genetic
analysis is essential to test this hypothesis. This study will involve
genetically fingerprinting reproductives, workers, and male sexuals of the
experimental nests in order to compare worker reproduction of males in eusocial
and parasocial colonies. Because of parthenogenetic production of males, all
bands in a fingerprint of a male must also be present in the fingerprint of his
mother. Maternity of males can therefore be determined by matching fingerprints
of males to fingerprints of putative mothers (e.g. foundresses and workers). If
evidence from genetic fingerprinting refutes the hypothesis of worker
reproduction, relatedness asymmetries deriving from haplodiploidy remain as the
only explanation of the observed sex-ratio adjustments. This would imply that
social behavior in A. striata evolved not only in response to ecological
constraints limiting reproductive options, but also in relation to genetic
variables (relatedness asymmetries) intrinsic to the haplodiploid system of sex-
determination.