* 9100267
* Mathematical Sciences: Small Geometry Project
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Colin Adams, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1994
* USD 180,000.00

A Research Experiences for Undergraduates project involving 12 students will be
supported by this award. The students will work for ten weeks under the
supervision of seven faculty advisors. Other funds will provide support for
additional students bringing the total size of the group to about 20. The grant
renews funding of successful projects of similar size carried out during the
past three years. Although many of the participants have not yet graduated, at
least seven are known to be enrolled in graduate study in mathematics and
computer science. The program is structured so that each student works with two
subgroups. They focus on several problems initially until one emerges as the
most promising. The themes are geometric although the term SMALL in the title is
an acronym representing the initials of the first group of advisors and is not
used as an adjective. Typical problems areas will include questions involving
knot theory. Students will consider how an analysis of the crossings of knots
can provide information about their general classification. These ideas are
related to others in graph theory in that certain knots can be embedded in
graphs. One would like to characterize such graphs. Other topics include the
calculation of topological characteristics called Betti numbers, vector-valued
Hermitian forms arising in the differential geometry of Cauchy-Riemann
structures and work in analytic number theory on the divisor problem for
arithmetic progressions. Students will be recruited from the New England area.
Efforts will be made see that the research continues after the summer ends. This
will be particularly true of the students who are recruited from Williams
College. It is expected that several publishable papers will result from the
project and that some students will have the opportunity to present their work
at professional meetings.