* 9100515
* Dissertation Research: The Paleo-Indian Archaeology and     Stratigraphy of Offshore Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. C. Vance Haynes, Mr. Michael K. Faught will collect
information for his doctoral dissertation. In the first stage of the research,
Mr. Faught will employ a geopulse devise to map underwater features and relict
river segments along the Aucilla river channel which is located in Florida's
Apalachee Bay. In particular, an attempt will be made to locate underwater
sinkholes. With the data thus acquired, a second phase of the work will focus on
the coring of promising areas. These cores will be photographed and examined for
pollen, macro botanical remains, sediment characteristics and radiocarbon
samples. The ultimate objectives of the work are to find bone bed accumulations
which are likely spots for Paleo-Indian remains, and to construct a sedimentary
profile out from the current Aucilla River mouth onto the continental shelf. The
geological data thus obtained will further aid the discovery of underwater
archaeological sites. Remains of extinct animals and Paleo-indian artifacts are
frequently found in the karst sinkholes of Northwestern Florida along with clear
stratigraphic evidence for Holocene environmental change. These sinkholes were
reliable sources of water for late Pleistocene animals, hunting sites used by
prehistoric people and traps for subsequent sediment accumulations. So far,
however, all these sinkholes have been disturbed by amateur diver/collectors
before geoarchaeological scrutiny could take place. Sinkholes currently located
offshore in this region can solve this problem because they most likely contain
extinct faunal remains as well as archaeological materials. (At the end of the
Pleistocene sea levels were lower than at present.) Numerous offshore
archaeological sites have been located offshore in this area, but no one has yet
probed the inundated relict karst river channels for their protected early
archaeology. This research is important for several reasons. It will, hopefully,
locate sites which can be excavated in future years by Mr. Faught as well as
other archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of the native American
past and assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.