* 9100348
* FAW: Relations Between Language and Thought in Young        Children
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1996
* Susan Gelman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1996
* USD 250,000.00

With a Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers, Dr. Susan A. Gelman
will be able to continue to study the relations between language and thought in
young children, uncovering principles that children use to structure knowledge
and experience. She has already discovered that children make use of
sophisticated strategies to organize knowledge at an earlier age than
traditional theories of development predict. She discovered this by developing
new experimental techniques for use with preschool children (until recently a
relatively neglected age group) and novel linguistic analyses of language and
concepts. One representative finding from her laboratory is that children as
young as two-year olds expect category members to share important, nonobvious
similarities, such as internal parts. They infer that members of the same
category (e.g., blackbird and flamingo) share underlying properties despite
salient perceptual dissimilarities between the category members. In a sense,
very young children act as if members of a category share an underlying
"essence." This previously unsuspected ability contradicts a widely accepted
view that children's concepts are limited to concrete, perceptual, and obvious
qualities. Gelman has proposed that children have an early capacity to look
beyond salient perceptual properties, that this capacity predates training in
science, and that it serves as a mechanism for further cognitive development. In
addition to the developmental implications, these results suggest a new way of
thinking about categorization. Traditional accounts in psychology define
categories as static clusters of primarily superficial and obvious features. In
contrast, these findings indicate that hidden, nonobvious properties are
psychologically important. This work is important for several reasons. It will
provide basic information about the usual course of preschool conceptual
development, knowledge of which should provide educators with better ways to
present information so that it can be grasped by children when they enter formal
schooling. The information can also be useful in giving early warning of
developmental disabilities that manifest themselves only in very subtle ways in
preschoolers, so that intervention programs can be undertaken before the
children become stigmatized as "slow learners" or some such in school. It will
also assist in the professional development of a young scientist with the
potential to become one of the superstars of her field.