* 9100935
* U.S.-Poland Research on Spontaneous and Radiation           Induced Tautomerism in Nucleic Acid Bases
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Ludwik Adamowicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 26,438.00

The primary objective of this US-Poland research project between Dr. Ludwick
Adamowicz of the University of Arizona and Dr. M. Nowak of the Physics Institute
of the Polish Academy of Sciences is to study the tautomerism process in nucleic
acid bases and their derivatives that occur spontaneously or are invoked by UV
radiation. The researchers intend to continue developing ab-initio quantum
chemical techniques for more accurate calculations of electronic structures and
of excited electronic states. Many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) and coupled-
cluster methods will be extended to study electron excitation processes and
develop optimization techniques for correlation orbitals based on the Hylleraas
functional. The results are expected to develop theoretical methodologies that
will be combined with experimental approaches of matrix isolation spectroscopy
and extend understanding of the IR spectra of a group of molecules in the gas-
phase, as well as to describe the mechanism of the interaction and chemical
transformation of these molecules upon UV radiation. This project in theoretical
chemistry fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.