* 9101371
* Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic and Computational         Techniques for Amplitude Equations and Weak Turbulence      Models
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Paul Newton, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/1993
* USD 21,500.00

In this project the principal investigator will continue his study of several
problems related to the stability and bifurcation of time-dependent solutions of
amplitude equations arising in fluid dynamics. In particular, he will
investigate the Ginzburg-Landau equation from the theory of hydrodynamic
stability theory and the Zakharov system of equations from the theory of weak
plasma turbulence. In addition, the principal investigator will consider these
two sets of equations in their nonlinear Schroedinger limits. The method of
attack will be a combined analytical and numerical approach that seeks to derive
asymptotic versions of the equations that are tractable and that contain the
essential physics of the phenomena being modelled. Much of the natural phenomena
of everyday life involves what mathematicians and physicists call "stability and
bifurcation" phenomena. That is, a system will continue more or less in a stable
mode of operation until it is perturbed sufficiently to the point where a new
type of behavior arises out of the old one. When this happens one says that a
"bifurcation" has occurred and one is then interested in the "stability" of the
new solution. That is, how long will the new mode of behavior exist and how
large of a perturbation will it take to kick the system into a new mode of
behavior? In this project the principal investigator will examine such problems
as they arise in the modelling of plasmas and turbulence by using analytical and
numerical methods.