* 9101585
* Measurements and Modeling of the Behavior of Charring       Polymers in Fires
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Michael Serio, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1994
* USD 248,879.00

The high loss of life and property in fires each year in the U.S. underscores
the need for additional research on fires and fire safety. Natural and synthetic
organic polymers are most frequently the materials which are primarily
responsible for the propagation of fires. The Phase I objective was to
demonstrate the feasibility of applying the FG-DVC computer model, which
includes the processes of depolymerization, crosslinking, and the formation of
char, tar, and gases, and the TG-FTIR technique, which integrates a
thermogravimetic analyzer (TGA) with an FT-IR for evolved gas analysis, to the
measurement and modeling of the degradation of polymers under conditions of
interest in fires. Because of the importance of charring polymers as flame
resistant materials, the primary emphasis in Phase I was on phenol formaldehyde
resin, which is a commercially important example of a charring polymer. The main
conclusions from this effort can be summarized as follows: 1) The FG-DVC model
can be generalized to predict kinetics, product evolution, tar yields, and tar
molecular weight distributions for phenol formaldehyde and other charring
polymers over a wide range of conditions; 2) the TG- FTIR method can provide
information on several aspects of polymer combustion behavior: kinetics,
degration mechanisms, char formation, gas toxicity, gas and char heating value,
tar formation, and flame retardance. 3) In order to further develop the FG-DVC
model as a submodel for a charring polymers in a fire model, a need was
identified for a new experiment to provide information on the thermal and
radiative properties of a charring surface. This need can be met by a new
version of the TG-FTIR experiment, to be developed in Phase II, which includes
both FT- IR emission and transmission spectroscopy. The ultimate goal of the
combined Phase I and Phase II programs is the development of a laboratory scale
methodology for assessing the relative flammability as a function of polymer
structure and fire conditions. The product would consist of an integrated
software and hardware package which utilized the TG-FTIR analysis method and
modifications of this method and the FG-DVC model as key components.