* 9101712
* Improved Aequorin for Ca Assay in Functioning Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Osamu Shimomura, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1995
* USD 289,407.00

The photoprotein aequorin, first isolated by the P.I. in 1962, has been widely
used as a calcium indicator in living cells. The preparations of aequorin used
in the past were undefined mixtures of many isoaequorins. Recently, three
categories of improved forms of aequorin were prepared in this laboratory: 1)
homogeneous isoaequorins isolated from heterogeneous aequorin, 2) recombinant
aequorin prepared by molecular cloning, and 3) semi-synthetic aequorins obtained
by replacing the functional group of various aequorins with various synthetic
analogs. Semi-synthetic aequorins have highly advantageous properties in
measuring intracellular calcium but are not yet fully utilized. The main
objective of this project is to improve the usability of the new types of
aequorin. Studies planned include: 1) detailed investigation concerning the
calcium triggered luminescence of semi-synthetic aequorins, to improve the
effective utilization of these aequorins; 2) development of a new ratio method
of measuring calcium, employing semi-synthetic aequorins; 3) development of a
method to produce stabilized preparations of aequorin that are more convenient
to transport and use. In addition, sufficient amounts of various kinds of
aequorin will be produced for distribution to cell biologists and physiologists
for their use in research. The results of this research will be a variety of
improved luminescent probes for measurement of free calcium within living cells.
These probes, in combination with modern techniques of computer assisted light
microscope imaging, will ultimately make it possible to visualize and quantitate
the movement of calcium into and out of cells and between intracellular
compartments during the response of a cell to a physiological signal.