* 9101449
* Japan Long-Term Visit: Finite Difference Time Domain        Analysis of Electromagnetics Interactions with Special      Materials and Geometries
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Raymond Luebbers, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 08/31/1993
* USD 54,580.00

This award will support a long-term research visit by Professor Raymond J.
Luebbers, Department of Electrical Engineering, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, to Japan for a cooperative research project with Professor
Saburo Adachi, Laboratory of Electromagnetics at Tohoku University, at Sendai.
The researchers will attempt to extend the applications and analysis
capabilities of Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) methods as applied to
problems in electromagnetics. The FDTD method involves dividing a computational
space into small cells. The material occupying each cell may be specified
independently. The simulated electromagnetic source field is propagated through
the computational space in small time steps. The electric and magnetic fields in
each cell are computed at each time step. Other quantities, including voltage,
current, Pointing vector, and energy density are available for each cell at each
time step. The areas of concentration will include development of an FDTD
antenna modeling capability, assessing effectiveness of methods used to shield
persons and electronic equipment from electromagnetic waves, improving methods
for analyzing dispersive electric and magnetic materials such as plasmas, and
developing improved methods for modeling and predicting biological effects of
electromagnetic fields. The Laboratory of Electromagnetics at Tohoku University
is one of the most highly recognized and prestigious electromag- netics research
institutions in Japan. Professor Adachi is internationally recognized as a
leader in electromagnetics research. Professor Luebbers has been heavily
involved in the area and contributed to the development of FDTD modeling of
dispersive media. Applications for these improved FDTD methods include antennas,
radar scattering, electromagnetic performance of dielectric and magnetic
materials, electromag- netic shielding, microwave circuits, fiber optics, and
biological effects. Since there is an agreement of Academic Exchange between the
Pennsylvania State University and Tohoku University, it is believed that
collaboration between the researchers will continue beyond the termination of
this formal agreement.