* 9101544
* Picosecond and Nanosecond Pulse Shaping for State-Selective Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Warren Warren, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew P. Baronavski
* 10/31/1994
* USD 534,600.00

Professor Warren is supported by a grant from the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program to use shaped laser pulses to orient or align molecules in a
molecular beam, to generate population inversion in low-temperature crystals,
and to localize energy in a bond by a photon-locking experiment. One of the
thrusts of the research program is the development of techniques to efficiently
populate an electronically excited state with a single laser, or to transfer
population to highly vibrationally excited levels of the ground state with two
lasers. The motivation for this work is the study of collisional dynamics which
require selective excitation to monitor velocity changing collisions. Complete
population transfer enhances the signal and minimizes interferences. Success in
transferring large fractions of the thermal distribution into high vibrational
states will be useful for exploring the kinetics of chemical reactions. One goal
is to design radiation fields which drive diatomic molecules in their ground
state to a superposition of rotational states such that the diatomic molecule is
oriented in the laboratory. A demonstration of the effect of modulating the
dissociation rate of the IBr molecule by Stark shifting previously stable levels
with specific frequency-swept pulse shapes will be the first step towards
applying this technique to polyatomic molecules. %%% By preparing specially
tailored pulses of light, it is possible to produce simple and interpretable
states of molecules. These techniques will be used by Prof. Warren to control
their alignment in a molecular beam and even their orientation in the
laboratory, and to modulate the rate at which they break apart into fragments.