* 9101298
* Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Fourier       Integrals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Allan Greenleaf, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1993
* USD 24,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will study several problems
associated with singular integrals and Fourier integrals. In particular, he will
formulate classes of canonical relations that apply to examples from integral
geometry and isospectral deformations, and he will prove composition calculi and
sharp L-2 estimates for Fourier integral operators associated with them. The
principal investigator will also look into the local solvability of systems of
first-order pseudodifferential operators. Finally he will obtain sharper
estimates for degenerate pseudodifferential operators with singular symbols, and
he will apply these results to degenerate Radon transforms. A number of problems
in theoretical and applied analysis concern the inversion of an operation or a
transformation. For example, the desired solution of a problem may be
transformed into an equation that involves integrals or integral operators, and
then in order to obtain the solution, one must invert the transformation, that
is, solve the integral equation. In this project the principal investigator will
analyze two classes of integral operators, in order to provide sharp estimates
for the solutions they represent. One application of this work is to the
estimation of solutions of X-ray tomography problems.