* 9101104
* Mathematical Sciences: Real and Complex Analysis on Domains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Steven Krantz, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1994
* USD 156,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will continue working on three
problems involving real and complex analysis on domains. The first problem
concerns an examination of function spaces designed for boundary value problems
for partial differential operators defined on domains in real Euclidean space.
The second problem concerns the study of automorphism groups of domains in
complex n-space and how their group- theoretic properties are determined by the
geometry of the boundary of the domain. The third problem concerns various
subproblems in the function theory of several complex variables; to wit,
boundary uniqueness theorems for holomorphic mappings, biholomorphic exhaustions
of domains by other domains, and the boundary behavior of holomorphic functions.
Complex analysis is one of the oldest branches of modern mathematics. The
principal objects of study in complex analysis are functions with special
properties called holomorphic or analytic functions. Holomorphic functions are
capable of expressing relationships and equivalences between complex quantities
in two or more space dimensions. In this project the principal investigator will
study the behavior of holomorphic functions at the boundaries of their domains
of definition. The boundary behavior of holomorphic functions is very often the
most interesting (and difficult|) aspect of the theory.