* 9101856
* CEDAR:  Study of Mesospheric Airglow and Dynamics:                  Analysis and Interpretation of Aloha-90 Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Jeng-Hwa Yee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 07/31/1993
* USD 38,753.00

The upper atmosphere depart significantly from radiative equilibrium and have a
circulation and thermal structure that appear to be mostly due to forcing by
small-scale gravity wave motion. Although this region of the atmosphere exhibits
a large number of interesting aeronomical phenomena, it is the least understood
region of the earth's atmosphere. Detailed studies of chemical and dynamical
coupling in the upper atmosphere and lower thermosphere thus have been
identified as one major component of the NSF CEDAR program. Gravity wave
parameters are useful for understanding the dynamics in this region. A
collection of various CEDAR instruments such as lidar, optical, and radar
systems, is required in order to improve our knowledge of gravity waves and
turbulence field. Such a collection, including the PIs' airglow spectrometer,
participated in a CEDAR supported campaign, Airborne Lidar and Observations of
the Hawaiian Airglow (ALOHA), which was successfully conducted in March and
April of 1990. The participating experiments included groundbased airglow
imagers and interferometers at Haleaukala Observatory, SAD and meteor radars at
Christmas Island, a Na temperature lidar and meteor radar in Colorado, and
airglow spectrometers onboard the NCAR Electra along with a Na lidar. This
proposal requests support to analyze the data obtained by the Michigan airglow
spectrometer onboard the Electra and to interpret the airglow results with
additional information from those obtained by the other instruments.