* 9101894
* Acquisition of a Quadrupole/Quadrupole Option for a High    Resolution Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1992
* Michael Zerner, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 04/30/1992
* USD 30,000.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will aid in
purchasing a Quadrupole/Quadrupole (QQ) Option for the high resolution mass
spectrometer in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida. This
option will make the instrument a hybrid sector instrument of BEQQ geometry by
adding two quadrupoles in series with the sector (BE) portion of the existing
instrument. The research studies to be performed include the following: gas-
phase reactions of metal complexes, electrochemistry and mass spectrometry in
the study of metabolic redox reactions mechanism, synthetic studies of the ene
reaction and SmI2-mediated reactions, kinetic and stereochemical effects of
fluorine substituents in thermal homolytic and pericyclic reactions, carbene
complexes from rearrangement of transition metal sigma complexes and strained
allenes. Mass Spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to probe intimate structural
details and to obtain the molecular compositions of a vast array of organic,
bioorganic and organometallic molecules. When combined with a quadrupole-
quadrupole (QQ) option, the range of tandem-mass spectrometic analysis is
increased. It affords the chemist one the most powerful tools available for the
characterization of compounds. The acquisition of capability in mass
spectrometry is essential for the prosecution of frontier research in many
fields of chemistry.