* 9101006
* Development Processes in Maya Communities
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1993
* June Nash, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 04/30/1993
* USD 49,302.00

This award provides support to the Department of Anthropology at City College of
the City University of New York to continue a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates Site Project which will involve undergraduates in the study of
contemporary socio- cultural change among the highland Maya and Mexican national
communities of Chiapas, southeastern Mexico. The PI, who has studied work and
gender in Latin America for the past thirty years, will direct the project.
Students will live with families in Indian villages during a part of the week,
coming in to the research center in the city of San Cristobal de las Casas for
seminars, Maya language lessons, and discussion with the PI. Group trips to
handicraft production cooperatives, experimental agricultural stations, and
government offices will take place periodically in accord with the research
needs of the project. Students will learn basic censusing techniques, extensive
interviewing and oral narrative accounts, participant observation, and
apprenticeship training to learn the socialization process in handicraft
production. They will write daily diaries and submit a summary report at the end
of the project. The observations of students located in families in different
communities will add up to an account of coping strategies in the debt crisis
Mexico is undergoing. The PI will be assisted by colleagues presently working in
Chiapas who have devoted their scholarly careers to investigations of indigenous
culture in the area.