* 9101439
* Japan JSPS Program: In-situ Analysis of Gold and Carbon     Fiber Electrode Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1992,04/30/1994
* Greg Swain, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 04/30/1994
* USD 9,950.00

This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr. Greg Swain of Auburn
University to conduct collaborative research with Dr. Kingo Itaya for twelve
months at Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan. They will apply in situ scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) techniques to
characterize the solid/solution interface of gold and carbon fiber electrode
surfaces. Despite the fact that they are strongly influenced by the
microstructure present at the surface, solid electrodes are usually studied in a
high vacuum. Such a technique does not accurately measure the physical and
chemical interface properties of the solid electrode surfaces in solutions as
they relate to electron transfer, adsorption, corrosion and catalysis. In order
to provide insight into the nature of these processes, Swain and Itaya will
conduct an in situ analysis of single crystal gold electrodes in ultraclean
solutions using STM and AFM. Dr. Itaya's expertise in the use of in situ STM to
image mono and polycrystalline electrode surfaces will complement Swain's
experience in electrochemical surface spectroscopy and the necessary
pretreatment of carbonaceous electrodes, and will facilitate the understanding
of the interaction between ions and solvents at the solid/solution interface.