* 9101620
* Measurement of Intracrystalline Diffusion in Molecular SieveZeolites by the Tracer-Pulse Method - Renewal
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1992
* Ronald Danner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1992
* USD 34,901.00

The measurements of equilibrium and diffusional parameters of gases in
microporous solids is very important for the design of many separation and
catalytic processes. These properties are measured by use of the pulse
chromatography method, which is unique in that it is a macroscopic method that
operates under equilibrium conditions. Comparison of the tracer pulse results
with previously published NMR diffusion coefficients is used to determine the
origin of discrepancies commonly observed between the two techniques.
Equilibrium isotherms and diffusion data for the ethane-silicalite system are
measured at various temperatures and loadings, allowing investigation of the
effect of adsorbed phase concentration on the micropore diffusion coefficient.
The effect of co-adsorbed molecules on the diffusional behavior of ethane in
ideal and nonideal adsorbed mixtures is investigated by a modification of the
original tracer pulse technique. Equilibrium isotherms for each component of the
binary mixtures are also measured by the 'concentration-tracer pulse' method.
Since industrial applications always involve multicomponent systems, a study if
diffusion in mixtures is of great interest. Finally, two variations of
perturbation chromatography (tracer and concentration pulse) are used to
investigate the validity of the Darken equation at various adsorbed
concentrations. The tracer-pulse chromatography apparatus is unique in this
respect, since other experimental techniques are not able to measure both the
transport and self diffusion coefficients.