* 9101201
* Dissertation Research: Systematic Investigations in the     Basidiomycete Genus Coprinus Phylogeny, Character Evolution, and Development
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1993
* John Hopple, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1993
* USD 9,400.00

Phylogenetic systematics can offer great insights into evolution but until
recently has rarely been applied to fungi because traditional morphological
characters are few in number and are thought to have often evolved in a
convergent or parallel manner. With the advent of molecular methods to generate
independent data and modern systematic approaches for phylogenetic analysis of
all types of characters it has become possible to make progress in understanding
the evolutionary history of fungi. The objectives of the proposed research are
to produce a broad- scale phylogeny for the genus Coprinus (Pers.:Fr.) S.F. Gray
and use this phylogeny to study the manner in which fungal characters have
evolved. Multiple character sets will be generated from morphological,
molecular, and developmental sources. Morphological characters will be drawn
from the study of macro- and microscopic characters of fresh and dried
basidiocarps and living mycelia grown in the laboratory. Restriction site maps,
DNA sequences, and gene organization will constitute the molecular characters.
Developmental data will consist of observations made on thin sections of
fruitbodies. Data sets will be analyzed together and separately using cladistic
methodologies to determine a consensus phylogeny. Character evolution will then
be studied by individually mapping characters onto the consensus phylogeny. This
research will 1. elucidate evolutionary patterns in fungal morphology and
development, 2. provide a better understanding of which fungal characters are
informative in a phylogenetic sense and at what taxonomic levels, 3. provide a
phylogenetic hypothesis for an important genus of fungi, and 4. serve as a model
for the study of evolution through the integration of multiple data sets
analyzed through a cladistic framework.