* 9101777
* Renormalized Electron Propagator Theory: Development,       Application and Interpretation
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Joseph Ortiz, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Paul S. Bagus
* 10/31/1994
* USD 173,000.00

With this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division Professor Ortiz will apply electron propagator theory to the
computation of the electronic structure of small molecules. The computations
will aid in the interpretation of the electronic structure and bonding of many
interesting atomic and molecular systems. Electron propagator theory provides a
correlated one-electron picture of bonding through accurate calculations of
electron binding energies and Feynman-Dyson amplitudes. Improvements to existing
codes will concentrate on propagator renormalizations. Reference state averages
will be improved with certain infinite order corrections by employing amplitudes
from coupled cluster singles and doubles calculations. Diagonalization of the
superoperator Hamiltonian matrix with an algorithm based on inverse iterations
will result in operator manifold renormalizations. Full two-electron
transformations will facilitate calculations on large molecules and interface
with other codes. The dependence of one-electron states and energies on chain
length and on local conformations will be explored for polysilane oligomers.
Relationships between bond energies and ionization energies will be studied for
half-sandwhich organometallics. Nonresonant emissions in triatomic radicals will
be considered through calculations of ground and excited state potential energy
surfaces. Explanations for the stabilities of various double Rydberg anions will
be sought through one electron pictures.