* 9101587
* An Experimental Exploration of Structure-Property           Relationships Which Delimit Transport in and Physical Aging of Glassy Membrane and Barrier Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Harold Hopfenberg, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 01/31/1995
* USD 79,937.00

The proposed experimental research program is designed to address those
fundamental, structural, mesogenic, and configurational features of liquid
crystalline polymers and closely related polymer structures which confer high
barrier properties upon liquid crystalline polymers as a class of materials. The
research will focus upon explicit comparison of the properties of isotropic,
amorphous, and disordered polymers and the identical polymers which have
developed liquid crystalline order by solvent or thermal treatment. Moreover,
the effect of systematic structure and configurational changes on sorption and
transport behavior of liquid crystalline polymers will further define the role
of liquid crystalline order on the barrier properties of liquid crystalline
polymeric materials. These fundamental studies are directed toward developing an
expanded and more subtle repertoire of structural modifications which would be
useful for the rational tailoring of super-barriers based upon liquid
crystalline polymers and will also provide useful mechanistic insight into the
fundamental basis for high permeability in disordered rigid-rod polymeric
materials. Central to the thesis under consideration is the notion that
extremely subtle structural, mesogenic, and configurational features distinguish
the most permeable from the least permeable polymeric materials. This project is
jointly supported by NSF and the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI),
following a special NSF-EPRI research initiative on polymeric materials.