* 9101824
* CEDAR:  High Spectral Resolution Lidar for Profiling        Mesopause Temperature, Wind, and Sodium Density
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Chiao-Yao She, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 01/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

This grant supports the continued study of the physics of Na temperature lidar
and its applications. It is expected that with improved technology the
temperature error due to laser frequency uncertainty can be reduced to the level
of 0.1 K, and that the lidar can also be used to measure radial wind velocity to
an accuracy of 1 m/s. Since very little is known about the temperature structure
in the mesopause region, measurements of temperature and Doppler-wind) profiles
with high resolution are timely and of geophysical interest. A three year-
research program will be carried out to further investigate and employ the
physics of high-spectral-resolution Na fluorescence lidar, and to elucidate the
geophysics in the mesospause region by performing observations regularly and
over an extended period with this unique lidar system. In particular, the PI
will (1) conduct laboratory and theoretical studies of saturated Doppler-free
fluorescence spectroscopy in Na vapor for the purpose of improving measurement
accuracy, (2) modify the existing lidar for simultaneous temperature and
Doppler-wind measurements, (3) establish nighttime climatology of the mesopause
region over Fort Collins, CO and (4) analyze, organize and interpret these
unique lidar data in terms of correlated mesospheric response to gravity wave
induced perturbations. *** //