* 9101058
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Self-Diffusion,          Electrophoresis and Local Electrostatic Potentials of       Glycosaminoglycans
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/29/1996
* Wayne Reed, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Tomas E. Gergely
* 02/29/1996
* USD 15,421.00

This award supports a U.S./Brazil collaborative effort in biophysics between
Wayne Reed of the Physics Department at Tulane University, and Mario Politi and
Iolanda Cuccovia of the Chemistry Department at the University of Sao Paulo and
Dino Zanette of the Federal University of Santa Catarina, both in Brazil. The
project will use the Brazilians' expertise in synthetic chemistry and the
American expertise in physical chemical experimentation and theory to carry out
fluorescence-based measurements on a family of important biological
macromolecules (glycosaminoglycans). These experiments should provide data on
the electrophoretic mobility, self- diffusion and local electrostatic potentials
of these molecules. The ultimate goal of the project is to relate aspects of
connective tissue biofunctionality, such as swelling pressure and
compressibility, to the molecular properties of glycosaminoglycans. This
interdisciplinary effort will utilize synthetic chemical strategies to produce
physical probes of macromolecular behavior. Data on such behavior can then be
correlated with modern theories of diffusion, electrophoresis and electro-
thermodynamics in polymer physics, with structure/functional theories in
macromolecular biophysics, and with compressibility data and models in
biomechanics. They will also provide the basis and stimulus for the development
of new models and theories in these interdisciplinary areas.