* 9101118
* Dissertation Research:  Tree Size at Reproductive Onset and Leaf-level Photosynthesis in Malaysia Primary Rainforest    Trees
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* NONE NONE, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 08/31/1993
* USD 6,820.00

The proposed research project explores relationships between tree species size,
measured as the height at onset of reproduction, and leaf-level photosynthetic
light response. A positive relationship between adult tree size and maximal
light-saturated photosynthetic rate (Pmax) among primary rainforest trees is
predicted. This prediction derives from a general correlation across
environments between light levels and maximum rate of photosynthesis, and the
presence of a strong, predictable light gradient through the rainforest canopy.
Recent studies of physiological acclimation to sun and shade conditions suggest
that photosynthetic acclimation is relatively limited in primary tropical
rainforest trees. If this is so, Pmax values measured for saplings should be
similar to Pmax values for adult trees, and the proposed allometric relationship
should be detectable from photosynthetic measurements on saplings. Measurement
will be made of maximal light-saturated photosynthetic rate (Pmax) for saplings
of 35 species for which size and structural allometric data have been gathered.
Differences in Pmax between saplings and mature trees of selected species will
be assessed. Each genus included in the study spans a wide size range, from
understory treelets to canopy-level trees, making possible tests of phylogenetic
differences. This study represents the first attempt to examine photosynthetic
physiology of tropical rainforest trees in an allometric context.