* 9101171
* Dissertation Research:  Life History Responses to Fire in a Clonal Herb, Pityopsis graminifolia
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1994
* William Platt, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 10/31/1994
* USD 9,396.00

It is not well understood how disturbances such as frequent, low- intensity
(e.g. sublethal) fire have influenced life history evolution in plants.
Pityopsis graminifolia is a fire-adapted, clonal perennial herb that inhabits
frequently burned sandhills in Southeastern longleaf pine savannas. The
reproductive biology of this species differs in two sandhill communities in
which it has been studied despite the fact that fire results in little adult
mortality or seedling establishment in either community. The proposed study has
two major objectives. It will first examine how low intensity fires change the
favorability of environmental conditions in these two sandhill populations of P.
graminifolia. Specifically, if and to what extent fire reduces the cost of
flowering and vegetative reproduction (e.g. clonal growth) in this stress-
tolerant species by increasing the availability of nutrients in each of these
communities will be examined. The impact of floral herbivory and seed predation
following fire in each of these sites will also be examined. The significance of
their impact in light of the phenotypic variation in reproductive behavior
exhibited by this species following fires in each of these sandhill communities
will be assessed. Results may indicate how fluctuating environmental conditions
during the life of a plant influence life history evolution. The second goal of
the study is to address how the dynamics of flowering and clonal growth respond
to fires that differ in their historical, evolutionary importance (e.g. growing
season vs. dormant season fires). In particular, whether the more profuse
flowering and fruiting of shorter duration following historically important
growing season fires reduces the impact of floral herbivory and/or seed
predation in this species will be assessed. Evidence of this kind could provide
insight regarding the adaptive significance of growing season vs. dormant season
sublethal fires in longleaf pine savannas.