* 9101850
* Japan JSPS Program: "Polymeric Micelles: A New Molecular    Architecture for in Vivo Drug Carriers"
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,09/30/1994
* Sung Wan Kim, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 09/30/1994
* USD 9,220.00

This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr. Glen Kwon of the
University of Utah to conduct collaborative research with Dr. Teruo Okano for 16
months at the Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Tokyo Women's Medical
College, in Tokyo, Japan. Kwon and Okano will apply Kwon's knowledge of
polymeric microspheres and controlled delivery systems to conduct research on
polymeric micelles as a drug carrier for adriamycin. Colloidal drug carriers,
such as polymeric microspheres, liposomes, and soluble polymeric carriers, have
been developed to increase the efficacy of drug action in vivo. The
disadvantages of these systems, however, preclude their ability to increase the
therapeutic index of many drugs. A new drug carrier synthesized of polymeric
micelles has been developed in Japan and has proven to increase the efficiency
of adriamycin without the problems associated with the other methods. Leading-
edge research on polymeric micelle drug delivery systems is advancing quickly in
Japan, and Okano's laboratory is one of the best. Kwon's knowledge of
pharmaceutics and controlled drug delivery systems involving proteins and
polypeptides complements Okano's expertise in synthesizing polymeric micelles.
This collaborative research will provide Kwon with first-hand knowledge of the
Japanese approach to novel polymer synthesis methods and applications of
biomaterials as drug carriers.