* 9101198
* Japan Long-Term Visit: Micromagnetic Analysis of the Staticsand Dynamics of Magnetization in Thin Ferromagnetic Films   with Applications to Magnetic Memories and Sensors
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1993
* Bharat Pant, Solid State Electronics Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 08/31/1993
* USD 88,611.00

This award will support a 12 month long-term visit by Dr. Bharat B. Pant of the
Solid State Electronics Center at Honeywell, Inc. to visit Japan for a
cooperative research project involving Professors Kimihide Matsuyama and Ichiro
Sasada of the Department of Electrical Engineering at Kyushu University and
Professor Jiro Yamasaki of the Department of Electrical Engineering at Kyushu
Institute of Technology. The proposed research involves modeling of the response
of long strips of ferromagnetic film used in magnetoresistive sensors. In these
sensors a change in the sensed field produces a change in the resistance of the
strip. The research will be targeted towards two types of devices which use
magnetic thin films, i.e. verticle Bloch line memory and thin film magnetic
sensors. The work proposed is of both a theoretical and computational nature.
The research will be carried out in conjunction with Professor Matsuyama's
verticle Bloch line memory effort, Professor Sasada's work in the use of
amorphous ferromagnetic ribbons as torque sensors and Professor Yamasaki's
research into experimental investi- gations of the dynamics of magnetization in
thin films. The proposed research has significant scientific as well as
practical value. It will provide an important contribution to our basic
theoretical and experimental understanding of the statics and dynamics of
magnetism in thin films. Research resulting from this project could improve the
ability to design thin film magneto-resistive sensors which are currently being
studied for use in magnetic recording disk files. This could have an important
economic impact on the disk drive industry. All of the researchers are experts
in their specific areas. Both Kyushu University and the Kyushu Institute of
Technology have ongoing experimental efforts taking place in this area. Kyushu
University is well advanced in experiments in vertical Bloch line memory and
amorphous magnetic films. Since Honeywell has no experimental effort in this
area it is advantageous for Professor Pant to carry out his research at this
University. It is believed that the collaborations will be very successful and
that this research will result in continued cooperation among the researchers.