* 9101759
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Chloroplast Enslavement in  Marine Oligotrich Ciliates
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,12/31/1992
* John Dolan, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 12/31/1992
* USD 45,600.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Chloroplast Enslavement in Marine Oligotrich
Ciliates This award is under the Program for Long-& Medium Term Research at
Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to
conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. John Dolan with Fereidoun Rassoulzadegan, Director of Research at
the Station Zoologique, Villefranche- sur-Mer, France. The researchers will
focus on the oligotrich ciliates which often dominate marine microzo>plankton
communities, about which recent work has shown a large fraction (. 1/3) are
mixotrophic; that is, in addition to herbivory they use photosynthate produced
by chloroplasts sequestered from ingested algae. The researchers propose to use
field work and laboratory work to ask what large-scale environmental properties
influence the abundance of these forms and what cellular mechanisms may be
involved in chloroplast enslavement. Field work will examine the variability of
mixotrophic oligotrichs in relation to changes in the abundance of autotrophic
nanoplankton, light, and heterotrophic competitors. Laboratory work will
investigate cellular mechanisms. The postulate that a chemical cue, derived from
the algae source of chloroplasts, modifies the normal course of food vacuole
processing is justified. A set of experiments designed to locate the chemical
cue and examine the effect of the state of the source algae as well as the state
of the oligotrich is outlined. The study will add significantly to knowledge of
how some plankters survive in nutritionally dilute environ- ments and also will
further understanding of the cellular mechanisms involved with symbiosis. The
award recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a
dependents' allowance.