* 9101389
* Dissertation Research:  The Role of Habitat Selection       Behavior in Mediating Trophic Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Gary Mittelbach, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 04/30/1993
* USD 5,400.00

An understanding of how consumers choose among habitats is essential to
predicting community level responses to predator and resource manipulations.
Current models predict individual habitat choice when mortality risk and feeding
rates vary among habitats, but do not incorporate dynamic resources. This study
will extend these models to include resource dynamics, showing how the
distribution of consumers among habitats is dependent on mortality risk and
resource productivity. Specifically, the response of consumers and resources to
predator and nutrient manipulations in simple, two habitat, experimental systems
will be tested. In these systems, small bluegills (Lepomis macrochirus) are free
to move between paired experimental pools, but their predators, largemouth bass
(Micropterus salmoides) are confined to specific pools. These pools also contain
self-supporting populations of zooplankton (the bluegill's resource). The
research will address the following specific questions: 1) Under the situation
where consumers can choose among habitats with differing mortality risks and
self-renewing resources, do consumers use habitats optimally, 2) How does the
portion of the consumer population in each habitat vary with varying resource
productivity, and 3) What are the consequences of consumer habitat choice to
resource dynamics within habitats? These studies provide the first empirical
test of theory linking the behavior of habitat selection to its consequences for
community dynamics.