* 9101432
* Quantum Wavepacket Dynamics Techniques: Theory and          Application to Condensed Phase Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1996
* Rob Coalson, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 09/30/1996
* USD 432,000.00

With this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry division, Professor Coalson will develop wavepacket methods for
computing the dynamical evolution of quantum many-body systems and will apply
these methods to several problems in condensed phase spectroscopy. The
computations will aid in the understanding of rate processes in these systems
which explicitly depend on quantum effects. The problems to be investigated will
include: photodesorption cross sections of molecular adsorbates (e.g., CH3Br and
NO), and resonance raman excitation profiles of the bovine pancreatic tripsin
inhibitor protein. The principle technique to be employed is the time-dependent
Hartree grid method which involves factorization of the complete many-body
system wave function into low dimensional pieces for various subsystems. This
approximation is suitable for treating subpicosecond dynamics as required in the
above applications. In order to treat longer time processes, accuracy beyond the
Hartee level will be necessary. The principal investigator will develop
algorithms to do configuration interaction in conjunction with the time-
dependent Hartee grid solutions. These algorithms will introduce direct
correlation between wavepackets representing the various subsystems into which
the overall system has been partitioned.