* 9101084
* Dissertation Research:  Adding Natural Enemies to a Virus-  Plant Interaction in an Agricultural System
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1992
* Alison Power, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 04/30/1992
* USD 7,400.00

In order to develop and evaluate control strategies for insect- vectored plant
pathogens, in agroecosystems, both vector population dynamics and behavioral
ecology must be understood. While many studies have examined insect population
dynamics and mortality due to natural enemies, few have studied the impact of
natural enemies on the movement behavior of insect vectors. This is true despite
demonstrations that both predaceous and parasitic natural enemies can affect
vector movement, that the resulting change in vector movement behavior can
increase disease spread, and despite the ongoing USDA project to release natural
enemies for aphid control in grains throughout the Western US. We will compare
the impact of a predator (Coccinella septempunctata a beetle) and a parasitoid
(Aphidius sp., a wasp) of the major aphid vector (Rhopalosiphum padi) on the
spread of barley yellow dwarf virus which affects small grains worldwide. This
study will develop mechanistic models of insect-vectored plant disease and
compare model predictions with experimental results. There are no mechanistic
models of insect-vectored plant disease, and such models will assist in
evaluating the disease consequences of biological control strategies using
easily observed behavioral parameters of the organisms involved. The research
will test model hypotheses by confining natural enemies in plots of oats in the
field and measure aphid movement, aphid mortality, and disease incidence.