* 9101145
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates SITE at Mechanical  and Aerospace Engineering Department, Syracuse University
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1992
* Darshan Dosanjh, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 11/30/1992
* USD 40,000.00

The Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department at Syracuse University plans
to award research stipends to motivated and academically superior engineering
undergraduates who have completed their junior year studies. The program has
both the summer and academic year components. Each year, five of the eight REU
participants are selected for summer research participation from applicants from
colleges and universities other than Syracuse University. The remaining three
students are selected for summer research participation from the seniors in
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at Syracuse University. A particular focus
of recruitment effort is to attract qualified participants from minority, women,
and physically disabled students, both from within and without Syracuse. Six
faculty members in the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department have
expressed active interest in supervising the research efforts of the
participants. The areas in which these faculty members are actively engaged in
research span experimental and computational fluid mechanics, gasdynamics,
aerodynamics, heat transfer, aeroacoustics, noise control, composite materials,
and mechanical behavior of fibrous materials. A REU participant may select a
research problem in any one of these research areas. For faculty supervision,
research participant's choice of a research project and faculty supervisor's
field of specialization will be matched.