* 9101317
* FASEB Summer Conference: Positive Control of Transcription  Initiation in Prokaryotes, " July 14-19, 1991, at Saxons    River, Vermont"
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1992
* Gary Gussin, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1992
* USD 7,000.00

This grant provides partial funding for a 1991 FASEB Summer Research Conference
on "Positive Control or Transcription Initiation in Prokaryotes," to be held
July 14-19 at the Vermont Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont. The conference is
under the auspices of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental
Biology (FASEB). The format for the conference will be the same that is used by
the Gordon Research Conferences and others FASEB conferences. There will be a
keynote session, nine major sessions with invited speakers, and poster sessions.
The general topics to be included are: Dissection of the Biochemistry of
Transcription Initiation; Activator-RNA Polymerase Interactions; Two-component
Systems (sensors and effectors); Activator Paradigms; and DNA protein
Interactions. The purpose of the meeting is to bring together geneticists,
biochemists, and physical biochemists to exchange information. There have been
dramatic advances in the field of transcription activation in the last few
years, not only in well-studied Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium, but
also in important pathogens such as Bordetella pertussis and Vibrio cholerae.
Although the topic of positive control of transcription initiation in
prokaryotes is often one session in other meeting, this will be the only meeting
devoted entirely to its discussion.