* 9101385
* Towards Overcoming the Transitive-Closure Bottleneck:       Efficient Parallel Algorithms for Directed Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Ming-Yang Kao, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 05/31/1994
* USD 56,580.00

In parallel computation using parallel random access machines, very few
efficient algorithms are known for problems involving directed graphs. The most
demonstrative example of this situation is the problem of directed graph
reachability. In its simplest form, the problem is to test whether a graph
contains a directed path from a given vertex to another. The best sequential
algorithms for the problem use simple graph searches and run in optimal linear
time. In contrast, the best known parallel algorithm for the same problem
computes the transitive closure of the given graph, and uses a superlinear
number of processors. Therefore, there is a significant gap between the optimal
sequential and the best known parallel complexities of the problem. This
reliance on transitive closure techniques and the resulting inefficiency are
also present in the best known parallel algorithms for many other fundamental
problems in directed graph theory. The goal of this project is to remove the
complexity bottleneck resulting from this undesirable reliance on transitive
closure techniques. For fundamental problems on directed graphs, parallel
algorithms will be designed that run in polylogarithmic time and use only a
linear number of processors, and therefore, achieve an optimal complexity within
a polylogarithmic factor.