* 9101673
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Quantum Mechanical Study of Photodissociation Dynamics in Three Dimensions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Janet Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1993
* USD 40,210.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Quantum Mechanical Study of Photodissociation
Dynamics in Three Dimensions This award is under the Program for Long-&amp;
Medium Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at
research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Janet Waldeck of the
University of Pittsburgh with Dr. Moshe Shapiro of the Weizmann Institute of
Science, Rehovot, Israel. The researchers plan to develop a fully three-
dimensional quantum mechanical method for calculating photodissociation
branching ratios. An understanding of the natural photodissociation dynamics is
essential to devising experimental schemes by which electronic branching can be
controlled. Recently, Dr. Shapiro developed a theory for coherent control of
reactions which relies on the fact that control over reaction yield can occur
via quantum interference induced by using several independent optical routes to
the same energy E. In order to apply their findings more readily to experimental
spectra, they will examine the conditions under which quantum features found in
the collinear case of coherent control survive 3D averaging. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover interna- tional travel, dependent's
allowance, local travel abroad and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for
the U.S. home institution.