* 9101648
* Advanced Polymeric Materials:  Process Induced Internal     Stresses in Laminated Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* James Seferis, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/1995
* USD 153,000.00

This research is to develop both experimental and analytical methods to
determine internal stresses induced in laminated composite structures during
processing. Through these internal stress characterizations, a methodology will
be developed that can provide a basic understanding for controlled processing
and performance of composites. Both thermosetting and thermoplastic polymer
matrices reinforced with continuous fibers, that are potential candidates for
structural materials in the electric power industry, will be examined using well
established as well as novel lamination processes. As an integral part of this
study, several process monitoring techniques will be evaluated; these techniques
could also be used for on-line, long term durability monitoring. Internal stress
analysis will be studied on macroscopic as well as microscopic (micro-
mechanical) scale considering both time dependent (kinetic) and time independent
(thermodynamic) effects. Through the experimental and analytical approach, an
attempt will be made to characterize composite system molecular and
morphological structural features that are influenced and/or give rise to the
internal stresses developed during processing, leading to full property
characterization. It is anticipated that the results derived from this study, in
conjunction with previous developments, will provide a basic methodology for
process analysis of laminated composites that may also provide fundamental
information in screening new materials and processes for load bearing structural
application of composites in real manufacturing operations focused on the needs
of the electric power industry.