* 9101852
* Support for Upgrade of the Ichthyology Database of the      Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Scott Schaefer, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1995
* USD 135,606.00

The Ichthyological Collection in the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences
contains approximately 1.5 million specimens representing more than 10,000
species, as well as 12,000 type specimens. The collection ranks among the ten
largest fish collections in the western hemisphere, and was the first to
computerize its entire holdings with MUSE, an NSF-supported database program for
microcomputers. Dr. Scott Schaefer, Curator in charge of the fish collection,
proposes to validate the data records entered from early (pre-1954) catalog
ledgers. These records fail to include many important pieces of information
(locality descriptions, species identifications, specimen measurements) that are
available on the labels attached to the specimens themselves. Dr. Schaefer also
proposes to standardize the geographic place names in locality records, and to
determine latitudes and longitudes of localities wherever possible. These
improvements to the locality records will allow the database records to be used
directly by Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and other mapping software for
biogeographic research. A modem will be added to the Collection's computer
network, allowing remote dial-in for querying the database. The proposed
improvements will add significantly to the research impact of this important
collection. Computerization of natural history collections is proving beneficial
to collection management and to research, and the Ichthyology Collection in the
Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia continues to show vision and
leadership in this area.