* 9101762
* Japan STA Program: "Immunofluorescence Study of Spindle     Apparatus Microtubules in Parthenogenetically and           Gynogenetically Developing Bivalves"
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* John Scarpa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 01/31/1994
* USD 8,050.00

Japan STA Program: "Immunofluorescence Study of Spindle Apparatus Microtubules
in Parthenogenetically and Gynogeneti- cally Developing Bivalves" This award
will provide supplementary support to enable Dr. John Scarpa of the Rutgers
University Shellfish Research Laboratory to conduct collaborative research with
Dr. Katsuhiko T. Wada for 18 months at the National Research Institute of
Aquaculture in Mie, Japan. They will study the parthenogenetic and gynogenetic
methods of developing a pure breeding line for a bivalve mollusc, either the
oyster Crassostrea gigas or clam Mactra chinensis. Parthenogenesis and
gynogenesis have been suggested as the two most efficient methods for quickly
developing pure- breeding lines of bivalve molluscs for aquacultural purposes.
These methods have been successful with fish, sea star, sea urchin, and sea
cucumber, but have not produced viable bivalve molluscs. A comparative
description of spindle apparatus formation during anaphase I of normally and
parthenogenetically or gynogenetically developing bivalves will direct future
production of pure-breeding lines of molluscs for aquaculture. Dr. Scarpa's
techniques in inducing parthenogenetic and gynogenetic development will
complement Dr. Wada's expertise in molluscan genetics, specifically, the
Japanese pearl oyster.