* 9101784
* Multiple Sampling of DSDP/ODP Bore Hole Waters for          Geochemical Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Joris Gieskes, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 08/31/1993
* USD 124,928.00

Studies of the hydrogeochemistry of layer 2 of the oceanic crust are of primary
importance for gaining a more thorough understanding of alteration reactions
occurring in the crust and geochemical fluxes associated with exchange between
the ocean and layer 2. In both cases the composition of the fluids trapped in
layer 2 as formation waters is critical to modelling and flux calculations.
Ocean drilling allows such fluids to be directly sampled. Unfortunately, the
drilling process often disturbs the fluids in a hole requiring a sampling plan
that involves a return to the site after the fluids have come to equilibrium.
Although such return visits have been done by the drillship itself, other
techniques are being perfected to allow return sampling by submersible (France)
and by regular research vessels (United States). The present award will continue
support to Dr. Gieskes for such studies. He has recently participated with the
French in a re- entry program in the Atlantic. Funds in the this award will
support analyses and publication of the results from this cruise. Additionally,
he will undertake the design of a new sampler to be deployed in drillholes from
a re-entry vehicle under construction at Scripps Institution. This system will
deploy the samplers from a vehicle navigated on a cable from a surface vessel,
eliminating the need for a costly submersible or drillship.