* 9101542
* Theory of Fractional Statistics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Geoffrey Canright, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1994
* USD 120,000.00

On this new research effort several numerical studies will be undertaken on
particles with fractional statistics (anyons). Fractional statistics arise in
connection with particle number fractionalization in two dimensions; it has been
shown to occur in the fractional quantum Hall effect, and may also occur in the
high temperature superconductors. A stochastic sampling (Monte Carlo) algorithm
for fractional statistics will be developed and tested. This work is the first
of its kind and should substantially enhance our ability to treat the many-anyon
problem. Studies of exact diagonalization techniques for anyons will continue.
In particular, we will examine the magnetic moment arising from the screening by
anyons of a charged impurity; the temperature dependence of the spontaneous
magnetic moment in the unperturbed system; and the Hall conductance of anyons in
zero field. %%% The discovery of the possible relevance of particles obeying
fractional statistics to the fractional quantum Hall effect and high temperature
superconductivity has renewed interest in these strange particles called anyons.
These particles are unique to two-dimensional space and possess properties
different than the more conventional bosons and fermions. While anyons are of
fundamental theoretical interest, their possible relevance to high temperature
superconductors has stimulated searches for experimental verification of their
role in these two-dimensional materials.