* 9101384
* A Pigment-Based Study of 13C Fractionation in Microalgae:   The Effect of Physiological and Environmental Factors on theDelta 13C of POC  in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Ralf Goericke, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 04/30/1995
* USD 261,277.00

The objective of this research is to investigate the relative importance of
environmental vs. biological effects on the &amp;13C of POC in the surface layer
of the open ocean. The distribution of &amp;13CPOC in the ocean as a function of
latitude can not be explained by any single cause, such as temperature,
concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide (ıCO2!aq) or lipid content.
Multicausal explanations will have to be sought to explain this distribution.
The effects of the composition of the phytoplankton community on the
distribution of &amp;13CPOC in the ocean will be investigated since
physiological characteristics of 13C fractionation vary among groups of
microalgae and the composition of the phytoplankton community varies as a
function of latitude in the ocean. Patterns of &amp;13C fractionation in
different groups of microalgae in the laboratory and in the field will be
documented as a function of growth rate, cell size and ıCO2!aq. In the field
carotenoids will be used as chemosystematic indicators for the composition of
the phytoplankton community and measure the &amp;13C of carotenoids to determine
the &amp;13C of the different groups of microalgae. The relationship between
&amp;13CPOC and the &amp;13C of carotenoids will be established for laboratory
cultures. A comparison of the variations of &amp;13CPOC and &amp;13Ccarotenoid
within the different microalgal groups along a N-S transect in the North
Atlantic will establish the relative effect of phytoplankton community
composition on the &amp;13C of plankton in the ocean.