* 9101354
* Reasoning Usefully about Mental States During Discourse     Understanding:  A Metaphor Based Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,12/31/1995
* Stephen Helmreich, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 12/31/1995
* USD 281,712.00

This Artificial Intelligence project investigates part of the problem of
discerning the coherence relationships within natural language discourse. The
relationships of interest are between discourse components that describe or
presuppose mental states (propositional attitudes). The mental states can be
those of the speaker, listener, or any person mentioned by the discourse, and
can be states of belief, intention hope, desire, etc. The focus of this work is
on descriptions that rely implicitly of explicity on commonsense models of the
mind that people often deploy, such as the prevalent model of a mind and its
beliefs as respectively a physical container and some physical objects within
it. Commonsense models are frequently relied upon in mental-state descriptions
and are important factors in discourse coherence relationships, yet previous
detailed work on representing and reasoning about mental states has largely
skirted the issues. This research relates strongly, however, to work by
psychologists and linguists on metaphor and metonymy, because the commonsense
models are metaphorical and metonymy is often involved as well. The project
includes the development of a prototype AL discourse- interpretation system, as
well as major data collection activities: collection of information about
mental-state language through experiments with human subjects, and through semi-
automated examination of diverse natural language texts, including definitions
and examples in machine-readable dictionaries. Annotated compendia of examples
from these texts will be produced. The project is also concered with the
relationship between mental-state descriptions in English and those in other
language, notably Spanish, with a view to contributing to machine-translation
work at our laboratory.