* 9101886
* Development of a Molecular Probe for Investigating Cell-    Surface Enzyme Activity in Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Cindy Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/1993
* USD 92,230.00

Nitrogen is one of the nutrients essential for phytoplankton growth. The rate
of nitrogen recycling can determine the rate of primary production. One of the
major pathways of nitrogen cycling in the sea is the uptake of N by
phytoplankton for incorporation into the amino acids and nucleic acids required
for life. Traditionally, marine scientists have thought that phytoplankton
obtain the N they require from inorganic nitrogen compounds. However, dissolved
organic nitrogen compounds make up a larger reservoir of N in seawater than do
inorganic nitrogen compounds. Previously, field studies have indicated that
amino acids and other organic nitrogen compounds are not taken up to any
significant extent by phytoplankton. It has been recently suggested that some
phytoplankton can oxidize amines and amino acids using a cell-surface enzyme.
Oxidation of amino acids produces hydrogen peroxide, an x-keto acid, and
ammonium. The ammononium is then transported across the phytoplankton cell
membrane for use as a N source. The x- keto acid is released to the surrounding
seawater where it can be taken up by bacteria. If the ability to oxidize amino
acids by mechanism is widespread among phytoplankton, it has profound
implications for our understanding of the cycling of amino acids in seawater and
the competition between phytoplankton and bacteria for these compounds. This
project will develop a series of fluorescent molecular probes to simulate amino
acids and amines in seawater. Loss of the probes (by algal oxidation) from
seawater can be monitored quickly and sensitively by high performance liquid
chromatography with fluorescent detection. Using these synthesized probes, the
importance of phytoplankton oxidation of amines and amino acids by this novel
mechanism will be tested in the field.