* 9101235
* Mathematical Sciences: Moduli Spaces of Riemann Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Robert Penner, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1994
* USD 89,500.00

Robert Penner will study decorated Teichmuller theory in several directions, as
follows. Integrals of monomials of Miller- Morita-Mumford classes over the
moduli space of Riemann surfaces should be computable using intersection theory
on an appropriate V- manifold compactification of moduli space; in particular,
all the necessary ingredients seem to be in place for applying this scheme to
the computation of Weil-Petersson volumes for once-punctured surfaces. There is
also a "universal" analog of the decorated Teichmuller space, and essentially
all of the classical structures extend to this setting; he hopes the study of
this universal space will shed light on the classical theory. He furthermore
hopes to compute the complex structure of moduli in his coordinates. Computer
work will be pursued to derive the combinatorial structure of the moduli space
of once-punctured surfaces of genus three, and he hopes explicitly to compute
the homology of this spaces. Finally, a program has evolved for extending some
of his work to the setting of closed surfaces. Teichmuller theory is a seventy
year-old blend of algebraic geometry, differential geometry, and topology. As
such, advances will interest a broad spectrum of mathematicians. Some also have
a bearing on string theory, so some theoretical physicists have a stake in this
research as well.