* 9101211
* Dissertation Research:  Wood Thrush Population Regulation in a Fragmented Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Scott Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 01/31/1993
* USD 5,320.00

There is a growing concern about recent population declines in forest breeding
songbirds in North America. The absence of many of these species from small
forest tracts has led to questions about the effects of forest fragmentation on
songbird reproductive success. Increased nest predation and brood parasitism by
brown-headed cowbirds appear to be associated with increased forest
fragmentation. There is, however, a paucity of data on the impact of cowbird
parasitism and nest predation on the reproductive success of individual species
of forest-nesting birds. The purpose of this study is to examine the population
dynamics of the wood thrush, a rapidly declining forest songbird. The factors
determining reproductive success on three study sites in a moderately fragmented
region, the Shawnee National Forest of southern Illinois where cowbird
parasitism and nest predation rates are high will be studied. These data will be
used to evaluate a model of population dynamics that proposes that some
populations (sources) regularly produce surplus offspring which immigrate to
other populations (sinks) which would otherwise become extinct as a result of
low reproductive success. This model will be evaluated at regional, local and
temporal scales.