* 9101901
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Numerical Methodsfor Nonlinear Optimization
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1993
* USD 5,250.00

This award will support continued collaborative research in computer science
between Dr. Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern University, and Dr. Claude LeMarechal,
French National Institute for Information Science and Automation (INRIA). The
main object of the project is the solution of large scale non-linear
optimization problems. One of the most promising approaches in weather
forecasting is the variational assimilation technique, which can be used to
adjust various physical quantities, including the forcing data. Its versatility
is due to the fact that the physics of the problem is incorporated both in the
cost function and in the constraints. The fundamental problem is the determi-
nation of initial conditions for the numerical models. Since observations are
very sparse, the key idea is to estimate the unknown observations by means of
the nonlinear optimization code. Once a good set of initial conditions has been
determined, atmospheric and oceanographic forecasting can be performed by
simulation of the dynamical questions. In this project, Drs. Nocedal and
LeMarechal plan to develop a pilot code, encompassing algorithmic and
theoretical developments that will be tested on the assimilation problem in
meteorology. This program will evolve to incorporate new algorithmic ideas and
will also be applied in the future to two other areas: crystallography and
transonic flow. This project will benefit from complementary expertise of the
two investigators in the proposed topic of research.