* 9101094
* REU Site:  The Study of Ecology as an Interactive process:  Research Problems and Strategies for the Undergraduate
* BIO,BIO
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1995
* Alan Berkowitz, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 10/31/1995
* USD 150,000.00

This award provides continuing support to The Institute of Ecosystem Studies'
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (IES- REU) SITE. The program will
immerse students in a highly interactive, research oriented environment. The
major tenet is that success in science depends on understanding the context of
research, as well as the substance and procedures of a particular discipline.
Program goals are: (1) to provide intensive training in ecological research; (2)
to broaden students' perspectives on the societal, ethical and theoretical
contexts of science; (3) to give students direct exposure to the life of a
research scientist; and (4) to promote an understanding of ecology. Eight
students will be brought to the Institute for a twelve-week program in each of
the next three summers, building upon the strengths of the highly successful
1988-1990 programs. The program will include the following components: (1)
Student Research Projects; (2) Research Strategies for the Undergraduate, a
series of intensive training sessions; (3) Research in Context, a seminar series
designed to broaden students' perspectives on the various components and
applications of science; (4) Forum on Opportunities in Ecology, a full-day
program with representatives from a broad spectrum of ecological and related
disciplines; (5) Ecology Seminars; and (6) a variety of other supporting
activities. Under the guidance of a mentor scientist, each student will
delineate a research question and associated hypotheses, select appropriate
methods, and develop a research plan. Students will then implement the project,
finishing with analysis and report writing. Presentations in a formal Research
Symposium will conclude the summer program. Final papers will be collated and
published as an IES Occasional Publication.