* 9101737
* U.S. - U.S.S.R. Joint Research in Topological Fluid Dynamicsat Institute for Theoretical Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,12/31/1991
* James Langer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 12/31/1991
* USD 30,600.00

Dr. James S. Langer, Director of the Institute for Theoretical Physics,
University of California - Santa Barbara, and Dr. George M. Zaslavsky, Head of
the Department of Analytical Studies, Space Research Institute, Moscow,
U.S.S.R., have organized a cross- disciplinary program in Topological Fluid
Dynamics that will involve pure mathematicians and astrophysicists as well as
fluid dynamicists. Leadership will be shared with Dr. Keith Moffatt of Cambridge
University and Dr. Michael Tabor of Columbia University. The Soviet delegation
will include Drs. Alexander Chernikov and Michael Natenzon from the Space
Research Institute and Dr. A. Mikhailov from the Landau Institute of Theoretical
Physics. The principal activity of the Institute for Theoretical Physics (ITP)
is to organize and operate research programs in which visiting scientists can
interact over an extended period with a sizable fraction of the world's most
active scientists in the research area. An outstanding cross-section of leading
topologists, theoretical and computational fluid dynamicists working on problems
involving fundamental mechanisms of vorticity dynamics and turbulence, plasma
physicists with expertise in problems of magnetic field topology and
reconnection processes, and experts in Lagrangian chaos will meet from August -
December 1991. The participation of the group of Soviet scientists will enhance
the vitality and international nature of this program. This project fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
researchers in the U.S. and U.S.S.R. to combine complementary efforts and
capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence in the field of
basic scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality
of benefit.