* 9101569
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Pipe Networks and Their  Properties, Function, and Damage
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* James Liggett, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1995
* USD 6,000.00

This award will support Professor James Liggett of Cornell University in a
research collaboration with Professor Gustavo Ayala of the Universidad Nacional
Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM). The objective of their research is to study leaks in
water distribution systems by directing a measurement program so that leaks can
be detected with minimum effort. Such a program can be automated and the
analysis made continuously to find anomalies in the system. Leaks in water
distribution systems are a common occurrence, whether they are caused by a
catastrophic event such as an earthquake or by slow deterioration. Detection of
such leaks is a major problem. As a result of the 1985 earthquake, Mexican
officials have expressed a willingness to collect additional data as required
for relevant research on the Mexico City water distribution system and to carry
on experiments in small portions of the distribution system. The Mexican side
will also provide software that is useful for computation in water distribution
systems while the U.S. side will address parameter identification types of
calculations. As envisioned, this collaborative research cooperation offers a
golden opportunity to test algorithms with real data under realistic situations
and, consequently, has the potential to develop effective procedures for leak
detection and damage control.