* 9101563
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  "Societe d'Encouragement    pour L'Industrie Nationale:  A History of Applied Science inFrance, 1801-1941
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Andrew Butrica, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 08/31/1992
* USD 42,802.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Societe d'Encouragement pour l'Industrie Nationale:
A History of Applied Science in France, 1801-1941 This award is under the
Program for Long-& Medium Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which
enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of
research abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards
provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Andrew Butrica with
Brigitte Schroeder-Gudehus, Director, Center for Research in History of Science
& Technology, Cit> des Sciences et d'Industrie, Paris, France. The researchers
plan to continue work on a history of the Soci>t> d'Encouragement pour
l'Industrie Nationale, a Paris society established to apply science to industry
and agriculture. They will examine the application of science to industry and
agriculture within the setting of this French institution, from its founding in
1801 to its near collapse in 1941. The activities of this society in promoting
the application of science to industry and agriculture are particularly
important since a key aspect of the modernization of French society has been the
interaction of science and technology with economic, political, and cultural
forces. The award recommendation provides funds to cover international travel,
local travel abroad.