* 9101834
* Dinuclear Reductive Elimination Reactions of Dimeric        Platinum Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Gordon Anderson, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1994
* USD 135,000.00

A series of dimeric platinum complexes containing bridging
(diphenylphosphino)cyclopentadienyl (dppc) ligands will be prepared and
characterized by NMR spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction. Dinuclear reductive
elimination reactions will result in carbon-carbon bond formation, and the
mechanism(s) of these processes will be investigated using isotopic labeling and
variable temperature NMR techniques. The dppc-bridged platinum system will be
developed in two ways. The first will be to introduce one or more methyl groups
onto the cyclopenta- dienyl ring. This will enhance the coordinating ability of
the ligand and prevent reversible dissociation of the cyclopenta- dienyl ring,
which appears to be a feature of the dinuclear eliminations. Secondly, a
bis(phosphino)cyclopentadienyl ligand will be prepared and used to construct
homo- and hetero- metallic trimeric and oligomeric complexes. Where two
different metals are present in a single complex, chemistry different from that
found for either metal alone is expected. %%% In this project in the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic, and Organo- metallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Gordon
K. Anderson of the University of Missouri at Saint Louis will prepare dimeric
platinum complexes for use as catalysts in carbon-carbon bond forming reactions.
This type of reaction is involved in reforming processes and the production of
fuels based on ethylene, methanol, or synthesis gas. In addition, complexes
containing many metal atoms of different elements will be synthesized for the
same purpose.