* 9101978
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  High Resolution Doppler     Lidar System for Ground Based Wind Measurement of the MiddleAtmosphere
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Bruno Nardi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1993
* USD 38,584.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: High Resolution Doppler Lidar System for Ground
Base Wind Measurement of Middle Atmosphere This award is under the Program for
Long-&amp; Medium Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables
U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research
abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Bruno Nardi of the
University of Michigan Ann Arbor with Dr. Marie-Lise Chanin at the Service
d'A>ronomie of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. The researchers
will build an operational Doppler lidar system to measure wind in the 10-60 km
altitude range of the middle atmosphere. This new French technique is the only
ground- based method of obtaining continuous wind measurements in the middle
atmosphere with very high spatial and temporal resolution. Wind measurements are
necessary to understand the dynamics of this poorly monitored atmospheric region
and its dynamic coupling to adjoining atmospheric regions. Besides participating
in the construction of this instrument, Dr. Nardi will help develop and
implement analysis techniques, and participate in a collaborative American-
French effort to validate the High Resolution Doppler Interferometer ıHRDI!, now
in the final stages of preparation at the Space Physics Research Laboratory at
the University of Michigan, to be deployed in the Upper Atmosphere Research
Satellite ıUARS!. The award recommendation provides funds to cover international
travel and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home
institution.