* 9102626
* U.S.-Malaysia Cooperative Research:  Macromer Synthesis via Delocalized Carbanions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Bernard Gordon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/28/1994
* USD 15,766.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Bernard Gordon, Department of Polymer
Science, Pennsylvania State University, to pursue with Dr. Seng Neon Gan,
Department of Chemistry, University of Malaya, macromer synthesis via
delocalized carbanions. Their research will involve (1) preparing new macromers
(polymers with a reactive terminal) by anionic initiation, (2) chemically
modifying hydrogenated rubbers to produce elastic fragments with reactive
terminals, and (3) investigating the reactions of epoxidized natural rubber with
various macromers and polymers prepared by anionic initiation. Diversification
of the traditional uses of natural and synthetic rubbers can be achieved by
changing the properties of the base polymers. This can be done by direct
chemical reactions to change the structures or by grafting other polymers onto
the rubber structure. This project adds an international cooperative dimension
to the PI's research under NSF Grant No. DMR-8822938. Dr. Gan's experience with
natural and synthetic rubbers and prior collaboration with the PI on macromers
will add a valuable new dimension to the ongoing research. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and developing country
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.