* 9102154
* Application of a Cooled CCD Imaging System to the Study of  Microorganisms and Non-Living Particles in the Picoplankton Size Range
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1994
* Michael Sieracki, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1994
* USD 189,047.00

Sub-Micrometer particles in marine plankton systems may play important roles in
the basic chemistry and biology of the system, in population and food web
dynamics and in biogeochemical cycling. Particles in the picoplankton size range
include living microorganisms, viruses and non-living detrital particles. The
abundance, size spectra and fluorescent nature of these various particles can be
measured using image analyzed epifluorescence microscopy. With funding from the
"Long-Lead Time Development Program" of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux Study, a
sensitive, accurate image analysis system, has been developed, based on a cooled
CCD camera, to automate these measurements of natural samples. This award which
constitutes a renewal of the past award is to upgrade the spatial resolution of
the system to increase the precision of the size measurements of these
particles. The instrument will than be used for the characterization of small
particles in terms of population abundances, size spectra, and fluorochrome
staining. The system will be calibrated using known virus concentrates to
determine if they can be distinguished from small bacteria based on their size
and fluorescence characteristics. The instrument will be used to characterize
particle populations at the JGOFS Bermuda Time Series station and in local
estuarine waters. Samples will also be analyzed by electron microscopy as well
as for carbon and nitrogen composition, particularly some of the size-
fractionated samples. This variety of measurements should lead to a better
understanding of the nature of these particles and their potential roles in
marine biogeochemical cycles.