* 9102689
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  The Role of Pyoluteorin     Production by Pseudomones Fluorescens CHAO in Biological    Control
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Joyce Loper, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 06/30/1993
* USD 36,950.00

Bull Long & Medium-Term Research: The Role of Pyoluteorin Production by
Pseudomonas fluorescens in Biological Control of Plant Pathogens This award is
made under the Program for Long & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twelve months abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's
awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or
complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award, sponsored by Dr. Joyce E. Loper of Oregon State University, will support
a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Carolee T. Bull with Dr.
Dieter Haas of Eidgen>ssische Technische Hochschule (ETH), Z>rich, Switzerland.
Certain strains of Pseudomonas fluorescens, when applied to seeds of
agricultural plants, control plant diseases caused by soilborne fungi. P.
fluorescens strains CHAO and Pf-5 control a seedling disease of cucumber caused
by the fungal phytopathogen, Pythium ultimum, and produce the antifungal
metabolite, pyoluteorin. Pyoluteorin production is implicated in the biocontrol
activity of strain Pf-5 but the role of pyoluteorin produced by strain CHAO in
disease suppression is unknown. A cosmid clone, pME3090, obtained from a genomic
library of CHAO, confers to strain CHAO an enhanced biocontrol activity, and
enhanced production of pyoluteorin and of a second antifungal compound,
2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol production to the enhanced biocontrol activity of
CHAO/pME3090 will be elucidated through a combination of molecular and agronomic
approaches. The proposed research will use organisms and techniques developed in
the United States and Switzerland to determine the role of pyoluteorin
production in biological control by CHAO. The specific objectives are to: (1)
Identify genes involved in pyoluteorin production; (2) Generate mutants in
strain CHAO that are defective specifi- cally in the production of pyoluteorin
(Plt); (3) Determine the relative ability of pyoluteorin mutants, 2,
4-diacetylph- loroglucinol mutants (Phl) and of wildtype CHAO to control plant
diseases. The proposed research will provide critical information describing
fundamental mechanisms in the biocontrol of plant diseases. The award
recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a flat
administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.