* 9102115
* CEDAR:  Development of a Global Empirical Model of Lower            Thermospheric Tides Based on a Comprehensive                Observational Data Base
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Roberta Johnson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/1994
* USD 105,200.00

This grants supports the comprehensive data base of lower thermospheric
measurements of winds, temperatures, densities, and composition from satellites,
rockets, and ground-based radar and optical instruments. These data will be used
to develop and test an empirical model of global lower thermospheric diurnal and
semidiurnal tidal oscillations from 85 to 150 km. Analysis of the data set will
include formation of climatological averages at different geographic locations
based on solar cycle and geomagnetic activity where appropriate. Fourier
decomposition of the climatological averages will yield diurnal and semidiurnal
components at selected altitudes, and finally decomposition of the Fourier
component as a function of latitude will allow amplitudes, and phase of the
contributing Hough function tidal modes to be determined. Climatological
averages and model Hough function amplitudes and phases will be assembled in
convenient format for distribution to interested scientists. The resulting model
representations of lower thermospheric diurnal and semidiurnal tides will be
used in several scientific investigations. Climatological tidal oscillations
will be compared with the results of previous theoretical and semiempirical
models. Other studies will include investigation of the electrodynamic forcing
of the ionosphere arising from the deduced global lower-thermosphere tides and a
term analysis of the tidal momentum forcing in the lower thermosphere utilizing
the National Center for Atmosphere Research (NCAR) Thermosphere Ionosphere
General Circulation Model (TIGCM) and its diagnostic processors. *** '