* 9102093
* Environmental and Stochastic Aspects of Creep Crack Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1997
* Ming Gao, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* W. Lance Haworth
* 08/31/1997
* USD 2,563,000.00

A new Materials Research Group is established to investigate the chemical and
michromechanical processes that control crack growth at elevated temperatures,
and to quantify the stochastic aspects of the crack growth response. The goal of
the investigation is to provide fundamental scientific understanding of the
microstructural mechanisms for growth of cracks at elevated temperatures.
Polycrystalline nickel-iron-chromium ternary alloys with varying carbon content
are being used for the experimental studies. The role of grain boundary carbide
or carbon concentration, as well as grain boundary orientation and structure
upon cavitation segregation and crack growth kinetics are being determined. The
specimens are being grown by vacuum melting, forging, rolling of single heats of
each alloy. Bicrystals of the same alloys are being grown by a modified
Bridgeman method for the purpose of producing high angle grain boundaries of
known orientation. Materials characterization is being accomplished using
analytical transmission electron microscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy, x-ray
microprobe analysis, Laue back-reflection x-ray, and optical microscopy.
Mechanical testing includes constant-load, tensile creep tests in vacuum or high
purity argon on polycrystalline and bicrystalline specimens as a function of
stress and environment (e.g., temperature, hydrogen, water vapor, methane, and
oxygen). The steady-state creep deformation is being modeled as a function of
stress, strain, and temperature. The models are addressing the mechanistic
aspects of deformation (e.g., dislocation glide vs. climb, grain boundary
sliding vs climb). The kinetics of chemical reactions and transport processes
are being determined their effects upon the enhancement of cavitation and creep
crack growth in these alloys. The micromechanical model is being integrated with
the chemically-based model to form a predictive model for environmentally-
assisted creep crack growth. In addition to the deterministic model, stochastic
modeling of the factors that are probabilistic in nature are being incorporated
to formulate a comprehensive model. Factors being considered in the
probabilistic portions are cavity spacing, cavity growth rate, sintering and
coalescence of cavities, grain boundary orientation, distribution of carbide
precipitates.