* 9102735
* U.S.-Italy Workshop:  The Chemical Components and Structure of Asphaltic Materials (Rome, Italy; June 3-4, 1991)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1992
* Paul Jennings, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 04/30/1992
* USD 19,200.00

This award will support a U.S.-Italy Workshop on asphaltic materials. The
activity is being organized by Professor Paul Jennings of Montana State
University and Professor Carlo Giavarini of the University of Rome. The subject
of the workshop will be restricted to the chemical components of bitumens and
the ways in which the components interact in the neat asphalt. The agenda
includes presentation of research results and new techniques for achieving such
results, and allows ample time for discussion and exchange of ideas. Although
asphaltic materials (bitumens) have been used extensively around the world for
roadway paving, for roofing and for other purposes, the chemistry of these
materials, which determines their behavior, has been poorly understood. However,
research in this area has been gaining momentum rapidly and interchange of
information and ideas among scientists from different countries will play an
important role in future efforts. This workshop will permit a rapid exchange of
information among the participants, thus promoting progress in individual
research. Furthermore, the proceedings of the conference, including all
presentations and transcriptions of discussions, will be published and
disseminated not only among the participants but also to other interested
scientists.