* 9102672
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Magnetic Recording Research
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Jay Hoinville, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1993
* USD 38,384.00

Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Magnetic Recording Research This award is made
under the Program for Long &amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to
twelve months abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's
awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or
complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Jay R.
Hoinville of Washington University with D.J. Mapps of the School of Electronic,
Communication, and Electrical Engineering of Polytechnic South West, Devon,
United Kingdom. The researchers will investigate magnetic recording by
developing and characterizing new recording head technologies. The size of a
recorded bit cell depends on the size of the recording head and on the spacing
between the medium and the head. By taking advantage of the benefits of
reduction of geometric scale, the researchers hope to develop recording heads
which produce areal densities on the order of 1Mbit/mm2. They propose to develop
a head which can be used to read/write in contact with the medium and which has
a tract width of 1um. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S.
home institution.