* 9102113
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  High Resolution Delineation of Earth Structure
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* John Calloway VanDecar, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1993
* USD 37,150.00

VanDecar Long- &amp; Medium-Term Research: High Resolution of Earth Structure
This award is under the Program for Long-&amp; Medium Term Research at Foreign
Centers of Excellence, which enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct
three to twelve months of research abroad at research centers of proven
excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and
the use of unique or complimentary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. Robert S. Crosson
will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. John Calloway
VanDecar of the University of Washington with Drs. Guust Nolet and Roel Snieder
of the University of Utrecht. In order to improve knowledge of the Earth's
mantle, and in particular the structure of tectonically active regions, to
better answer fundamental questions about tectonic processes, the researchers
propose to (A) extract from large data sets more accurate parameters and
quantitative data covariance estimates; (B) apply robust statistical techniques
to seismic inversion problems to help account for non-Gaussian noise
distributions and gross errors; (C) implement non-linear inversion techniques
where necessary; and (D) include diverse geophysical data sets (e.g., gravity,
phase amplitudes) into the seismic inversion problem in order to help constrain
the uniqueness of resulting models. They also intend to perform detailed
resolution analyses with (A - D) in place in order to determine what limits the
highest quality data, combined with appropriate theory, can place on small scale
earth structure. The award recommendation provides funds to cover international
travel and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home
institution.