* 9102196
* Acquisition of a Mini-Super Computer for Modeling Normal    and Discordered Cognition.
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* James McClelland, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 12/31/1993
* USD 162,302.00

This proposal seeks funds for instrumentation needed for the further
development and assessment of parallel distributed processing (PDP) models of a
number of different aspects of human cognitive processes. We seek to study a
class of PDP models in which processing occurs through the interaction of a
large number of intrinsically variable processing units whose activation is
based on a time-average of their input from other units. The knowledge that
governs skilled processing is stored in the strengths of the connections among
the units, and the acquisition of the knowledge that underlies skilled
processing occurs through gradual adjustments in the strengths of the
connections triggered by processing experience. Previous work has shown the
potential of the approach for a number of applications, but continued progress
requires an increase in computational resources. In some cases, it has not been
possible to explore a realistically diverse range of training examples, thus
limiting the opportunity to test the adequacy of the principles to model human
performance data. In other cases, simplified assumptions about processing have
been made, and it is now clear that these simplifications can result in
inadequate fits to experimental data. In both kinds of cases, the ability to
assess the degree to which the models can account for experimental data has been
compromised. We therefore seek an upgrade to our existing 5-year old vectorizing
'minisupercomputer' to a newer, more powerful model.