* 9102651
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Molecular              Characterization of Plant Response to Drought and Abscisic  Acid
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,03/31/1994
* John Mullet, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support Professor John Mullet of Texas A &amp; M University in a
research collaboration with Dr. Alejandra Covarrubias of the Plant Biotechnolgy
Center in Cuernavaca, Mexico. The purpose of the research is to identify genes
in plants that contribute to drought tolerance, drought avoidance and water use
efficiency. Identification of these genes will allow new approaches to improve
drought tolerance in crop species. The researchers will collaborate in the
identification of genes induced in response to water deficit in Sorghum and
Phaseolus. Sorghum will be studied because it is a drought tolerant cereal;
Phaseolus varieties also share desiccation tolerance and the plant is an
important source of food in Mexico. The analysis will focus on specific genes
and study the role of abscisic acid in induced desiccation tolerance. In
addition, the researchers will map the location of abscisic acid modulated genes
on the RFLP map of Sorghum to help establish relationships between specific
genes and drought tolerance under field conditions. The proposed collaboration
will be of benefit to the U.S. side in extending their collection of genes to
genes induced in response to more severe water deficits and genes responsive to
abscisic acid, while the Mexican side will benefit from access to the U.S.
researcher's gene collection and related information.