* 9102229
* Subaqueous Pyroclastic Flows from Krakatau and Tambora      Volcanoes, Indonesia
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1994
* John King, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Bilal U. Haq
* 04/30/1994
* USD 77,777.00

The historic explosive eruptions of Krakatau (1883) and tambora(1815) volcanoes
in Indonesia discharged over 40 km 3 of pyroclastic material into the sea,
mostly as voluminous gravity flows. With previous funding samples have been
obtained of the submarine deposits areound Krakatau volcano by a diver.deployed
coring system. The study focussed on the origin of two ephmeral islands, Steers
and Calmeyer, that formed to the nortwest of Krakatau as a result of the
catastrophic 1883 eruption. Underwater geologic mapping and preliminary
examination of sediment cores indicate that the two islands were formed by the
entrance of subaerially.generated pyroclastic flows into the sea. The findings
have shed new light on the controversy surrounding the origing of devstating
tsunamis associated with the eruption and the fate of Krakatau island during the
paroxymal stage of the event. New funds for as additional will be used to carry
outstudies on the samples collected in 1990 and existing samples of the tambora
1815 deposits. Thermal demagnetization studies on pumice and lithic clasts from
the subaqueous pyroclastic flow deposits will be made to determine emplacement
temperatures and investigate the role of seawater as colling agent during
subaqueous transport and deposition. Detailed grain size, component abundance,
and image analysis will also be carried out to evaluate the nature of hot,
pyroclastic flow interactions with seawater. These result will be significant in
terms of understanding the eruptive processes of these event sand providing
modern analogues of volcaniclastic sedimentation that can be applied to ancient
convergent margin sequences in the geologic record.