* 9102097
* Second International Symposium on Coastal Ocean Space       Utilization; April 2-4, 1991; Long Beach, California
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1991,12/31/1991
* Donald Keach, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 12/31/1991
* USD 34,184.00

In May, 1989, the National Science Foundation, NOAA (Office of Marine
Assessment), the Max and Victoria Dreyfus Foundation, the New Jersey Marine
Sciences Consortium, the Paul Hall Endowment of the University of Southern
California, and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey supported the
first International Symposium on Coastal Ocean Space Utilization (COSU I) held
at the offices of the Port Authority at the World Trade Center in New York City.
The purpose of the three-day meeting was to bring together an international
group of senior experts in coastal ocean management and development to discuss
the implications of new technology on coastal management policies throughout the
world. The success of that conference was manifested by the substantial
attendance from around the globe. During the three days of discussions, over 175
individuals participated. The discussions, all held in plenary sessions, were
designed to provide an opportunity for discussion of international developments
that were potentially useful to all coastal nations and regions facing similar
environmental, political, social and economic challenges. While it was not
designed to be a technology transfer conference, certainly the outcome of the
meeting was the communication of ideas for improved management of multiple uses
in the coastal environment. The grant provides support for the preparation of a
second COSU meeting. Primary activities include: 1. Concept development and
preliminary organization 2. Program publicity, advertising and recruiting
speakers 3. Technical program development