* 9102005
* Japan JSPS Program: "Sidescan Sonar and Multichannel SeismicInvestigations of the Northern Izu-Bonin Arc-Trench System"
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Adam Klaus, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 02/28/1994
* USD 7,205.00

Japan JSPS Program: "Sidescan Sonar and Multichannel Seismic Investigations of
the Northern Izu-Bonin Arc-Trench System" This award will provide supplementary
support to enable Dr. Adam Klaus of the University of Hawaii to conduct
collaborative research with Dr. Asahiko Taira for 12 months at the Ocean
Research Institute, University of Tokyo in Japan. After collecting sidescan
sonar and multichannel seismic data, they will test Dr. Klaus' hypotheses on the
structural and volcanic processes of intra-oceanic island arc rifting and the
forearc sedimentation processes and submarine canyon formation. The Izu-Bonin
Arc-Trench is one of only a few places in the world where active rifting of
intra-oceanic island arcs presently occurs. The University of Hawaii has already
collected data from various sections of the system, but the data is not
complete. Complimenting the University of Hawaii's data, Dr. Taira began a data
acquisition program for the Izu-Bonin Arc-Trench System in 1991. The data
collected using Ocean Research Institute's state-of-the-art swath-mapping and
multichannel seismic data acquisition systems, when combined with existing data,
will provide the necessary data to test Klaus' hypotheses and refine his models
of the structural evolution of backarc rifts and the tectonic control of forearc
sedimentation and submarine canyon evolution.