* 9102201
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Metabolic Engineering of    Anaerobes
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* D Petersen, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1993
* USD 40,900.00

Long & Medium-Term Research: Metabolic Engineering of Anaerobes This award
through the Program for Long & Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of
Excellence, which enables U.S. postdoctoral researchers to conduct 3 to 12
months joint research abroad at centers of proven excellence, where researchers
can profit from unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
conditions abroad. This award will support a 12-month postdoctoral research
visit by Dr. D.J. Petersen with Professor Jos Vanderleyden of the F.A.
Janssenslaboratorium voor Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Ä±Louvaine!,
Belgium. Thanks to biotech- nology, which now can dramatically change the
metabolic character of micro>rganisms, the anaerobic organism Clostridium
acetobutylicum is used commercially to produce important organic solvents
because it can convert a wide variety of crude substrates to acids and alcohols
in high yield. New knowledge concerning the molecular genetics and cell
regulation of C. acetobutylicum allows unprecedented genetic manipulation of
fermentations of this organism. Dr. Petersen proposes to produce beneficial
genetic alterations of the cell metabolism by the introduction and amplification
of modified genes to (1) elucidate the regulatory factor(s) controlling the
metabolic switch from acid to solvent production; (2) produce specific
alterations to place expression of genes involved in solvent production under
regulatory controls independent of cell cycle, including site-specific
mutagenesis and recombination with altered genes; (3) identify the solvent
induction signal, facilitated by Tn916 mutants already achieved in his
laboratory; 4) analyze transcription regulation with the newly developed ELISA
system which increases sensitivity and reproductibility while circumventing
problems inherent in anaerobic >- galactosidase assays using C. acetobutylicum;
5) incorporate anti-sense RNA technology also developed by Dr. Vanderleyden in
the bioreactor studies of gene regulations in genetically altered strains; 6)
evaluate cells metabolically with altered enzymatic pathways to assess the
effectiveness of recombinant proteins in biocatalysis and observe the effects on
the levels of other enzymes; 7) study research developments at Leuven in gene
transfer technology with other model systems such as Azospirillum and Rhizobia.
The award recommendation provides funds to cover international travel and a
dependent's allowance.