* 9102777
* Nondestructive Instrumentation for Measuring Thermal        Conductivity and Interface Thermal Resistance of Thin Films
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1994
* Sergei Govorkov, INRAD, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1994
* USD 224,993.00

A prototype was developed in Phase I for measuring the thermal conductivity of
thin films, proving the capabilities of a measuring technique in the range not
covered by any other existing commercial equipment. The measurement method is
based on the definition of the thermal resistance, as opposed to the mostly
indirect methods used in the past. Its operating range extends from thin optical
films to bulk materials. The technique was verified by measurements of thin and
thick bulk samples and the results closely correlate with the published values
for those materials. Final testing was accomplished by successfully measuring
two micrometer thick SiO2 films deposited on single crystal silicon substrates.
During Phase II the performance of the system will be significantly improved,
leading to a useful commercial instrument. Modifications are planned for the
sensor head, electronic circuit and control software. Development and commercial
availability of a nondestructive test for thermal conductivity and interface
thermal resistance in dielectric and other thin films will permit rapid advances
to be made in the design and construction of multilayer structures with improved
heat flow characteristics. Several technologies will be aided by this
instrument, with applications in high speed electronics, optics, optical and
magneto-optical recording, thin films, superconducting films, as well as
diamond-like coatings.