* 9102842
* Generic Relationships Among Dasyurid Marsupials Based on    Mitrochondrial Cytochrome-b Sequences
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1995
* Carey Krajewski, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Annalisa Berta
* 12/31/1995
* USD 130,000.00

Dasyurids are the dominant terrestrial carnivores of Australia, occupying a
diverse array of habitats such as aridlands, forest, and alpine heath. They are
small to medium sized mammals, ranging from the tiny Pilbara ningaui (209 g) to
the dog-sized Tasmanian devil (6-8 kg). With approximately 51 species in 17
genera, the family Dasyuridae constitutes one of three major lineages of
Australasian marsupials. Attempts to understand the evolutionary relationships
among dasyurids date from the early 20th century, but these efforts could only
reveal the broadest outlines of phylogeny. In recent years, comparative study of
molecular genetic variation among dasyurids has shed much light on relationships
within the family, but a detailed and well-resolved branching order for genera
has not been established. This lack of phylogenetic resolution has hampered
efforts to understand the historical biogeography of dasyurids, particularly the
origins of New Guinean endemics. In this study, DNA sequence variation in the
mitochondrial cytochrome-b gene will be assayed for representatives of all
dasyurid genera. Cytochrome-b, a key component in cellular energy production, is
a relatively small (ca. 400 residues) and simple molecule. Patterns of DNA
variation in cytochrome-b across the range of divergence times represented by
dasyurids will allow construction of a simple model of how the gene evolves. The
value of such a model for estimating phylogeny is a key issue in modern
molecular systematics. The data and model together will provide an interesting
means of comparing several current and conceptually distinct methods of
phylogenetic inference. Final results should provide a clearer picture of
dasyurid relationships, as well as a better understanding of cytochrome-b
evolution and molecular phylogenetics.