* 9102621
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Heavy Ion Reactions at   Intermediate Energies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Aaron Galonsky, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 08/31/1995
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports cooperative research in heavy- ion physics between
scientists from the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan
State University and the Pelletron Laboratory, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil.
The principal investigators are G. M. Crawley and A. Szanto de Toledo,
respectively, along with eight colleagues, four from each country. The general
subject is heavy-ion reaction mechanism and particularly the area of multi-
fragmentation and particle correlations at intermediate energies. They will
investigate the energy and projectile dependence of the emission of the reaction
products by measuring both elemental and isotopic cross-sections as a function
of bombarding energy. The new generation of detectors developed at the NSCL, as
well as the expertise in the study of reactions involving the dectection of
neutrons will allow important contributions to the understanding of the dynamics
of heavy-ions reactions. The Pelletron Laboratory at USP is upgrading its
facilities by means of the construction of superconducting linear accelerator.
The Brazilian scientists will investigate heavy-ion reactions at higher
energies. The significant number of investigators, as well as students
demonstrating interest in this project, the computational and technical support
that can be offered at the Pelletron laboratory joined to the expertise and
updated instrumental support that NSCL can offer will all contribute to make
this a very fruitful collaboration.