* 9102094
* The Ecological Dynamics of the Mangrove Ecosystems in the   Vicinity of the Indus River Delta, Pakistan: The PAKMER     Project, A Supplement Award
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Saiyed Ahmed, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1994
* USD 61,776.00

Description: Under this project support is provided for collaboration between
Dr. S. Ahmed of the School of Oceanography, University of Washington, and Dr. G.
S. Quraishee, Director Emeritus of the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO)
in Karachi, Pakistan. The research deals with the interaction of the elements of
the web of mangrove systems, especially in the system at the mouth of the Indus
river in Pakistan, to understand the impact of factors such as the decrease in
fresh water flow and increase in ground water salinity on the growth of trees
and the chain reaction on other marine life in the mangrove ecosystem. In
Pakistani mangrove ecosystems the result has been expressed in vastly decreased
species diversity of the halophytes and in shorter shrubs. The full
understanding of the ecophysiology of the mangrove ecosystems and an order of
importance of its elements is needed to affect a reversal of the loss in this
natural resource. Scope: This research is being carried out by the U. of
Washington team with the participation of the NIO staff which also provides the
boats and other logistical support. The participation in the data analysis and
even in data acquisition will be enhanced through this project to the benefit of
the U.S. team and also to the Pakistani team. The latter will develop the
necessary capabilities and expertise to continue the reserach beyond the
involvement of the Americans. The project fits the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program. This project is being funded jointly by INT and
OCE.