* 9102670
* Development and Application of Fiber Optic Sensors for      Improved Measurement of pCO2 in Sea Water
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1998
* David Walt, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 05/31/1998
* USD 800,548.00

This ocean sciences instrumentation development project will design and build
fiber optic sensors for continuous sensitive measurements of pCO2 in sea water.
CO2 plays a major role in the biogeochemical cycle. Studying these complicated
processes require precise quantitative measurements of small changes in CO2 in
order to understand the extent of the ocean's contribution to the global CO2
cycle. The advent of optical fibers within the past decade is producing an
impact on chemical sensor technology. Optical sensors consist of reagents
attached to the distal tip of an optical fiber that change their optical
properties upon exposure to a specific analyte. These sensors are small
(approximately 200 microns), require no direct electrical connection between the
sample and sensor, and are free from electromagnetic interference. These
characteristics make optical sensors ideal for measurements at sea. This project
aims to develop deployable instrumentation based on optical sensors for
continuous sensitive pCO2 measurements in seawater. The project is divided into
three parts. 1) Sensor/indicator development will be conducted at Tufts. Novel
indicating schemes with enhanced sensitivity and internal calibration capability
will be examined. 2) Laboratory-based measurements will be conducted using both
research and field portable instruments to verify the use of these indicating
schemes for seawater pCO2 measurements. This aspect of the work will be a
collaborative project with Tufts and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. 3)
Shipboard measurements of sensors for field proofing will be conducted by Woods
Hole/Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institution personnel.