* 9102732
* Heteroallyl and Alpha-Heterosubstituted Allyllithium        Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Lloyd Jackman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 03/31/1995
* USD 346,500.00

With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Jackman will study solution
structures of lithium enolates. The following sutides will be performed in
connection with this project: (i) determination of the structures of the mixed
aggregates of three lithium enolates with lithium perchlorate and lithium
tetraphenylboride, (ii) NMR studies of dynamic processes in mixed aggregates,
(iii) studies of the solvation of a series of substituted lithium phenolates,
(iv) comprehen-sive analysis of the initial rates of C- and O-alkylation of
lithioisobutyrophenone and lithio 2-isopropyl-alpha-tetralone by methyl tosylate
in a variety of solvents with added lithium perchlorate and lithium
tetraphenylboride, (v) studies of degenerate proton transfer with lithium
phenolates, and (vi) design of enantioselective organolithium reagents. %%%
Organolithium compounds provide the synthetic organic chemist with some of the
most effective methods for controlling stereo- and regiochemistry in processes
that involve formation of new carbon-carbon bonds. In the past, progress in this
field has been severely hampered by lack of mechanistic understanding, which in
turn is a consequence of lack of detailed knowledge of the precise structures
that organolithium species adopt in solution. The proposed studies address the
elucidation of solution structures and then seek to develop useful mechanistic
concepts that are based upon these structures. The special effects of solvents
and cosolvents upon the solution structure of organolithium species will be
studied. In addition, new stereoselctive reagents that are based upon mixed
aggregate formation will be explored.