* 9102549
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Qualitative Analysis of       Ecological Models with Time Delays and Diffusions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Yang Kuang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/1994
* USD 24,134.00

The investigator undertakes studies aimed at gaining an understanding of the
global qualitative behavior of solutions of some ecological models with delays
or diffusions. These fall in three parts: (1) finite-dimensional systems of
ordinary differential equations, (2) delay differential equations, and (3)
diffusive systems with time delays. The principal themes of the research are the
fundamental problems of finding various criteria for the uniform persistence of
these considered systems, the global stability of steady states, and the
existence of periodic solutions and spatial patterns. In particular, the
investigator will study some mathematical models of populations dispersing among
patches in heterogeneous environments, where various kind of interactions will
be considered. For systems with more than two populations, one of the main
objectives is to find concrete conditions under which all populations will
coexist in the long term. For two-species interaction models, global stability
of steady states, existence of periodic solutions or spatial patterns will be
main concerns. Time delays and space variations constitute integral components
of most ecological, biological, physiological, chemical, physical, economic and
atmospheric processes. The planet as a habitat of mankind and other species has
become too small to support an extravagant exploitation of its resources. The
damages are inevitable and usually occur with time delays in heterogeneous
environments; no experiments are possible to fully simulate these effects. In
order to better understand and control such processes, it is thus necessary and
important to study them mathematically. Unfortunately, current mathematical
techniques are far from adequate to handle these numerous real problems. The
proposed research will lead to an improved understanding of the dynamical
interplay of the effects of time delays and diffusions. In particular, the final
results can be useful to a wide spectrum of people like ecologists, engineers,
system scientists and others who plan for a better management of the planet and
life.