* 9102217
* RUI:  Size: Field Tests of the Impacts of Sea Urchin Grazingand Sediment Disturbance Herbivory, Bioturbation and the    Regulation of Seagrass Meadow
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Kenneth Heck, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1995
* USD 220,000.00

In previous work, Dr. Heck and collaborators assessed the importance of short-
term grazing by sea urchins, and bioturbation by sand dollars in a seagrass
habitat in the northern Gulf. Based on results of this effort and newly
published information, they will now initiate additional field experiments in
the northern Gulf of Mexico, as well as studies at a south Florida site, to
identify more precisely the densities of sea urchins and the duration of
herbivory required to permanently create unvegetated sand flats. Together these
two sites represents the northern and southern extents of some of the most
extensive seagrass habitats in the United States, encompassing some 14,000 Km2.
Additionally, they will continue assessing the role of bioturbation of the
seagrass rhizosphere by sand dollars, and the potential interaction between sand
dollar bioturbation and sea urchin herbivory in limiting the distribution of
seagrass habitats. They will carry out the first experimental examination of the
ability of stringrays and burrowing crabs to create and maintain unvegetated
sand flats within otherwise suitable habitat for seagrasses. The work will
improve our understanding of the variables involved in maintaining habitat and
mosaics, and those that facilitate changes between alternative community states
(e.g. seagrass meadows and sand flats) which in turn can lead to drastic shifts
in primary and secondary productivity.