* 9102934
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Edge-Layer Physics of    Field Reversed Configurations
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/11/1993
* Loren Steinhauer, STI Optronics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/11/1993
* USD 2,768.00

This award supports cooperative research in plasma physics between Loren
Steinhauer of Spectra Technology, Inc. of Bellevue, Washington and Roberto
Clemente of the University of Campinas in Brazil. Measurements have shown edge-
layer thicknesses several times larger than expected for simple outflow of
plasma. A promising explanation is that an electrostatic potential barrier is
spontaneously established near the ends of the FRC (field reversed
conviguration) which reduces the outflow rate. This idea has never been modelled
theoretically. Since the edge-layer confinement is better than expected, the
implications for a thermonuclear plasma may be a significantly reduced size
requirement for a reacting FRC. The proposed research is to construct
complementary models to explain the observed edge layer properties; a fluid-
based model will be developed by Clemente, and a kinetic model by Steinhauer.
The FRC concept is a highly promising fusion plasma concept with possible
application to terrestrial fusion-electric energy (especially the low-
radioactivity D-3He fuel cycle), space-based power systems, and space
propulsion. The proposed work would benefit the U.S. FRC program by enlisting a
researcher from another country in a project of significant interest to an
existing domestic program. The proposed work would also benefit the Brazilian
effort on plasma physics by enabling one of its scientists to collaborate with a
researcher at a laboratory where major FRC experimental and theoretical work is
in progress. In addition, the substantial computation skills at STI, including
access to the National Magnetic Fusion Energy Computer Center (Livermore,
California) are available in support of the research.