* 9102981
* Adaptive Multi-Domain Spectral Methods Applied to High      Gradient Problems in Solid Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1991,05/31/1995
* Ted Belytschko, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jerome Sackman
* 05/31/1995
* USD 322,203.00

Spectral methods have been shown to be effective in approximating the high
gradient bands which occur during failure processes. These methods are effective
in solid mechanics when applied in small patches or domains, which correspond to
the high gradient regions such as shear bands, coupled with a finite element
discretization of the rest of the problem. Here, adaptive procedures will be
developed to determine the location and extent of these spectral domains from
properties of the solution, for example the strain field. These numerical
methods will be employed in large scale computations to study the structure of
shear bands and factors influencing their growth. The use of spectral patches or
subdomains provides a high degree of resolution of high gradient bands. Mappings
within the subdomains and patches will be employed to adaptively enhance the
resolution. These methods, because of their employment of subdomains, lend
themselves naturally to MIMD parallel computers. Implementations designed to
exploit this parallelism, will be developed. These methods will be implemented
and applied in large scale computational studies relating to materials forming
processes. In particular the role of imperfections and thermal coupling in the
development of shear bands will be studied. Additionally, these methods will be
applied in computational studies of the dynamics of gaseous combustion with
multiple stage reaction mechanisms.