* 9102295
* Selection of an Experimental Site in Colombia and           Preliminary Measurements of the Sky Brightness and          Polarization at Long Wavelengths
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* George Smoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/1994
* USD 17,404.00

This award will support collaboration between George Smoot of the space
sciences group at the University of California-Berkeley and Sergio Torres of the
astrophysics group at the Universidad de los Andes in Bogota, Colombia. The
project aims to study atmospheric conditions and preliminary radioastronomical
measurements, in conjunction with the NSF-supported project on low frequency
measurements of the cosmic microwave background radiation (CMBR). By looking at
the spectral distribution of the CMBR, the researchers can study the process
that took place in an early epoch of the universe when the mechanisms that
triggered galaxy formation must have left an imprint in the radiation. Data from
a site near the equator will provide maximum observation of the galactic plane.
This project will map the galactic emission in orthogonal linear polarizations,
in order to produce more precise maps than exist today. Besides acquiring
galactic intensity data, the researchers will select sites for future
polarization measurements requiring correlation of data taken at different
sites. The U.S. group has developed the radiometric technique for the CMBR
measurements to be used in the project. The Colombian group will provide the
infrastructure for the project in Colombia, as well as facilities and access to
proposed sites for collecting data to improve galactic models.