* 9102370
* Supervisory Control in Automated Manufacturing Processes:   The Design of Human-Computer Interaction for "Lights-Out    Factories"
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Loren Platzman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pius J. Egbelu
* 09/30/1994
* USD 120,330.00

Most research on manufacturing automation focuses on the derivation of fully
automated control and scheduling techniques. An alternative and more realistic
paradigm to "lights out" automation is supervisory control; the design of
manufacturing control and scheduling processes that explicitly integrate human
decision makers with underlying automation. Supervisory control designs the
human-computer interaction in order to augment and to extend the human's role
and decision making effectiveness. Neither the goal nor the unintended side-
effects of supervisory control are to automate the human decision maker out of
the system nor to reduce the human's role to a set of undesirable or ineffective
tasks. At the same time, supervisory control ameliorates the inherent
limitations of flexibility in automated control. This research offers
supervisory control as an alternative to the goal of full automation in
manufacturing processes. With supervisory control, the goal is to design into
the control process human functions that utilize human skills and that enhance
human effectiveness and overall system performance. The research offers a three
part approach to explore supervisory control in advanced manufacturing systems:
first, the development of an interactive, real-time, object-oriented
manufacturing simulator; second, the development of modeling methods to
prescribe/describe operators who control and troubleshoot manufacturing
processes; and third, to use the operator models and the object-oriented
manufacturing simulator to systematically explore, with realistic manufacturing
system dynamics, the integration of analytical methods and knowledge-based
techniques, effective designs for an on-line decision support system.