* 9102016
* The Archaeometry Laboratory at the Missouri University      Reasearch Reactor
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Hector Neff, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

Dr. Glascock will continue to operate an archaeometric center at the University
of Missouri and employ the technique of instrumental neutron activation analysis
(INAA) to analyze the elemental composition of archaeological materials. INAA is
a multi-elemental technique which allows the major, minor and trace elements of
a material to be determined simultaneously and with considerable accuracy and
precision. A sample is not destroyed by INAA and, as a result, the analysis can
be repeated or different analytical techniques can be applied to the same
sample. For valuable archaeological objects, this is an important consideration.
Of particular interest are potential analyses of ceramics, lithics, metal and
bone. Dr. Glascock has established a national review committee to evaluate the
importance of samples submitted for analysis. Through elemental analysis of
archaeological materials, a number of significant kinds of questions can be
addressed. INAA provides a taxonomic tool because it allows materials of similar
composition to be grouped together. In some instances, it also permits the
proveniencing of artifacts and thus may provide information about procurement
practices, routes of trade and political boundaries. It may also improve
understanding of ancient technologies and (through analysis of skeletal remains)
give insight into prehistoric diet and nutrition. This project is particularly
important because the two laboratories, which for many years have provided this
service to archaeologists, have shifted their foci elsewhere. The University of
Missouri center fills an important gap and makes its services available on a
nationwide basis.