* 9102148
* Long and Medium-Term Research:  Adaptive Parameter Estima-  tion and Detection of Correlated Signals in Noise
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Hamid Krim, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1993
* USD 37,450.00

Krim Long &amp; Medium-Term Research: Adaptive Parameter Estimation and
Detection of Correlated Signals in Noise This award is under the Program for
Long-&amp; Medium Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables
U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research
abroad at research centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award for a
proposal sponsored by Dr. John C. Proakis of Northeastern University will
support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Hamid Krim at the
Laboratoire des Signaux &amp; Syst>mes, Ecole Sup>rieure d'Electricit>, Yvette,
France. Dr. Krim will study estimation/detection with emphasis on array-
processing problems. In subspace-based parameter estimation and detection
techniques, in a turbulent dispersive medium, applications of high resolution
methods for detecting transmitted signals (or estimating signal parameters)
prove difficult. Dr. Krim recently proposed a data-based algorithm to estimate
the direction of arrival of correlated (coherent) signals impinging on a linear
array and has developed a generalized performance analysis specialized to this
algorithm. He will extend this work thus: (1) To account for the nonstationarity
of the transmitting medium (e.g., seasonal turbulence of the atmosphere) and
accommodate for it, he proposes to derive an adaptive scheme that can be easily
integrated into his current algorithm; (2) He will use some insightful results
of a recent performance analysis to formally derive analytical bounds on the
probability of resolving two closely spaced signals impinging on a linear array
antenna. The stronger result of an exact probability will also be derived after
some additional reasonable assumptions. This research should be of relevance to
many applications including radar and sonar. The award recommendation provides
funds to cover international travel, dependent's allowance, and a flat
administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.