* 9102782
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential       Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* J. Thomas Beale, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1995
* USD 101,579.00

This project studies several mathematical aspects of fluid mechanics.
Computational tests will be conducted for numerical methods, known as vortex
methods, for time-dependent, inviscid, incompressible fluid flow. The test
problems used are vortex rings with swirl; they can be computed reliably by
other researchers using variational methods. The results may serve as a guide in
the application of vortex methods and may suggest possible improvements in the
methods. An analysis of the errors in related methods for fluid interfaces will
be initiated, in the hope of better understanding their design. In such cases a
moving interface is tracked, along with information determining its velocity. A
convergence proof will be attempted along the lines of earlier analysis for
vortex methods. Work on the construction of exact solutions for the equations of
three-dimensional water waves, representing interacting long waves, of the type
modeled by the Korteweg-de Vries equation, will be continued. Near-resonances
with waves in the usual scaling have led to delicate analysis. Finally, the
relationship between the equations describing large-scale atmospheric and
oceanic motions and their singular limiting form, the quasi-geostrophic
equations, will be investigated. The nature of this approximation is closely
related to the generation of unwanted small scales in time or space in the
solutions of the full system. In many situations where the nature of fluid flow
is of practical importance, such as the flow past an object or combustion,
quantitative prediction is difficult because of the large number of variables
involved. The development of reliable methods for numerical simulation of
realistic flows offers the hope that a greater number of test cases could be
studied with less effort than through experiments alone. Vortex methods are a
special class of methods which have particular advantages in important but
difficult cases. An interface occurs where one kind of fluid motion meets
another. Analysis and numerical simulation can predict whether or not desired
configurations can be maintained. The proposed work might suggest improvements
in the numerical methods used for these special problems. Nonlinear waves of the
type described in the third topic have been found to be remarkably stable in
water and in other physical settings; they are completely different from the
waves occurring in linear theory. Little is known about their fully nonlinear
interaction. The last topic is a mathematical investigation of the fundamental
and long-standing question of how the equations for large-scale circulating flow
in the atmosphere or oceans can be reduced to a simpler system. One cannot hope
to solve the full system accurately, and much effort has been devoted to finding
ways to predict the main features by calculating a smaller number of variables.