* 9102027
* The Importance of Pre- and Post Recruitment Processes to theStructure of a Fish Population
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Peter Sale, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1994
* USD 38,308.00

Processes which limit or modify population abundance are of general interest to
ecologists. In marine systems, two alternative hypotheses are currently the
focus of attention. The recruitment limitation hypothesis suggests that
recruitment form the larval phase sets the upper limit in population size, or
the variation in recruitment is subsequently reflected as variation in
population abundance. Another view suggests that post- recruitment processes,
particularly competition for space or food, predation or migration are most
important in limiting or regulating sizes of demersal populations. Dr. Sale and
collaborators suggest a more pluralistic approach is required to adequately
explain variability in population structure. They will examine this by testing
the relative importance of pre- and post-recruitment processes to a Gulf of
Maine fish population at different spatial scales and in different habitats.
Specifically they will examine: 1) the importance of larval supply, settlement
and post- settlement mortality to recruitment variability at a range of spatial
scales and in different habitats 2) the importance of recruitment and post-
recruitment processes to the limitation or determination of population size in
different habitats This approach will simultaneously be investigating both pre-
and post-recruitment processes at different spatial scales and in very different
habitats. Additionally, this research will allow for comparison of the factors
affecting fish populations between temperate and tropical latitudes.