* 9102649
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Studies of Olefin     Polymerization and Sorption in Zeolites
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,06/30/1995
* William Conner, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1995
* USD 12,000.00

This award supports cooperative reseach between Willam Conner of the University
of Massachusetts and Mario Chiovetta of the Institute of Technology Development
for the Chemical Industry in Santa Fe, Argentina (INTEC). This research involves
a coordinated program of olefin polymerization catalysis research and sorption
in zeolites to be conducted between the University of Massachusetts and INTEC in
Argentina. The focus of the work is to experimentally determine the changes in
catalyst morphology and to quantify the changes in the thermal and mass
transport that occur during the polymerization process and sorption within
zeolites. These experimentally measured parameters will be used as the basis for
representing the processes and calculating the dependence of the polymer
production and of zeolite sorption on the process conditions and the changing
catalyst morphology. The cooperative program will involve both exchanges of
graduate (postdoctoral) research assistants and visits between principal
investigators. The experimental program and extended characterization will
primarily be conducted at the University of Massachusetts where the reactor
systems and instruments for system characterization are available. Specific
analyses are also to be conducted at Brookhaven National Laboratories (for the
tomography) and the University of Paris. Parallel polymer- ization reaction
studies will be conducted at INTEC in Argentina for a stirred bed polymerization
system with morphological analyses to be primarily conducted at the University
of Massachusetts. INTEC will be the main center of the modelling and simulation
studies for this collaborative research. They will continue their pioneering
modelling studies of polymerization and develop the parallel analyses of
zeolitic systems.