* 9102321
* Separation of Complex Materials by Field-Flow Fractionation
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* J. Calvin Giddings, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jon F. Parcher
* 11/30/1994
* USD 526,000.00

This research, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, will seek new ways to separate and characterize large
molecules and small particulates using Field Flow Fractionation, a technique
pioneered by the principal investigator. Crossed flows of solvents or crossed
force fields (fluid flow vs. temperature, fluid flow vs. electric field, or
fluid flow vs. gravity) are employed to separate molecules and particulates
based on differences in their density, electrical mobility, and diameter.
Applications include both preparation of mono-dispersed particulates and
analysis of mixtures. %%% This research, supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, renews support of the principal
investigator's work in field flow fractionation (FFF) for separation and
analysis of large molecules and particulates. FFF separates molecules,
particulates, or cells based on the competitive interaction of a fluid flow adn
a perpendicular force field (flow of a second fluid, gravity, heat, or electric
field) with the mixture to be separated. This contrasts with more common
separation methods that depend on the chemical interaction of the substances to
be separated with a stationary, selective phase. The current proposal focuses on
separations of polymers and emulsions, based on thermal gradients.