* 9102717
* Research in Dynamical Systems (Mathematical Sciences):      Visiting Professorships for Women
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Lisa Goldberg, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 08/31/1993
* USD 76,300.00

The research proposed for this project consists of two sets of questions in the
field of dynamical systems and complex analysis. The first set of problems
concerns polynomials in a single complex variable. They are an extension of the
analysis begun earlier, classifying polynomial dynamic systems in terms of their
local behavior near the fixed points. The second set of problems concerns
dynamical systems on the 2-torus and the 2-disk. Denjoy- type theorms for
homeomorphisms isotopic to the identity on the torus are to be formulated. A
computerized method to search for a counterexample to the conjucture that every
periodic cycle for every disc homeomorphism is strongly linked with a fixed
point is to be outlined on the disk. The investigator is working in the
forefront of a very active methematical field--dynamics. The project furthers
VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their
careers in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women
to pursue careers in these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility
as role models on the host campuses. In this project, the proposed activities
which contribute to the second objective include: teaching a graduate course
entitled Computer Experiments in One-Dimensional Dynamics; and conducting twice-
monthly seminars for female graduate and advanced undergraduate students
interested in research careers in mathematics, including outside and inside
speakers, discussion, and counselling.