* 9102682
* Numerical Simulation of Solidification and Shrinkage        Prediction of Cast Irons
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Fred Bradley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/1995
* USD 246,100.00

Research will develop numerical simulation-based shrinkage prediction criteria
for the optimization of casting design of commercial ductile and gray iron
castings. The initial focus will be on ductile iron. Shrinkage prediction for
this important commercial alloy is complicated not only by the complexity of
solidification behavior, but also by its extreme sensitivity to metallurgical
processing conditions. Thus, an essential requirement for the development of
practically useful design software is the development of a kinetic model of cast
iron solidification which realistically accounts for the effects of
metallurgical processing on mode and sequence of the solidification. A combined
micro-modeling/thermal analysis approach to solificaction modeling will be
developed, along with an algorithm for applying the solidifaction model to the
estimation of volume changes during freezing on the basis of conservation of
energy and mass, and thermodynamic considerations. The ultimate goal of the
research is the development of an integrated computer-based methodology for
process control, optimization of casting design, and diagnosis of casting
defects which takes into account the interdependent effects of metallurgical
variables, molding factors, and geometry on casting quality. Castings are
designed in industry by a process that involves much trial and error, since
experience is the only available tool. This project involves the development of
a design tool which incorporates current understanding of the metallurgy of the
cast metal and additional insights that result from the research project.
Therefore, parts can be designed more precisely, reducing the number of failed
attempts.