* 9102433
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research: Isolation of Novel NaturalCompounds from Brazilian Species
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* David Kingston, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1994
* USD 17,407.00

This award supports collaborative research on the chemistry of natural
compounds. It will be conducted by Dr. David Kingston of the Virginia
Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University in cooperation with Alphonse
Kelecom of the Federal University in Fluminense, Brazil. This work is aimed at
the isolation and structure elucidation of novel chemical compounds from
Brazilian plants and marine organisms. Both plants and marine organisms have
proved important sources of novel antitumor agents, and it is expected that a
continued search of Brazilian flora and marine species will yield additional
useful compounds. The work in Brazil will be carried out by Dr. Kelecom, who
will make both marine and terrestrial collections and perform preliminary
bioassys and isolations. The work in the U.S.A. will be carried out by Professor
Kingston and his group, and will include the final purification of bioactive
constituents and their structure elucidation. The major benefit of this project
to Dr. Kelecom is that it gives him access to the necessary equipment and
expertise to complete the isolation and structure elucidation. The major benefit
to Dr. Kingston is that it gives him access to an enlarged group of plants and
marine organisms for the isolation of natural compounds.