* 9102854
* RUI:   Parallel methods and software for solving sparse     nonlinear systems of equations in structured approaches
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Xiaodong Zhang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 07/31/1995
* USD 112,140.00

The goal of this project is to design, analyze, implement and test several
groups of parallel methods for solving sparse nonlinear systems of equations on
parallel computers. The approach is to transform sparse nonlinear systems of
equations into some special structures so that the computations can be
decomposed for parallel processing. The research will concentrate on two
important classes of naturally structured systems: 1) large-scale block bordered
systems of nonlinear equations, obtained by permuting general nonlinear systems.
It is planned to develop parallel explicit and implicit methods and iterative
methods for solving the block bordered nonlinear systems of equations, including
convergence analysis, perturbation methods for singular or nearly singular block
bordered systems, applications of the secant method, and the implementations of
the methods on different types of parallel computers. The investigation will
also be extended to different direct and iterative methods for solving the block
triangular nonlinear systems of equations including the convergence analysis,
applications of quasi- Newton methods and asynchronous parallel methods for
solving this type of problems. The method design is motivated by the use of
parallel computers, and the implementation and testing will be on parallel
computers. The goal is, however, to discover new methods that efficiently solve
sparse nonlinear systems of equations in structured approaches on a parallel
computer.