* 9102393
* Long &amp; Medium-Term Research:  Detecting Mixing Effects in   the Luminol Chemical Oscillator with CARS
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Christopher Doona, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Sveda
* 02/28/1993
* USD 37,750.00

Long- &amp; Medium-Term Research: Detecting Mixing Effects in the Luminol
Chemical Oscillator with CARS This award is made under the Program for Long-
&amp; Medium-Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables U.S.
scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months abroad at research
centers of proven excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for
joint research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month
postdoctoral research visit by Christopher John Doona of Brandeis University
with Dr. Friedeman W. Schneider of the Institut fur Physikalische Chemie der
Universitat Wurzburg, Germany. The researchers will examine the luminol
oscillator for the effects of imperfect mixing with Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman
Spectroscopy (CARS). The crossed laser system used in CARS enables small,
discrete regions within a reactor to be examined independently. A complete
mapping of the mixing profile in the reactor thus can be determined. Mapping
mixing with CARS in a nonreactive system is done only at Wurzburg. This proposal
will extend this technique to the reactive luminol system, and will be helpful
in understanding mixing effects in other systems and in the modelling of exotic
dynamic behavior such as chaos. The award recommendation provides funds to cover
international travel and a flat administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S.
home institution.