* 9102120
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Plasticity, Mineral      Nutrient Acquisition and Mycorrhizae in Tropical Dry Forest Seedlings
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* F. Stuart Chapin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/1994
* USD 12,975.00

This U.S.-Mexico award supports Professor F. Stuart Chapin of the University of
California-Berkeley in collaboration with Professor Emmanuel Rincon of the
Ecology Center of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) in Mexico
City, Mexico. The major objective of the proposed research is to understand the
effects of variation in resource supply on the growth of tree species from dry
tropical forests. The researchers will combine glasshouse field and laboratory
studies to test a series of hypotheses concerned with the role of plasticity and
mycorrhizae in resource capture and use. They will determine whether the extent
of plasticity that a species exhibits influences its capacity to exploit
temporal pulses of light, water, and nutrients, and whether differences in
plasticity affect the outcome of competition among species either in simple
experimental microcosms or in synthetic communities. Finally they will explore
the role that mycorrhizae play in influencing competition and species
interactions in communities. The proposed research provides an opportunity to
combine the complementary research expertise of researchers with substantially
different backgrounds. The Mexican PI has worked extensively on studies of
relative growth rate and plasticity in plants while the U.S. PI's work has dealt
more with mineral nutrition. The project will also involve Professor Edith Allen
from San Diego State University and her expertise on mycorrhizal techniques will
add an essential component to the proposed research.