* 9103478
* Late Cenozoic Extensional Deformation of Bulgaria and the   Role of Lower Crustal Flow in Continental Deformation       (Crustal Structures and Tectonics): VPW
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1991,10/28/1992
* Leigh Royden, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 10/28/1992
* USD 48,241.00

This research consists of two parts: (1) a study of the young extensional
history of Bulgaria; and (2) application of fluid dynamic theory to the problem
of lower crustal flow during continental deformation. The Bulgarian component of
the program consists of: compilation of existing data on the structure, age,
stratigraphy, etc. of features related to young extension in Bulgaria; regional
correlation of extensional events with coeval events along the Hellenic trench
system; and quantitative analysis gravity and topography data across young
extensional features. The goal of this portion of the study is to better
understand the relationship of subduction and its driving forces to regional
deformation in the upper lithosphere. The problem of lower crustal flow during
lithospheric deformation will be addressed by application of a variation of
simple channel (or sheet) flow to simple two and three dimensional models of the
deforming lithosphere with the ultimate goal of better understanding the
coupling of crustal and mantle motions during continental deformation. The
project combines an attempt to understand the basic tertiary evolutions of
Bulgaria with an attempt to get a better theoretical handle on flow in the lower
crust. It also furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for
women to advance their careers in science or engineering through research, and
to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: presentation of a series of guest lectures, establishment of a weekly
seminar/support group for female graduate students (and post-doctoral fellows),
and counseling of female students in a department where there are currently no
female faculty.