* 9103322
* Phylogenetic Analysis of Blepharoneura (Diptera:Tephritidae)A Test of New Methods and Hypotheses About the Evolution of Host Choice (Systematic Biology/Teacher Enhancement): VPW
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Martha Condon, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 01/31/1994
* USD 158,122.00

Through a phylogenetic analysis of a monophyletic species group of
Blepharoneura (Diptera: Tephritidae), sets of hypotheses are tested that address
two major aspects: 1) evolution of host choice in phytophagous insects; 2)
evolution of science and education. This effort tests a new method for
discovering morphological characters, utilizing public involvement, and stems
from observations that untrained observers recognize patterns overlooked by
specialists. Curious children are ideal untrained observers. The investigator
will work with teachers, visit classrooms, explain the research, and ask
students for help (How can we tell these flies apart?). The process generates
new characters for the investigator, and involves students and teachers in the
process of working on a real problem in science. Methods and collaboration
include: field work in Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela with volunteers
from UMBC; isozyme electrophoresis; cytology; morphological character discovery
with children and teachers in the elementary Science Integration Project, UMBC;
and phylogenetic analysis. The study is significant because it will generate and
integrate interactions between: systematics and ecology, and science, education,
and the public; and, provide a powerful model for these interactions. The
project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to
advance their careers in science or engineering through research, and to
encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: working with and training elementary and middle school teachers and
students, and involving them with research through the Elementary Science
Integration Project (UMBC); training teachers and volunteers for field work
using the National Aquarium resources; participating in two seminar series at
UMBC; and serving as a lecturer for the University President's Commission on the
Status of Women.