* 9103925
* Possibility Theory in Expert Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Ronald Yager, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Y. T. Chien
* 12/31/1996
* USD 163,404.00

This is the first year funding of a three year continuing grant. This research
focuses on the development of a formal system, based upon possibility thoery for
the representation and manipulation of uncertainity in expert systems. The use
of Possibility theory allows a natural representation of linguistic information
as well being an appropriate setting for handling partial matching. One emphasis
of the research is the development of tools for the general representation of
imprecise functional information. Here use is made of the ability possibility
theory to interact with other knowledge representation formalisms such as
default reasoning and probability theory. A second emphasis of this research is
the development of a tool to help in the validation of knowledge-based systems
containing uncertain information. Particular attention is paid to the discovery
of potential inconsistencies in a knowledge base. The approach used is based
upon the idea of reflecting back on the input. A very fundamental uncertainty
principle is the specificity-correctness tradeoff. What this principle says is
that in providing information we generally must make a tradeoff. What this
principle says is that in providing information we generally must make a
tradeoff between being very specific and running the risk of being incorrect or
being unspecific and in turn assure ourselves of being correct. In most expert
systems one desires both correctness and specificity. In this research the
measure of specificity is extended to environments in which their exists as
underlying similarity relation. The significance of this research is that it
provides tools for builders of expert systems which can be used to formally and
systemically include uncertainty in their systems.