* 9103357
* SEM/TEM Study of Zeolite Crystallization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Robert Thompson, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1994
* USD 150,000.00

This research program deals with understanding of the mechanisms of
crystallization of molecular sieve zeolite in hydrothermal systems. Taking
advantage of seeding techniques in zeolite syntheses results in somewhat larger
particles, as expected and desired, but the degree of success has been limited,
and the seed crystals themselves are converted into polycrystalline masses with
quite irregular morphology. This ongoing project continues the zeolite synthesis
research to investigate the effects of seeding zeolite crystallization systems,
and to study the effects on the seed crystals themselves. While circumstantial
evidence that initial breeding occurs in the seeded silicalite synthesis system
has been obtained, an attempt to actually observe these by microscopic
techniques is being made. An attempt is also being made to demonstrate for
several zeolite systems that some of these surface-bound initial bred nuclei
remain on the seed crystal surface and generate the polycrystalline masses noted
above. Examination of these initial bred nuclei by scanning and transmission
electron microscope is attempted. An investigation of the effects that different
growth environments have on the seed crystals themselves is done by these
techniques and by selected area diffraction techniques. Crystals grown using the
technique of late reagent addition during a crystallization also are
investigated. Lastly, zeolite crystal precipitate zeolite NaA and "Silicalite"
are investigated. The crystals have potential applications in sensors and in
membrane separations.