* 9103229
* Coordination of Vertically Integrated, Multi-Plant          Companies: VPW
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Candace Yano, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1993
* USD 137,064.00

Production and transportation control strategies for multiple plants in a
vertically integrated company will be investigated, emphasizing settings with
complicating factors such as setups (machine changeovers), transportation delays
between plants, uncertain yields, and uncertain production lead times. The
primary motivating example is the electronic industry. The goal is to develop
approaches to improve coordination so as to reduce the manufacturing response
time while keeping transportation and production costs low. Analytical models
will be developed to study groups of complicating factors, to understand their
interactions, and then to develop control strategies that encourage coordination
in view of these factors. Project results will be used to appropriately adapt an
existing production planning model at the host department, to account for these
factors. This project addresses production control methodology for vertically
integrated companies, is extremely relevant to the semiconductor and electronics
industries, and has applicability to a much broader range of problems. The
project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to
advance their careers in science or engineering through research, and to
encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: teaching two lecture courses (one undergraduate and one graduate),
advising on projects for Master of Science students, presenting at least one
guest seminar, and informal mentoring and counseling and role modeling (there
are no full-time female faculty in the host department).