* 9103884
* Mathematical Sciences: A State-of-the-Art,                  Cross-Disciplinary Report on Mathematics and Molecular      Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Gary Dwoskin, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Peter Arzberger
* 07/31/1993
* USD 30,000.00

This project will support a series of meetings and produce a report on the
significant contributions, open problems, and likely future directions of
mathematical sciences research and methods applied to problems in molecular
biology, especially recent intensive work in the areas of genome and protein
structure research. The objective of the report is to make this work known and
accessible to a broad class of mathematical scientists (particularly graduate
students and new Ph.D.'s) for the purpose of increasing the participation of
mathematical scientists in this area of research. Secondary objectives are to
create a useful reference to this work for biologists and to make the fruits of
this collaboration more broadly known and appreciated in the scientific
community. The project will produce a report on the significant contributions,
open problems, and likely future directions of mathematical sciences research
and methods applied to problems in molecular biology, especially recent
intensive work in the areas of genome and protein structure research. The
objective of the report is to make this work known and accessible to a broad
class of mathematical scientists (particularly graduate students and new
Ph.D.'s) for the purpose of increasing the participation of mathematical
scientists in this area of research.