* 9103491
* Comparative Diagenetic Analysis of Cambrian and Ordovician  Sequences: Understanding Controls on the Pathway of         Diagenesis Within Sequence-Stratigraphic Framework
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Kenneth Walker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1994
* USD 174,714.00

Diagenesis will be examined for two large scale sequences in eastern Tennessee:
1) one deposited in a ramp setting during a time of aragonite/high-magnesian-
calcite facilitation in the Middle to Late Cambrian, and 2) one deposited on a
rimmed platform during a time of low-magnesian calcite facilitation in Middle
Ordovician. An understanding of the relationship between diagenetic history and
sequence-stratigraphic framework will be developed by: 1) further comparison of
similar lithologies occurring in both sequences (eg. oolite), 2) diagenetic
studies of lithologies unique to one or the other sequence (eg. subtidal "flat-
pebble" conglomerates of the Cambrian), and 3) analyses of diagenetic history
through measured sections of both sequences. Thin-section petrography (polarized
light and cathodoluminescent), coupled with analyses, as well as isotopic
analysis of microsamples (0.3-0.6 mg) of diagenetic phases and other rock
components will be used in all parts of the research. The geochemical data will
be used to model mass transfer of chemical components to aid in understanding
fluid flow during diagenesis. The long-term objective is to establish a
diagenetic framework (stratigraphy + diagenetic processes + time) comparable in
detail to the paleoenvironmental and sequence-stratigraphic framework previously
developed, and to determine how the diagenetic history of large scale sequences
differ depending on setting and geologic age.