* 9103323
* Agencies of Change:  The National Science Foundation and    Federal Patronage of Biology (History and Philosopy of      Science): VPW
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Toby Appel, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 06/30/1994
* USD 149,618.00

The investigator is completing a book on the National Science Foundation and
federal patronage of the biological sciences in the period of 1945-1975, viewed
as a case study for the illumination of broader themes on science and public
policy. The existing study is a good agency history, showing that individual
decisions as well as institutional dynamics have shaped NSF patronage of biology
in a pluralistic system of federal support of science. To reshape the manuscript
so that it can become a significant work in the history of science, alternative
points of view using sources other than NSF need to be incorporated. Among the
issues to be investigated are: tensions between basic and applied research and
between biology and medicine; strategies of supporting basic biology in the
context of a pluralistic system of federal funding agencies; competition with
National Institutes of Health; elitism versus support of the infrastructure of
science; and the role of federal "science managers." With past concentration on
agency records, through new research in the recent history of biology and in the
history of science and education policy, the investigator will incorporate a
broader range of perspectives. Four areas of biology, each with different
patterns of federal support, will be examined in order to address the key issue
of how the development of biological ideas and institutions relates to patterns
of federal patronage, namely: (1) the revolution in molecular biology; (2)
photosynthesis; (3) systematic biology; and (4) ecology. This effort is to
transform a narrative heavily based on institutional records into a case study
for illumination of broader themes of science and public policy. Thus, in
attempting to integrate the agency history with the history of biology, the
question of what difference did NSF make to the biological sciences will be
addressed. The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in science or engineering through research,
and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: teaching courses on Women and Science, the Social History of American
Science, and the History of Medicine; giving seminars; organizing a symposium on
women and science in conjunction with the Women's Studies Program; developing an
exhibit on early women scientists in Florida; and counseling women students.