* 9103932
* Computational Studies of Molecular Motions in Zeolites      (Theoretical Computational Physical Chemistry): VPW
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Amy Graves, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 11/30/1993
* USD 95,725.00

The planned research will pursue structural and dynamical properties of small
molecules adsorbed within a class of porous solids know as zeolites. These
solids are microporous, polar, and have profound technological importance. The
prototypical small molecules for the study are those of hydrogen; the zeolite
host is NaA. The techniques will be modern methods for computer simulation of
classical and quantum fluids. As far as is known, this will be the first study
of molecular diatomics in a zeolitic environment. The structural and thermal
properties of the confined fluid will be probed, as will diffusional and
rotational relaxation times, the shifts in electronic and vibrational states
that arise from proximity to the charges and multipoles which comprise the
interstitial walls. There is considerable interest in developing theoretical
models to explore the reactivity and dynamics of small molecules in zeolites.
This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women
to advance their careers in science or engineering through research, and to
encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: teaching a chemistry course, chairing a workshop for
undergraduate/graduate women in greater Boston home institutions, advising and
mentoring students in the host department, having an undergraduate physics
student work as a research assistant.