* 9103448
* Development of New Techniques for Meiotic Research          (Genetics): VPW
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Terry Ashley, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1993
* USD 250,000.00

The project aims to transfer techniques for mitotic labeling of DNA sequences
for light and electron microscopy to both meiotic chromosomes and nuclei.
"Labeling" will include replication labeling with BrdU of zygotene DNA (zygDNA)
semi- conservative replication and pachytene (PDNA) repair synthesis. In situ
hybridization of L1 and B2 sequences which hybridize to G- and R-bands,
respectively, offer an opportunity to "band" pachytene chromosomes so that they
can be individually identified and the relative involvement of R- and
G-chromatic in synapsis and recombination can be directly studied. The research
will significantly increase the resolution of meiotic studies, provide powerful
new tools for study of 3-D arrangement of chromatic within presynaptic nucleic
to provide an understanding of how homologous chromosomes "find" one another. In
addition, it will allow study of the role of specific DNA sequences in
initiation and progression of synapsis and recombination while determining where
these sequences are located with respect to R- and G-bands of mammalian
chromosomes. The project focuses upon gene making and chromosome structure. It
furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance
their careers in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other
women to pursue careers in these areas through the investigators' enhanced
visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this project, the proposed
activities which contribute to the second objective will include: developing and
coordinating a series of guest lectures by women in genetics, jointly sponsored
by the Department of Human Genetics and the Office for Women in Medicine, Yale
University School of Medicine, with time allocated for female graduate students
to meet with the lecturers and discuss careers in science; teaching a graduate
course on Meiosis and on Chromosomes, Speciation, and Evolution; and
participating in the departmental Journal Club presentations by faculty, and the
Recombination Journal Club, as well as other departmental activities, including
the yearly departmental retreat for students and faculty.