* 9103178
* Evidence from Paleosols for Acid Rain at the Cretaceous-    Tertiary Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1992
* Gregory Retallack, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1992
* USD 33,225.00

This proposal is for a small grant for exploratory research (SGER): a pilot
study of buried soils to attempt to detect mobilization of heavy trace metals,
decalcification and podzolization that should have accompanied the nitric acid
rain predicted by some scenarios of extraterrestrial impact at the Cretaceous-
Tertiary boundary. A suitably complete sequence of buried soils across this
geological boundary has been located and sampled in Bug Creek, eastern Montana.
Analyses of selected paleosols will be performed by AA (major and trace
elements), isotopic dilution mass spectrometry (for Pb) and Walkley-Black (for
organic carbon) techniques. Petrographic studies also will be undertaken in
order to complete documentation of the subsurface clayey (Bt) horizons and other
paleoenvironmentally significant features of the paleosols. Nitric acid rain
would be indicated by strong depletion of the paleosol at the boundary in Pb and
other heavy metal trace elements, compared to the depth function for these
elements in paleosols above and below the boundary that are otherwise similar
petrographically, chemically and in burial history. Should this research prove
to indicate acid rain, then full scale search of other sequences of paleosols
across the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary would be warranted. Should this research
be unsuccessful indicating acid rain, it may nevertheless add paleoenvironmental
information for reconstructing events at this place and time in Earth history.