* 9103029
* Energy Coupling Nicotinate Phosphoribosyltransferase
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/1991,11/30/1995
* Charles Grubmeyer, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 11/30/1995
* USD 255,000.00

Nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase hydrolyzes 1 molecule of ATP for each cycle
of NAMN formation, and the two processes are energetically coupled. A novel
alternating affinity mechanism is proposed for this coupling in which ATP use
generates an E-P with increased affinity for the substrates of the
phosphoribosyltransferase reaction; after phosphoribosyl group transfer,
compulsory E-P hydrolysis triggered by product pyrophosphate regenerates the low
affinity E form and results in product release. An E-P was shown to be
mechanistically involved in coupling, ADP/ATP exchanges and protein chemistry
will be used to characterize it. Mutagenesis at the phosphorylated residue will
allow uncoupling the ATPase and NAMN synthesis activities of the enzyme.
Stereochemical studies will be carried out to determine if other phosphorylated
intermediates exist. The E-P has dramatically decreased Km values for substrates
PRPP and nicotinate, compared to E, and the use of further binding studies will
quantitate the changes that occur on E-P formation. Rapid quench studies will
allow the determination the order of E-P hydrolysis and phosphoribosyl group
transfer in the mechanism. By learning the mechanism of energy coupling in
NAPRTase. This will show how alternation in affinity can lead to coupling in
more complex systems such Ca-ATPase and other vectorial transporters.