* 9103299
* Theoretical Studies of Spin-Forbidden and Electronically    Nonadiabatic Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* David Yarkony, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 11/30/1994
* USD 205,000.00

With this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Program of the Chemistry
Division Professor Yarkony will investigate several problems in spin-forbidden
and electronically nonadiabatic chemistry. These processes play a major role in
determining the rate of a number of industrially important chemical reactions.
Professor Yarkony will develop computer algorithms which will include: (1) the
capability for determining relativistic wavefunctions using large scale
configuration state function expansions based on quasidegenerate perturbation
theory within the Breit-Pauli approximation, and (2) the use of analytical
gradient methods for locating regions of significant electronic nonadiabaticity,
that is, allowed, avoided and actual crossings of potential energy surfaces, and
for determining derivative couplings in these regions. He will consider
nonadiabatic electronic quenching reactions such as that between Na+HCl which
has been the object of recent experimental and theoretical studies. He will
focus on the nature of the adiabatic-diabatic state transformations. Other areas
to be investigated include: (1) photochemical dissociation processes, (2) a
characterization of the global potential energy surfaces and derivative
couplings for the He-H2 system, and (3) a study of spin-forbidden dipole-allowed
radiative decay processes in the molecules NO+ and O2+, which are candidates for
energy storage intermediates in energy transfer in chemical lasers, as well as
the molecules SiCl2, SiH2, and SiHCl which play a role in semiconductor
fabrication through vapor deposition.