* 9103095
* Industry University Cooperative Research Center for         for Separations Using Thin Films
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1991,05/31/1998
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tapan K. Mukherjee
* 05/31/1998
* USD 741,304.00

Advances in separation science are critical to future U.S. economic
competitiveness in the industries and the I/UCRC Program. The objectives of the
Center for Separations Using Thin Films at the University of Colorado, Boulder
are to: (a) conduct basic research and related development activities for the
use of thin film technology in separation processes and b) provide rapid
technology transfer between Center research projects and industrial
participants. Thin films such as ceramics and polymers offer new separation
possibilities with a resulting impact on the capital, operating costs, and
energy consumption in industries that can use the technology such as the
chemical, petro chemical and gas separation industries. The proposed center
plans to work on acid/gas separation using ion-exchange membranes and separation
of olefin isomers using novel transport membranes. It will also focus on
membrane fouling in liquid phase cross-filtration, modeling, and laboratory
studies for control of solvent-cast membrane morphology in gas separation
applications, etc. This Center is being cost-shared with the Separations and
Purification Program of the Division of Chemical and Thermal Systems (E.I.
Frances, Program Director). The Program Director recommends that the University
of Colorado, Boulder be awarded $60,000 per year for a five year continuing
grant. Near the end of each 12 month period the Program Manager and/or the
Director of the Engineering Center Division will review the progress of the
center on a number of criteria, including the following: (1) the extent to which
the university-industry interaction and collaboration is developing; (2) The
extent to which the support base is expanding; (3) the extent to which a robust
research program is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program
Director will recommend support of the next period of this continuing grant.