* 9103671
* PRF:  Cascading Tropic Interactions in Stream Benthic       Communities and the Application of Close-Range Remote       Sensing for Quantifying Algal Trophic Level Responses
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* SHARON DEWEY, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/31/1994
* USD 69,600.00

The proposed project represents a synthesis of classical ecological stream
research and the use of new applications of remote sensing to detect an
important ecological response variable, attached algae. A series of laboratory
experiments will be conducted where artificial stream pools with natural bottom
substrates will be manipulated to determine the effects of water depth, surface
reflectance, turbidity, and phytoplankton density on attached algal spectral
reflectance. Also, an in situ stream experiment will be conducted to determine
the effects of benthic complexity and nutrient availability on the cascading
trophic patterns, which controlled benthic algal biomass in the laboratory
experiments. Spectral reflectance from all experiments will be measured using a
narrow-band spectroradiometer and ground-truth samples will be taken for
periphyton chlorophyll content and pertinent water quality variables. Two
similar in situ stream experiments conducted by other researchers in different
geographic locations will be sampled in the same way. In collaboration with
remote sensing experts from the University of Kansas, University of Nebraska,
and Creighton University (NB), spectral reflectance data from this project will
be used to develop and refine a spectral reflectance model for periphyton in
streams.