* 9103061
* Research on Learning in Industrial Settings:  Persistence,  Turnover, and Transfer
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1991,06/30/1992
* Dennis Epple, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 06/30/1992
* USD 64,936.00

The presence of a learning curve has been documented in many industries. Yet
little is known about why learning occurs, whether it persists, and how to
transfer it. This award empirically investigates the persistence of learning
within organizations and the transfer of learning across organizations. The role
of turnover in learning and its persistence are also examined. The analyses are
based on records data collected from one firm in the aerospace industry
producing an advanced jet and from three plants of the same firm in the
automotive industry producing a light truck. The principal investigator will
estimate production functions with variables included to assess the importance
of persistence, transfer and labor turnover in affecting the efficiency of the
production process. In addition to testing whether learning persists, whether it
transfers, and whether turnover is related to the rate of learning, the research
aims to develop a theoretical model of learning in organizations that integrates
and explains the empirical findings. The research will advance scientific
knowledge about why learning occurs in organizations and whether it persists and
transfers. This information will enable organizations to improve their
productivity and hence, compete more effectively. The information will also lead
to improved forecasting.