* 9103383
* Development of a Triple-Axis Neutron Spectrometer at the    University of Missouri Research Reactor
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Constantine Stassis, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1994
* USD 225,000.00

Through this collaborative project between the University of Missouri-Columbia
and Iowa State University, the triple-axis neutron spectrometer at the
University of Missouri Research Reactor (MURR), will be replaced with a newer,
higher intensity (3X), triple-axis neutron spectrometer (Triax), and a double-
axis diffractometer having 1.8X the intensity of the present diffractometer.
Triax, now located at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, is owned by the Ames
Laboratory. Triax will allow use of a 4 inch high, vertically-focussing
monochromator crystal. The calculated flux on the sample will be competitive
with the H4M triple-axis instrument at HFBR reactor at Brookhaven National
Laboratory, and the BT4 machine at the NBSR reactor at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. Relocation of Triax will provide needed neutron
scattering capability at a working facility to a broad group of scientists in
the Mid-west region of the country, and will serve to train and educate
students. Triax will be available to outside users about thirty-percent of the
time. o Operation and maintenance will be provided by MURR. %%% Research efforts
which will benefit cover areas of materials and solid state physics including:
inelastic scattering in disordered systems; magnetic semiconductors; elastic
diffraction from metallic superlattices; spin density and charge density waves
in binary alloys and multilayers; magnetic, electric, and dynamic properties of
solids; and polarized neutron scattering experiments.