* 9103628
* Mathematical Sciences: Topological Properties of            Singularities and Nonlinear Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* James Damon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1994
* USD 101,200.00

In singularity theory, topological methods have come to play an important role,
both in the classification of singularities, as well as in determining the
properties of mappings. In turn, these topological properties can be used to
answer fundamental questions about nonlinear problems. Professor Damon has been
developing topological analogues of the infinitesimal methods of Mather for
answering questions about the topological classification of singularities. He
has also discovered that the methods used for these results are closely related
to quite different questions concerning the topology of discriminants and
symmetry breaking problems in bifurcation theory. He hopes to develop further
results for topological equivalence questions, to use recent developments to
explore topology of discriminants and symmetry breaking for compact Lie groups,
and to investigate the application of classification results for singularities
of solutions of differential equations. Singularity theory has obvious relevance
to other areas. Some of the most interesting solutions to systems of equations,
both ordinary and differential, are the singular ones. In applications, it is
often impossible to confine attention to the regular solutions to problems, and
knowledge about the nature of singularities and about symmetry breaking is
fraught with physical significance.