* 9103846
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Characterization of      Scorpion Venom Proteins
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Paul Fletcher, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 06/30/1995
* USD 9,900.00

This award will support a research collaboration between Professor Fletcher of
East Carolina University and Professor Lourival D. Possani of the Universidad
Nacional Autonoma de Mexico in Mexico City. The investigators intend to
specifically identify the receptor proteins in mammalian pancreas that are
targeted by scorpion venom toxic proteins to activate exocrine secretory
discharge. Identification will measure venom protein binding and localize the
receptors at the cellular level. The work is expected to lead to the isolation
and characterization of these receptors. The U.S. laboratory will supply the
Mexican laboratory with biotinylated and radiolabled scorpion venom proteins
while the Mexican laboratory will provide synthetic peptide analogs of the venom
proteins. Both laboratories will use scorpion venom supplied by the Buntanton
Institute in Brazil. Interest in exploring these venoms and their effect on the
pancreas is high because they share no features in common with proteins and
peptides previously described that are also known to act on the exocrine
pancreas. These studies seem to include that certain excitatory behavior,
usually associated with nerve and muscle cells, may also occur in epithelial
tissue and thus may increase our understanding of receptor-mediated secretory
activity of these tissues.