* 9103504
* ROW: A Chronological and Environmental Framework for the    Quantification of Preneomorphic Chemical Diagenesis of      Corals
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1992
* Karen Love, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1992
* USD 49,787.00

Researchers commonly have assumed that petrographically and mineralogically
pristine aragonitic fossils represent original chemical compositions which,
therefore, can be used to obtain paleoenvironmental information. However, a
recent study indicates that substantial chemical changes have occurred in
pristine- appearing, Holocene-age fossils prior to any aragonite/calcite
transformation. Given the occurrence of these chemical changes, information is
needed regarding both the chemical diagenetic effects of specific environments
and the chronologic progression of such chemical changes. To delineate the
chemical effects of a common diagenetic environment, to provide a detailed
chronologic framework for early diagenetic changes, and to characterize the
diagenetic integrity of various chemical species in aragonite, intraspecies
comparisons will be make of the stable isotopic and elemental compositions of
dated, wholly aragonitic Holocene corals that have been exposed only to the
submarine diagenetic environment. Coral samples already have been obtained from
submarine cores, taken off the coasts of St. Croix and Puerto Rico, providing a
unique opportunity to study a progressive record of the exposure of aragonite to
submarine conditions over the past 10,000 years. This detailed information
regarding progressive chemical changes in wholly aragonitic fossils will
contribute not only to the understanding of early chemical diagenesis, but will
provide critical information for improving the reliability of paleoenvironmental
interpretations based on the chemical compositions of fossils.