* 9103107
* Study of Relationships of Particle Morphology and Process   Parameters to the Physical Properties of Products in Powder Metallurgy, Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1991,07/31/1995
* P. Ramakrishnan, None
* Continuing grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 07/31/1995
* USD 82,333.00

Description: Under this project, Drs. John Beddow of the University of Iowa,
and P. Ramakrishnan of the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay (IITB) will
continue their cooperation in the study of powder metallurgy. The key objective
of this research is to seek to relate the characteristics of powder particles
that are used to form powder metallurgy and ceramic products to the structure
and properties of the sintered materials so produced under a variety of
processing conditions. Investigations will include new theories of particle
characterization and morphological analysis of particle size and shape on the
one hand and study of new theories of morphological texture analysis and new and
well-established methods of sintered material property measurement on the other.
Empirical, phenomological and theoretical correlations between powder and
sintered material will be developed and explored. Most of the experimental work
will be done at IITB, with the analysis and theoretical formulation done at IITB
and the U. of Iowa. Scope: The two scientists have been cooperating for a number
of years with a number of joint publications in various refereed journals and
presentations in U.S. and European conferences. The area of research can lead to
optimization of the methods used in recycling ferrous scrape, thus leading to
important savings in material and energy usage. Funding: The project is being
supported under two grants: INT 9103107 to the Indian Institute of Technology,
Bombay; INT 9106225 to the University of Iowa