* 9103153
* Surface-Mediated Electrophilic Additions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1994
* Paul Kropp, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 10/31/1994
* USD 204,000.00

A study will be made of the effect of silica gel- and alumina- mediated
electrophilic addition reactions to alkenes and alkynes. In order to obtain a
better understanding of the mechanistic features of this synthetically useful
technique, a systematic study of the interaction of organic substrates with
alumina and silica surfaces and the effects of those interactions on
electrophilic additions to the substrates will be made. Particular attention
will be given to delineating previously observed differences between alumina and
silica gel surfaces in mediating electrophilic addition reactions, including
differences in the steric demands of the active sites, and to developing
techniques for effecting selective addition to one double or triple bond in the
presence of another. A major study of the effects of polar substituents on
surface-mediated electrophilic additions to alkenes and alkynes will also be
undertaken, with special attention to directive effects of the substituents
which may induce chemo-, regio-, or stereoselective additions of hydrohalides,
halogens, water, hydrazoic acid, and hydrogen cyanide. %%% This grant from the
Organic Dynamics Program supports the research of Professor Paul J. Kropp at the
University of North Carolina. Preliminary studies by Dr. Kropp have shown that
surfaces of alumina and silica gel can dramatically affect the addition of
various compounds to double and triple carbon-carbon bonds. In the present
study, the intimate details of alumina and silica gel mediated addition
reactions will be investigated. The size of substituents bonded to double and
triple carbon-carbon bonds, as well as the electron density in these multiple
bonds, will be studied with regard to the possible courses that the addition
reaction may take. The results of these studies will lead to important
applications in synthetic methods for the preparation of organic molecules.