* 9103931
* Studies on the Scientific Revolution (History and Philosophyof Science): VPW
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Edith Sylla, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/28/1993
* USD 108,647.00

The traditional story of the Scientific Revolution of the seventeenth century
is currently undergoing extensive revision, with some arguing that the concept
of a scientific revolution in the seventeenth century should be abandoned
altogether. A study of the early work on mathematical probability theory of
Jacob Bernoulli, a professor at Basel, Switzerland, his nephew Nicolaus
Bernoulli, who taught at the University of Padua, and their relations to John
Bernoulli, Jacob's brother, who worked at Groningen, in Holland, can help to
shed a new perspective on seventeenth century scientific developments. The
largest part of the research will concern early mathematical probability theory
and its social context. There will also be consideration of proposed new
interpretations of what happened in seventeenth century science from the
feminist perspective. The project is expected to provide new insights about the
scientific revolution. It furthers VPW program objectives to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or engineering
through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas
through the investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host
campuses. In this project, the proposed activities which contribute to the
second objective include: teaching a course on the Scientific Revolution and/or
a course on the history of women in science, through which the investigator will
examine and test new feminist interpretations against the evidence; and
participating in the support activities of the Douglass Project for Rutgers
Women in Math, Science, and Engineering.