* 9103314
* Statistical Methods for Multilinear Models and Structured   Multivariate Responses (Statistics and Probability): VPW
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Sue Leurgans, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 09/30/1992
* USD 51,241.00

The investigator will develop statistical methods for testing for patterns in
multilinear models, methods applicable even when the parameters of the patterned
model cannot be identified. Statistical methodology for incorporating
nonparametric smoothing and covariates when several vectors are measured on each
subject will also be developed. Detailed real examples will be analyzed to
illustrate the methods and demonstrate their applicability. The fitting of a
low-rank model to a three-way data array containing noise is an active area of
research with important applications in chemometrics and psychometrics. The
project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to
advance their careers in science or engineering through research, and to
encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: actively participating in and giving lectures for the Biostatistics
Workshop (a joint enterprise between the Department of Statistics and the School
of Medicine which meets twice weekly during the Fall Quarter); giving lectures
on her research to the Statistics Department's faculty and graduate students as
part of a biweekly lecture series; participating in the Department's program of
collaborative research with active research scientists from around the
University; and meeting with undergraduate majors to discuss career
opportunities in Statistics.