* 9103471
* VPW:  Effect of Intraspecific Variation in Plant Quality    on the Population Structure of Herbivores (Population       Biology)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Sharon Strauss, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1994
* USD 136,159.00

The adaptation of populations to environmental change can occur at extremely
fine scales. Plants growing on heavy-metal soils can be genetically
differentiated from neighboring plants growing only meters away on normal soils.
Such genetic isolation is the result of strong selective pressures by metals in
the soil coupled with selection for reduced gene flow between plant populations
that span mine boundaries. In this proposal, it is asked whether the same
processes that have given rise to population differentiation in plants can also
cause differentiation in herbivore populations that use these plants. The
importance of herbivore mobility, feeding specialization and exposure to metals
to the presence or absence of local adaptation will be examined. Eight different
insect species (4 specialist feeders and 4 generalists feeders - with difference
dispersal abilities) that occur on plants both on and off mine tailings will be
selected. Egg progeny of female insects, from both mined and normal sites, will
be collected for each species. Eggs from these females will be split into two
batches: one batch will be placed on plants growing on heavy-metal soil while
the other will be placed on nearby plants growing on normal soils. Such
reciprocal transfer experiments will allow determination if progeny from insects
collected on metal soils fare better than progeny of insects collected from
normal soils on metal-contaminated plants. If this is the case, then local
adaptation has occurred. If herbivores capable of using metal-containing plants
are genetically-differentiated from those on nearby plant populations, then it
is possible that herbivore populations in general may exist as patches of
locally-adapted individuals that are responding to small scale changes in plant
quality. This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in science or engineering through research,
and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: teaching two courses, Evolutionary Ecology, and a seminar in the
History and Role of Women in Science; giving lectures on personal research in
the departmental Entomology and Plant Science seminar series; collaborating with
a phytochemist and evolutionary ecologist in the Entomology department.