* 9103842
* REU: What Regulates Assimilation of Inorganic Nitrogen by   Heterotrophic Bacteria vs. Phytoplankton in the Euphotic    Zone?
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1995
* USD 107,500.00

Although it is well known that both phytoplankton and heterotrophic
bacterioplankton assimilate ammonium in the euphotic zone, the controls on
bacterial uptake are unclear. Little is known about factors controlling the
great variation in relative ammonium uptake by bacterioplankton (10- 60% of
total ammonium uptake) and nothing about nitrate uptake by bacteria. Nitrogen
uptake by heterotrophic bacteria can greatly impact our understanding of new
versus regenerated production, which has emerged as an important variable in
global carbon and nitrogen models. In the subarctic Pacific, for example, about
50% of the new production can be explained by changes in nitrogen use by
heterotrophic bacteria. In order to understand dissolved inorganic nitrogen
uptake (DIN . which includes ammonium, nitrate, and nitrite), this research
project will examine uptake by both phytoplankton and bacteria in relationship
to biomass, biomass production, and dissolved organic matter uptake. Improved
methodologies will be utilized to examine algal and bacterial dissolved
inorganic nitrogen (DIN) uptake and the researchers will carry out the project
in collaboration with ongoing process oriented studies in Oregon coastal waters,
particularly the California Current system off Oregon. Previous results indicate
that an extensive range in nutrient concentrations, biomass, and production will
be encountered. As a result of this variation, the researchers expect to observe
and eventually understand changes in DIN uptake by bacteria and to provide
insight into how the activity of both bacteria and phytoplankton should be
incorporated into realistic models of nitrogen cycling and carbon cycling in the
euphotic zone.