* 9103543
* Electrochemical Processes Studied Ex-Situ with Ultrahigh    Vacuum Surface Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Eric Stuve, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 02/28/1995
* USD 254,000.00

By combining ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) surface analysis with electrochemistry, ex
situ studies offer a new, vastly detailed route for examining electrochemical
phenomena. This approach is applied to the study of methanol and formic acid
electrocatalysis on single crystal, metal electrodes. These reactions are
important in fuel-cell applications, but the lack of mechanistic understanding,
particularly of spontaneous poisoning, inhibits further development. This work
applies concepts from gas-phase heterogeneous catalysis to build a paradigm for
understanding electrocatalytic behavior. The mechanistic details of the
reactions, individually and in the presence of modifiers, are studied with a
combination of UHV and electrochemical cross-characterization experiments and
post-electrochemical analyses in UHV. The growth modes and surface chemistry of
metallic and nonmetallic modifiers are examined as well. The research directly
address the important issues that stand in the way of development of direct
methanol fuel cells. However, of perhaps equal importance to the advancement of
this important (because of energy resource limitations and environmental
considerations) technology is the development and refinement of the ex situ
methodology for the study of electrochemical systems, which could have a major
impact on industrial process work.