* 9103569
* Roles of Calcium Pulses, Waves and Gradients in Early         Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Lionel Jaffe, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 01/31/1995
* USD 270,000.00

Dr. Jaffe will continue to explore the roles of free cytosolic calcium pulses,
waves and gradients in the development of embryological pattern, in cytokinesis
as well as in fertilization. His broad purpose is to discover and describe
spatiotemporal calcium patterns which have been conserved in evolution and to
explore their developmental roles and mechanisms. His main method for
visualizing these patterns will be to inject chemiluminescent, calcium specific
proteins called aequorins. He will also use vibrating calcium specific
electrodes to explore patterns of calcium currents through cell surfaces. He
will continue this exploration in fucoid, ascidian, Xenopus and medaka eggs as
well as in some other systems. One of the main methods for modifying, and thus
for exploring the role of, these calcium patterns will be to suppress them by
injecting appropriate calcium buffers. Dr. Jaffe will also modify such patterns
via appropriate applications of calcium channel blockers and agonists as well as
calcium ionophores. This enterprise should prove to be of broad value in
understanding cell development because calcium ions are among a relatively small
class of small substances (like hydrogen ions, ATP, cyclic AMP, IP3, etc.) whose
intracellular patterns are central to the physiological control mechanisms
within cells.