* 9103288
* Structure and Dynamics of Chemisorption Through He Atom     Scattering on Crystalline Surfaces (Analytical and Surface  Chemistry):VPW
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/1992,02/28/1993
* M. Elizabeth Derrick, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 02/28/1993
* USD 96,700.00

The primary objective of the proposed research is to study the structure and
dynamics of chemisorption through He atom scattering on crystalline surfaces
using the relatively new experimental technique, He atom-surface spectroscopy
(HAS). Surfaces formed when a series of long-chained hydrocarbons, alkylthiols,
are chemisorbed onto a gold (111) surface are to be examined. The low energy He
atoms, since they do not react with or charge the surface, are the probe of
choice for these systems. An understanding of the structure and dynamics of the
surfaces to be studied has implications in many areas including catalysis,
models for biological interfaces and membranes, corrosion protection, and
adhesion problems. The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide
opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or engineering
through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas
through the investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host
campuses. In this project, the proposed activities which contribute to the
second objective include: organizing a Garvin Medalist Symposium series of
outstanding women chemists; serving as a guest lecturer in "Science, Technology,
and Society" course; and interacting with the HAS research group, an
interdisciplinary group, through daily research contact and formal seminar
presentations.