* 9103271
* Middle Class Lawyers:  The Transformation of Small Firm     Practice (Law and Social Science): VPW
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Carroll Seron, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1992
* USD 125,921.00

This project looks at the work of small-firm and solo legal practitioners as
they confront new opportunities to market and advertise services, incorporate
innovative ways to computerize offices, and respond to the entry of women into
the labor market. In various and complicated ways, each of these developments
captures essential themes of the late twentieth century and challenges
traditional professional practices. The ways in which these legal practitioners
describe and understand their life-style, values, aspirations, expectations, and
commitments provide an entry point for examining contemporary economic,
political, and social values of urban America. This effort addresses a
significant and little-studied issue in law and social science, how developments
in marketing, technology, and the participation of women in the law labor force
have affected small and solo practitioner firms. It furthers VPW program
objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in
science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women to pursue
careers in these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility as role
models on the host campuses. In this project, the proposed activities which
contribute to the second objective include: teaching a graduate course in the
sociology department, and giving seminars at the law school, sociology
department, and Center for the Study of Women.