* 9103302
* Spectral Analyses of Old Stellar Populations (Stars and     Stellar Evolution): VPW
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Ruth Peterson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 09/30/1992
* USD 102,956.00

This proposal is to calculate and apply theoretical stellar spectra to stars in
globular clusters in the Local Group, in order to quantify the metallicity
calibration and to investigate the occurrence of variations in the relative
abundances of light elements and in the mean stellar age. The work will be based
on models and spectra generated from the newly expanded line list of Kurucz,
which have reproduced both flux distributions and individual line strengths of
the Sun and the cool giant Arcturus in the solar neighborhood. The first stage
of the proposed work will be to calculate models and spectra for individual cool
giants in the Galactic globular clusters M4, M71, and 47 Tucanae; the open
cluster M67; and the Galactic bulge. The goal is to determine the overall
metallicity and the abundance ratio of the light elements oxygen, magnesium,
silicon, calcium, sodium, and aluminum with respect to iron, to show to what
extent explosive nucleosynthesis dominated the element production in various
environments and epochs. Following this, theoretical spectra will be completed
for hotter stars of various metallicities near that of the Sun, both with and
without light element enhancements. Combinations of these spectra appropriate to
clusters of different ages will then be compared to the observed integrated-
light spectra of globular clusters in Andromeda to simultaneously estimate the
iron and light-element abundances and the mean stellar age. The proposed
research represents "state of the art" work in stellar atmospheres and elemental
abundances, which could make substantial advances in our understanding of the
composition and evolution of the Galaxy, namely structure of stars and history
of the evolution of the elements. The project furthers VPW program objectives to
provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or
engineering through research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in
these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the
host campuses. In this effort, the proposed activities which contribute to the
second objective include: giving guest lectures on the real-life analyses of
stellar abundances in a graduate course on stellar atmospheres and presenting a
seminar on how telescope applications should be written.