* 9103985
* Diagenesis of Sandstones in Foreland and Piggy-back Basins, Northern Apennines
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Earle McBride, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1994
* USD 154,276.00

The northern Apennines, Italy, have excellent exposures of these two types of
basins in close proximity and is the type area of piggy-back basins. Rock type
and geometry; distribution of cements and pores with respect to bedding planes,
faults, and shales; sandstone/shale ratio; and burial and tectonic history are
major features that will be compared. Diagenetic features will be studied using
polarized light, scanning electron microscopy, cathodoluminescence, electron
probe microanalysis, fluid inclusions, stable isotope geochemistry, heavy
mineral composition, vitrinite reflectance, apatite fission-track data in
addition to outcrop relations. The purpose of this project is to compare and
contrast cementation and other diagenetic aspects of age-equivalent sandstones
from two different types of sedimentary basins, piggy- back and foreland, in
order to isolate causes and effects and to identify the relative importance of
the many variables controlling diagenesis. Understanding sandstone diagenesis in
sedimentary basins has an important applied use in assessing hydrocarbon and
water reservoir quality of sandstones and in assessing the role of rock-water
interactions in sandstones used for toxic waste disposal. Understanding
diagenesis in sandstones also is essential to interpreting the post-depositional
history of sandstones, the sources and sinks of chemical components, and
interpreting the provenance of sandstones. This is a cooperative study involving
four Italian sedimentary geologists (Universities of Modena and Bologna) and
four sedimentary geologists from the University of Texas at Austin. The reasons
for doing the study in the northern Apennines are: 1) there are excellent
exposures of coeval rocks deposited in two different types of basins in a small
geographic area (200 x 150 km), 2) the stratigraphy and sedimentology of the
rocks and structural history are known, and 3) opportunity for international
cooperation on a project for which the Italian team has obtained support.