* 9103560
* Mathematical Sciences: Shock Stability in Systems that      Change Type
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Barbara Keyfitz, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1993
* USD 5,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will continue her important work on
the well-posedness of systems of partial differential equations that can change
type. Such systems have solutions of shock-wave type that serve as mechanisms
for the propoagation of waves, even in parts of the domain where the system is
no longer hyperbolic. These types of problems occur in the transonic flow of
gases and in the flow of multi-phase fluids through porous media. In particular,
the principal investigator will study the stability of shock waves in systems of
equations that undergo changes from hyperbolic to elliptic type using
regularization and perturbation methods. The behavior of fluids (liquids and
gases) under unusual conditions such as in the upper atmosphere or in the earth
is governed by a complicated system of partial differential equations that can
under go what is called a "change of type". Basically this means that the system
has solutions of different kinds in different parts of the domain. As an
illustration, think of the behavior of a seismic wave generated inside the earth
by a earthquake. The wave passes through regions that are in liquid, solid or
composite states. In this project the principal investigator will examine
certain solutions of a system of model equations that exhibit change-of-type
behavior that are known as "shock waves". The study of shock waves arises in
such technologically important areas as transonic flow and flow through porous
media.