* 9103833
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Partial Differential     Equations &amp; Several Complex Variables
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Francois Treves, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1994
* USD 10,560.00

This award supports cooperative research on partial differ- ential equations and
complex variables between Dr. Francois Treves of Rutgers University and Dr. P.
D. Cordaro of the University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. The work will
investigate the existence of local solutions in the differ- ential complexes
originating from commuting systems of complex vector fields (on a smooth real
manifold). Recently Cordaro and Treves have obtained general necessary
conditions, at least when the rank of the characteristic set is . 1. Cordaro
&amp; Treves are currently investigating the possibility of proving sufficient
conditions, in particular in the important case of Cauchy-Riemann structures.
There is a natural conjecture that awaits proof, in the case of top-degree
forms: local solvability ought to hold if the Levi form is not definite
(positive or negative) at any point. This type of result is an essential part of
the completion of the theory of hypo-analytic structures that has been building
for the last ten years, through the efforts of Treves and his collaborators. The
award will allow Cordaro &amp; Treves to get together at regular intervals to
work on this project. Cordaro has funds from CNPq NSF's corresponding agency in
Brazil to visit Rutgers University. Treves and a graduate student will visit Sao
Paulo in return.