* 9103955
* Stability And Performance Of Human-Machine Interaction In   Telerobotics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Homayoon Kazerooni, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* MARY E EBBOTT
* 08/31/1994
* USD 170,026.00

This research introduces a new control architecture for master- slave
telerobotic systems. Common architectures used in telerobotics are the "position
error architecture" and the "forward flow architecture." The proposed
architecture extends these two architectures. It utilizes the exchange of power
and information signals between a master robot, which controls a slave robot,
and the human arm that is in physical contact with the master. The human wears
the master robot, so power transfer is unavoidable and information signals from
the human help to control the machine. Local force feedback at the master can
increase the apparent sensitivity of the master to human input commands. In the
present case, force information is communicated in both directions. Balance is
maintained between the stability requirements of the master and the requirements
for human control. Master motion is partially due to the transfer of human power
and partially due to the command generated by the controller computer. The
design of the controller is based on dynamic models of the human arm and the
environment. The human arm dynamic behavior is modeled as a functional
relationship between a set of input and outputs. The internal structures and
operations of the model components are implicitly accounted for. An estimator
creates the human arm dynamic model using a learning model. It accepts
information using human electromyograph (EMG) signals, arm orientations and
contact forces. Dynamic behavior of the database of experimentally verified
human arm (EMG) impedances for regions of arm orientation is used to arrive at a
time-varying, human sensitivity function. A learning model accounts for non-
calibrated regions. The learning model uses a measure of the EMG signals (time
or frequency domain) as a index to derive human impedance as a function of a
cognitive command. Changes in system performance and system stability will be
investigated experimentally as a function of changes in the human and the
environmental load dynamics. The results will be compared to similar results
obtained when telepresence governs the system performance. The architecture
allows convenient mapping of variables into telerobotic design specifications.
This research advances a knowledge-based methodology and will lead to an
understanding of the role of human dynamics and constraints in the control of
telerobotic systems and in other types of human-computer interactions.