* 9103607
* The Physical Properties of Cold Gas in External Galaxies    (Extragalactic Astronomy)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Linda Tacconi, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 12/31/1993
* USD 77,004.00

This project will focus on the distributions and physical properties of
molecular and atomic clouds in galaxies and their relations to star formation.
The molecular clouds are traced by millimeter wave emission from carbon
monoxide, and the atomic gas is seen via 21-cm radiation from neutral hydrogen
(HI). The distributions of star forming regions will be determined by
observations of ionized hydrogen. This research will address the specific
problems of: (1) the effects of spiral density waves on the molecular clouds and
the local star formation efficiency; (2) the physical properties of the
molecular gas in the nuclei and disks of late-type galaxies; (3) the evolution
origin of the interstellar medium in lenticular galaxies; and (4) the role of HI
in molecular cloud shielding within dwarf irregular galaxies. This work will
lead to an improved understanding of the global and local processes which
regulate the star formation histories of galaxies. The project also furthers VPW
program objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their careers
in science or engineering through research, and to encourage other women to
pursue careers in these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility as
role models on the host campuses. In this project, the proposed activities which
contribute to the second objective include: leading an advanced topics seminar
on radio astronomy; teaching, "Galaxies and Cosmology", an astrophysics course
for junior and senior physics majors; involving at least one student per
semester in some aspect of the research; teaching Introductory Physics
laboratories; and delivering general colloquia.