* 9103097
* Structural Biology and Synchrotron Radiation:  Assesment of Resources and Needs
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1990,05/31/1992
* Janet Smith, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 05/31/1992
* USD 23,544.00

Structural biologists have been triggered to evaluate their current and future
needs for synchrotron radiation by construction of new facilities at Argonne and
at Berkeley. At a time when major requests will be submitted for funding of new
instrumentation, it has become apparent that scant documentation exists on
either the current or future needs of the structural biology community for
synchrotron radiation. The Structural Biology Synchrotron Users Organization
proposes to conduct an intensive, two-day workshop in order to document and
assess these resources and needs and to advise the National Science Foundation
in its role as sponsor of structural biology research. The proposed study group
would 1) analyze data gathered from synchrotron users and synchrotron facilities
that describe current resources and needs; 2) evaluate how scientific
developments in the fields of genetic engineering, low-angle scattering, X-ray
spectroscopy, x-ray microscopy, crystallography, computational technology, and
instrument development affect structural biology today; 3) project future demand
and capabilities; and 4) produce a document detailing these findings. The
document, reviewed by major scientists in these fields, would be available to
funding organizations, government bodies and the scientific community to
facilitate planning for the future.