* 9103575
* Mathematical Sciences: A Neural Network, Modeled by a       Nonlinear Dynamical System
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Virginia Noonburg, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/1994
* USD 25,500.00

This project studies the properties of a continuous neural network that has
already been shown to successfully solve certain problems in pattern
classification. The mathematical model for this network was derived using only
the most basic assumptions; namely, that a neural network is a collection of
interacting elements, each one affected positively or negatively by some subset
of the others, and such that the system as a whole is capable of adapting its
behavior over time. The resulting mathematical model is an autonomous system of
ordinary differential equations, and can therefore be analyzed by known analytic
and numerical techniques. For appropriate values of the parameters it can be
shown that an N-cell network will have N stable attractors. One of the major
goals of this project is the determination of the attractive basins of these
attractors and a description of their dependence on the various system
parameters. This information will then be used to determine the properties of a
neural network having these N-cell networks as components. Neural networks are
currently being applied to certain kinds of problems that have not yielded to
traditional techniques of artificial intelligence, for example speech
recognition and computer vision. As yet, there is no general agreement on which
neural network architectures work best. It is possible that hybrid systems,
consisting of interconnected components with different architectures, may be one
solution. It is in this spirit that the network proposed here is being studied.
It has some useful properties not possessed by other networks; for example, it
automatically identifies the component of an input vector that is most distinct
from all of the others, whether it is smaller or larger. As one of the few
models in which the weights vary continuously in time as a function of the
activity levels, it has in these weights a built-in short-term memory
capability. A careful comparison of this model with other neural networks in
current use needs to be made, to determine whether it has properties that make
it significantly better in particular applications.