* 9103277
* Experimental Investigations of the Thermodynamics and       Pinning in the Charge-Density Wave System Potassium-        Molybdate
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1991,01/17/1992
* Stuart Brown, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/17/1992
* USD 30,500.00

This research is concerned with unresolved fundamental problems associated with
the charge-density-wave (CDW) transition, namely the nature and effects of
fluctuations in the neighborhood of the CDW transition and secondly the nature
of the very weak impurity interactions with the CDW. The role of phonon entropy
on the thermodynamics of the CDW transition will be studied. Improved specific
heat, elastic, and magnetization measurements will permit a more careful
confirmation of scaling laws. A novel resonant ultrasonic method will be used
for simultaneous evaluation of all components of the elastic modulus tensor as a
function of temperature. Presently, thermodynamic measurements do not yet
confirm the criticality temperature range shown by x-ray diffraction.
Susceptibility measurements will be attempted to further explore the validity of
the scaling laws. It is hoped to provide experimental evidence on the influence
of fluctuations on charge and heat transport and to compare these results with
thermodynamic quantities. A second portion of the research is concerned with the
synthesis of patassium molybdate with isotopic substitution on the oxygen (0)
site with the obtainment of well controlled ratios of 180/160 or 170/160. Both
transport and nuclear magnetic resonance measurements will be undertaken to
obtain evidence on the pinning of the CDW. A search for the effects of the
isotopic substitution on the CDW phase transition will be made. This will be the
first attempt to explore isotopic effects on CDW systems.