* 9103043
* Workshop on Visual Database Systems for the Marine Sciences,San Francisco, California
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1993
* Welton Lee, W L Lee & Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Arzberger
* 03/31/1993
* USD 16,692.00

A workshop is proposed to investigate the potential application of visual
database systems to research in marine biology. Visual database systems link
relational databases with extensive video or image libraries. Such systems can
be used to construct a generic resource of combined factual and visual
information about marine organisms and about their environments. Such a resource
could support a range of research, environmental assessment, and educational
applications in the marine sciences. At this time there is a logistics crisis in
the management of visual information relating to taxonomic work needed to
support marine research. Much visual information has already been collected, but
is essentially inaccessible. The amount collected by various automated and
remotely operated vehicles is increasing. Furthermore, it is getting
increasingly difficult to process existing and new collected material.
Prototypes have shown the technical capabilities of visual database systems meet
perceived needs in the marine sciences. A window of opportunity currently exists
to use visual database systems to deal with the above problems. Decisions have
to be made about the visual database system features which will result in the
"best conomically possible format" allowing transfer of information between user
sites, about the priorities of development, and the logistics of continued
maintenance. Input from potential users of such systems will allow development
of a comprehensive resource and workstation delivery environment to be guided by
immediate and future application criteria.