* 9103551
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Analysis of Reactive    Multi-Phase Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Pedro Embid, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/1993
* USD 20,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will employ analytical and numerical
methods to study the behavior of solutions of the system of partial differential
equations that describes combustion phenomena in a reactive multi-phase flow. In
particular, he will look at the following three inter-related problems for
reactive multi-phase flows: the transition to detonation, the structure of
detonation waves, and the modelling of phenomena at low Mach number,i.e.,
subsonic flow. A substantial part of the project involves replacing the complex
set of equations with simpler, asymptotic versions whose solutions still retain
the essential physics of the phenomena. The goal is to increase our
understanding of the complex physics that governs the formation and evolution of
flames in combustible granular flows. Combustion phenomena form a visible and
important part of everyday life. Understanding the complex physical and chemical
processes that occur when liquids and gases burn is therefore of interest to a
host of scientists and engineers. Much of the work on combustion phenomena today
is experimental and/or numerical, but the complexity of the problems often
defeats even the largest supercomputer. And experiments at high temperatures are
often too difficult or too expensive to perform. In this project the principal
investigator will use asymptotic methods to simplify the complicated set of
nonlinear equations that governs combustion in gases. He will then analyze this
simpler set of equations in order to develop a better understanding of the
propagation of flames in a granular flow.