* 9103354
* Surface Electrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/1991,05/31/1993
* Arthur Hubbard, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Henry N. Blount, III
* 05/31/1993
* USD 329,000.00

The surface structure, composition and molecular characteristics of electrode
surfaces will be investigated using a range of powerful surface science methods.
In addition to the widely used methods of Auger electron spectroscopy, low
energy electron diffraction (LEED), Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopy
(FTIR) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), the new method of angular
distribution Auger mapping (ADAM) will be employed. This experiment obtains the
intensity information over a wide range of angles of emission using a unique
apparatus. ADAM has the promise to provide important spatial information about
electrode surfaces. Systems to be studied include the effects of immersion of
electrodes into ionic solution; the electrodeposition of metals, alloys and
chemical compounds; anodization and electrodissolution; electrosorption of
organic molecules; and chemical vapor treatment at atmospheric pressure. %%% The
research, in the general area of Analytical and Surface Chemistry, focuses on
the use of surface science to investigate electrochemical problems. The work
promises to lead to an enhanced understanding of the chemical and
electrochemical reactivity of electrode surfaces. This understanding is
necessary to properly utilize electrochemistry in many practical applications
such as catalysis and corrosion.