* 9103739
* Continued Water Tunnel Studies with Tuna at Kewalo Basin,   Hawaii
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Robert Shadwick, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1996
* USD 228,815.00

Preliminary studies have demonstrated the feasibility and experimental utility
of studying the swimming of skipjack and yellowfin tunas using a large water
tunnel located at the National Marine Fisheries Service Laboratory in Hawaii.
This project will conduct a detailed study of the numerous and diverse swimming
specializations of these powerful and exquisitely designed fishes. Specifically,
the investigators will: i) carry out measurements of tuna swimming metabolic
rate and thus describe their locomotion energetics, ii) monitor aspects of tuna
in vivo swimming physiology and thereby determine how these fishes regulate and
sustain their aerobic metabolism, and iii) examine various aspects of the tuna's
swimming kinematics and specialized locomotor anatomy and the augmentation of
swimming mechanics and efficiency. This investigation will provide the first
direct measurements on tunas, swimming at controlled speeds, of variables
ranging from swimming metabolism in relation to body size, swimming
cardiovascular physiology as determined by blood pressures, heart rate,
arterial-venous O2 differences, and calculation (by Fick) of cardiac output and
stoke volume. These studies will also provide the first controlled speed
analyses of tuna swimming kinematics and biomechanics, including caudal force
and thrust generation, and surface-flow visualization.