* 9103501
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* NONE NONE, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/1993
* USD 8,755.00

Much of the research and public policy attention on urban poverty is directed
at the "urban underclass." In addition to unemployed, minority, inner-city
females heading their own families, the urban underclass also includes many
women who work for wages. These women are employed in dead-end, female-dominated
occupations and are no more financially secure than they would be if they
received welfare payments. This doctoral dissertation project will explore the
strategies that low- income women have developed to ensure the health, safety,
and shelter of themselves and their families without relying on welfare.
Specifically, the research will focus on the place-specific nature of the
personal contacts that link African-American, Puerto Rican, and Vietnamese women
to jobs, child care, and housing. Intensive personal interviews and a survey
questionnaire will be used to investigate the ways that personal networks enable
and constrain women in their quests to provide for themselves and their
families. Analysis of the spatial dimensions of women's social networks will
illuminate the relationship between the nature of these networks and the job,
housing, and child-care opportunities available to these women. By focusing
explicitly on the spatial dimensions and the place- based nature of personal
contacts, this project will provide valuable information about the degree to
which women are constrained locationally, and it will assess the impacts of
these spatial constraints on their economic survival. This project also will
provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to
develop independent research skills.