* 9103917
* New Transition Metal Mediated Carbon-Carbon Bond Forming    Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Joseph Gajewski, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 01/31/1994
* USD 100,000.00

Dr. Stryker will focus his studies on developing new carbon-carbon bond making
reactions using transition metal organometallic complexes which permit the
regioselective addition of nucleophilic reagents to the central carbon of
certain eta-3-allyl complexes. Thus, the regioselectivity normally observed in
such nucleophilic additions will be reversed along with an inversion of the
natural electron demand shown by allylic electrophiles. The resulting
metallacyclobutane complexes represent an important organometallic structural
class. The PI will study the mechanism of the reaction by probing the nature of
the metal, its oxidation state, coordination geometry, the ancillary ligand set
and the nucleophile. Manipulation of alkylative metallacyclobutane formation is
anticipated to lead to the development of useful organic synthetic methodology.
%%% With this award the Synthetic Organic Program will support the research of
Dr. Jeffrey M. Stryker of the Department of Chemistry at Indiana University. The
research will focus on developing new methods of carbon-carbon bond formation
using transition metal organometallic compounds to synthesize derivatives of
cyclobutane. The project is expected to provide a deeper understanding of how
such reactions occur as well as new organic synthetic methodology.