* 9103733
* Isolation of Arabidopsis Genes by Phenotype Rescue of       Seedling Transformants.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Robert Ludwig, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1993
* USD 100,000.00

We have constructed a transformation-competent, Arabidopsis ecotype Columbia
strain GH50 nuclear genomic library in Agrobacterium host strain AGL1 and cosmid
vector pLZO3, both specially engineered for these purposes. This genomic library
comprises some 22,000 random clones gridded onto 225 96-well microtiter dishes
and, if random, carries some five Arabidopsis genomic equivalents. Arabidopsis
strain GH50 carries a dominant acetolactate synthase (als) allele conferring
chlorsulfuron resistance. We shall develop high efficiency Arabidopsis whole-
plant DNA transformation of newly germinated seedlings as a tool for gene
rescue. By a "successive approximation" method, we shall conduct seedling
transformation so as to be able to infer individual clones in the genomic
library giving rise to transformants. We shall use the transformation- competent
Arabidopsis GH50 genomic library constructed in Agrobacterium to rescue the
ahs1-1 allele conferring resistance to the sulfonylurea herbicide chlorsulfuron.
If successfully developed, this technology will allow the expeditions isolation
of genes central to plant growth and development. This gene rescue technology
will allow us to efficiency integrate Arabidopsis physical genomic and genetic
maps.***//