* 9103647
* Interaction between Low-Frequency Waves and High Frequency  Eddies
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Huug van den Dool, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 12/31/1994
* USD 215,500.00

The time-averaged (climatological) extra-tropical atmospheric flow shows a
definite spatial arrangement of areas of locally maximum variance ("storm
tracks") located east of equatorward extending meanders (pressure trough) in the
climatological jet-stream. Van den Dool and Cai propose to study the temporal
variations of the flow which underlie this climatic feature. They posit a
complementary inter-relationship between slowly-varying ("low frequency")
planetary-scale waves and rapidly changing ("high-frequency") synoptic scale
eddies. This would suggest that there exist traveling storm track regions
downstream of traveling low-frequency waves, which are obscured in the time
average. In fact, they report on a pilot study which demonstrates the existence
of such regions in the mid- troposphere. They used a novel analysis technique,
which records high-frequency activity in a frame which follows an identifiable
feature of the low-frequency flow as it travels about the mid- latitudes. Having
demonstrated the existence of traveling storm tracks, they now propose extended
analyses to elucidate the three-dimensional structures of both the low-frequency
and high- frequency features as seen in this moving ("phase-transformed") frame,
and the symbiotic relationship between them. The results of the proposed study
will form the basis of future attempts to extend detailed day-to-day weather
forecasts out to ranges that exceed a week.