* 9103860
* Chemotaxis to aromatic acids by Gram-negative bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Caroline Harwood, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1994
* USD 108,000.00

Aromatic compounds are abundant in the biosphere as a major polymeric component
of plants (lignin) and as toxic by-products of human industrial activities.
Although a reasonable amount is known about how aromatics are degraded by
bacteria, not much is known about how bacteria detect the presence of aromatic
compounds in the environment. Several genera of motile bacteria, including
Pseudomonas, have a strong behavioral attraction to aromatic compounds. This
project will study the mechanistic basis for chemotaxis to the aromatic acid,
benzoate, by Pseudomonas putida. Our intent is to understand how the receptor
that detects these aromatic acids functions and to elucidate the relationship
between attractant recognition and biodegradation. Genetic and biochemical
experiments are planned to identify the genes necessary for specific behavioral
responses to benzoate, and to express and characterize the proteins encoded by
these genes. The regulation of the chemotaxis genes and of selected benzoate
degradation genes will also be analyzed, with a particular focus on defining DNA
sequences and regulatory proteins that are required for gene expression. Since
chemotaxis is an important prelude to metabolism, the proposed work could lead
to the development of improved strategies for the biodegradation of selected
toxic compounds. The receptor protein for benzoate may also have distinctive
structural characteristics.