* 9103680
* PRF: Algal Community Responses to Landscape Disturbance and Nutrient Dynamics along Land-Inland Water Ecotones
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Heath Carney, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Margaret Palmer
* 07/31/1993
* USD 34,800.00

The principal objective of the proposed research is to describe and explain how
community composition and nutrient limitation of aquatic primary producers
(especially algae) are influenced by land use and ecotonal complexity in the
Andean Altiplano. The four large-scale nutrient flux treatments to be compared
are: ancient raised fields currently under rehabilitation vs. flat pastures and
fields (now more common), and complex littoral ecotones (shallow slopes) vs.
simple ecotones (steeply sloping shorelines). Several hypotheses derived from
the "big perturbation" of anthropogenic land-use changes are constructed as
tests. Field sampling and measurements will take place in stream surface water
between agricultural fields and the lake, and in nearshore zones of several
drainage systems. Analyses will be primarily for the major forms of nitrogen and
phosphorus, bioassay studies of nutrient limitation, and aquatic biological
responses. Thus, nutrient-algal relations will be tested with both large-scale
landscape treatments and more controlled bioassay experiments. These studies
will be coordinated with ongoing field investigations by other scientists of:
nutrient dynamics in agricultural fields, remote sensing and GIS-based modeling
of land-water interactions, and archeological and paleolimnological studies of
land use history.