* 9103965
* Conference on Photosynthetic Responses to the Environment,  August 25-27, 1992, Kona, Hawaii
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1993
* Harry Yamamoto, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 03/31/1993
* USD 7,000.00

The proposed conference will be held in Kona, Hawaii from August 25-27, 1992 as
a satelite meeting to the IX International Congress on Photosynthesis which
meets the following week in Nagoya, Japan. CO2 in the atmosphere has been
increasing steadily primarily from increasing human activities. If this trend
continues, the concern is that global warming through the so-called "greenhouse
effect" will occur and result in severe environment changes. There is also
concern over depletion of the ozone layer and the resulting increased exposure
to potentially harmful UV-B radiation. The effects of these and other
environmental factors on photosynthetic capacity and the ability of plants,
globally to withstand or reverse these trends are of considerable importance to
mankind. The problem is obviously large and complex. Yet, fundamental mechanisms
in photosynthesis offer a way to evaluate the processes that largely contribute
to the ability of plants to successfully respond to environmental change. The
purpose of the proposed conference is to provide a much-needed interdisciplinary
forum on how photosynthesis relates to this problem. Three dimensions will be
examined: (1) the underlying physiology of photosynthesis, (2) comparison of
terrestial and marine/aquatic systems, and (3) global responses. This meeting of
interdisciplinary groups should stimulate new insights, reveal new research
opportunities, both disciplinary and interdisciplinary, and open new
opportunities for collaborative research. These outcomes are especially
important for researchers early in their careers.