* 9104280
* Molecular Analysis of Terminal Oxidases from N2-fixing      Azotobacter vinelandii
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1993
* Robert Maier, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Robert Uffen
* 03/31/1993
* USD 78,500.00

Biological nitrogen fixation catalyzed by the procaryotic enzyme nitrogenase is
essential for a positive input of N on Earth. The N2-fixing bacterium
Azotobacter vinelandii contains two terminal oxidases responsible for aerobic
O2-consuming respiration. One of the oxidases (cytochrome o) is coupled to ATP
production, but the other oxidase (cytochrome b/d) complex) appears not to be
coupled to energy generation. The latter vigorously O2-consuming oxidase is
thought to be important in removing O2 so that the O2-labile nitrogenase enzyme
can function. The specific roles of each of these oxidases in respiratory
protection of nitrogenase and respiratory metabolism of the bacterium are not
well-understood. It is proposed to compare structural gene mutants in the
terminal oxidase cytochrome b/d and cytochrome o with the wild type in many
parameters associated with N2 fixation respiration. Also the cyt b/d complex
will be purified and reconstituted into lipid vesicles to directly measure its
ability to generate an electrochemical proton gradient (energy-generating
ability). Assuming lack of electrochemical gradient formation by the purified
cyt b/d complex in membranes, we will then characterize the pertinent structural
features that span the periplasmic and cytoplasmic portions of the membrane, and
responsible for differences in the uncoupled (non energy generating) terminal
oxidase of A. vinelandii in comparison with the well-characterized energy-
coupled cyt b/d oxidase of E. coli. The transcriptional regulation of these two
terminal oxidase complexes, especially their regulation in response to N and O2
levels will be addressed. The results are expected to enhance our knowledge of
the diversity and flexibility of bacterial respiratory metabolism and
specifically on respiratory metabolism in conjunction with N2 fixation.