* 9104794
* NMR Studies of Alpha-Bungarotoxin-Acetylcholine Receptor    Peptide Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Vladimir Basus, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1995
* USD 267,000.00

The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is found at neuromuscular junctions, where
its function is to depolarize muscle cells at the postsynaptic membrane,
triggering muscle contraction. Depolarization occurs by channel opening, induced
by the binding of acetylcholine, to allow the passage of small cations.
Neurotoxins inhibit the binding of acetylcholine, by binding a large portion of
the acetylcholine receptor -subunit, blocking at least part of the acetylcholine
binding site. The best structure for the receptor is at the low resolution level
of 22 A, using a combination of electron microscopy and x-ray diffraction data.
NMR spectroscopy for this large membrane bound complex is clearly beyond current
technological capabilities. However, peptides corresponding to the portion of
the receptor near the acetylcholine binding site have been found to bind -
bungarotoxin with about the same affinity as the entire - subunit binds this
neurotoxin. It is proposed here to determine the structure of these peptides
bound to -bungarotoxin, using two and three-dimensional NMR spectroscopy,
including heteronuclear techniques with selective isotopic labeling. This will
allow for the first time the details of the interactions between a portion of
the acetylcholine receptor containing the major determinant of the neurotoxin
binding site, and at least part of the acetylcholine binding site to be
determined. By studying complexes formed with different peptides the relative
importance of specific binding interactions between - bungarotoxin and the
acetylcholine receptor, will be clarified. This will contribute to the general
knowledge of non-covalent interactions between proteins.