* 9104786
* Instrumentation, Practice, and Observation: The Making and  Use of Visual Records in American Astrophysics, 1860-1914
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Alex Pang, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Michael M. Sokal
* 01/31/1993
* USD 28,000.00

Working with Dr. Timothy Lenoir of Stanford University, Dr. Pang is examining
the production and reproduction of visual records in 19th century American
astrophysics. Large telescopes, cameras, and spectrographs were highly promising
technologies to 19th century astrophysicists, but they were difficult to use,
and the images hard to produce, replicate, and analyze. Dr. Pang is studying how
those problems and opportunities were dealt with, and how they changed
astrophysical research. Dr. Pang is beginning his research by examining how the
technologies affected the work and workplaces of astronomers. New telescope
systems, consisting of larger optics, accurate tracking mechanisms, and
photographic technology, created opportunities for new research programs.
However, the new technical skills and training they required reshaped the craft
of observing, and created a need for specialists to analyze and reduce large
masses of data. He is then examining how printing technologies--engraving,
lithography, etc.--defined what images astronomers could reproduce and share
with their colleagues in journals and personal communications. He is also
examining how the new images were used in long-distance collaborative research.
Finally, he is examining why large telescopes and photography did not displace
drawing and direct observation in a few research areas. By taking this systemic
view, and examining the entire range of work required to produce, share, and use
visual records--by moving from the telescope, to the analysis room, to the
printer's shop, to the scientific journal and private letter--Dr. Pang will show
how the production of visual records changed the practice of astrophysical
observation and the making of astrophysical knowledge.