* 9104009
* NATO Advanced Research Workshop on  Academic Industry-      Relations Conference; Aquafredda di Maratea, Italy          August 31-Sept 6, 1991.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,08/01/1992
* Herbert Fusfeld, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Blanpied
* 08/01/1992
* USD 0.00

This award was made to support the foreign travel costs of eight U.S.resarchers
to attend a NATO Advanced Research Workshop (ARW) in Acquafredda, Italy. The
topic of the workshop is "Academic-Industry Relations." The P.I., Dr. Henry
Etzkowitz, is responsible for organizing attendance at and participation in the
workshop by top American researchers in this field. The aims of the ARW are to
exchange information and stimulate new research in the areas of: organizational
innovations in academic-industry R&amp;D alignments; science and industrial
policy intersections in regional, newly industrializing, and post-socialist
contexts; and development of broadly accesible data bases for comparative
research. The value of the workshop, which brings together researchers from all
around the world, is to bring a large body of existing research results and
knowledge to the attention of the most pre-eminent investigators in the field of
academic- industry research relations, revealing the possibilities for combining
their efforts synergistically. A great deal is already known, through
experientially-based surveys and through structured, theory-based research
studies, about how innovation occurs and knowledge is transmitted in academic-
industry research interactions. However, this body of knowledge has yet to be
organized and, to the extent feasible, codified in ways that would make it
widely and easily accessible to the S&amp;T community, both for implementation
and further research. Benefits to the U.S. will be in the form of gaining
knowledge of competing, and different, approaches to university-industry
partnerships.