* 9104195
* Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Norm Inequalities and       Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Richard Wheeden, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1994
* USD 75,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will continue his study of questions
related to weighted norm inequalities for integral and differential operators.
Specifically he will focus upon weighted norm inequalities for Poisson
integrals, fractional integrals, Hilbert transforms, and elliptic and parabolic
operators. This theoretical work is applicable to (and motivated by) the
following problems: the derivation of sharp estimates for the fundamental
solutions of degenerate parabolic equations, the estimation of the distribution
of eigenvalues of various operators, and the elucidation of the continuity
properties of solutions of integral and differential equations. Much of what
mathematicians call "analysis" involves deriving and applying "a'priori"
estimates on the solutions of integral and differential equations. An a'priori
estimate esentially provides a mathematician with information about a solution
that is contained in the equation itself, and its derivation does not require a
detailed knowledge of the putative solution. As an illustration, solutions of
certain types of boundary value problems for elliptic equations satisfy an
a'priori estimate of the following type; namely, the solution is bounded from
above (below) by the largest (smallest) value of the boundary values. In this
project the principal investigator will use what are called "norm inequalities"
to derive sharp a'priori estimates on the solutions of various integral and
differential equations.