* 9104297
* Assembly and Function of the Cofactors of Fumarate          Reductase from Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1991,12/31/1997
* Brian Ackrell, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1997
* USD 290,000.00

The proposed project is a direct continuation of studies conducted under NSF
project DMB 8715560, building on and exploiting findings in that investigation.
Fumarate reductase from Escherichia coli will be used as a model system for
studies on assembly and function of protein prosthetic groups. This enzyme
complex is particularly well suited for these studies in that it is easily
genetically manipulated, the complex is stable and can be amplified to high
levels for isolation and analysis, and it is similar in structure and function
to succinate dehydrogenase which is a key component of the mitochondrial
electron transport chain. In particular the investigations will provide
information on assembly and function of covalently bound flavins, the different
iron-sulfur clusters of the enzyme (?2Fe-2S!, ?4Fe-4S!, ?3Fe-4S!) and the sites
in the membrane-intrinsic domain that interact with quinones. The approaches of
biochemistry, molecular biology, and biophysics will be used to investigate
these questions. Site-directed mutagenesis of specific amino acid residues will
be performed and the resulting mutant enzyme complexes analyzed for enzymatic
function, and assembly of iron-sulfur clusters will be monitored by a
combination of EPR, magnetic CD, ENDOR, and Mossbauer spectroscopies. This
research will contribute to our understanding of how complex flavoprotein
oxidoreductases assemble into functional membrane protein complexes and thus
help elucidate the path of electron transport through such proteins.