* 9104600
* Analysis of virB genes in Agrobacterium T-DNA transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1991,04/30/1994
* John Ward, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1994
* USD 193,758.00

During plant transformation by Agrobacterium tumefaciens the virB gene products
most likely mediate T-DNA transport across the bacterial and plant cell
membranes and walls. The long-term objective of this proposal is to elucidate
the role of the eleven virB gene products in the T-DNA transfer process. The
specific aims will examine the following questions: 1) Which virB genes are
needed for virulence ? 2) Do VirB proteins compose the T-DNA transport
machinery? and 3) Is phosphorylation involved in controlling or activating VirB
functions? These questions will be addressed using a combination of genetic and
biochemical approaches. First, VirB-specific antibodies will be raised and A.
tumefaciens mutants will be isolated that each lack a different single virB
gene. These antisera and mutants will then be used in combination with cellular
fractionation, immunoelectron microscopy, protein cross-linking, site specific
mutagenesis, and other techniques to identify, localize, and functionally
characterize the virB gene products. The results will have immediate
significance in providing insight into the mechanism of T-DNA transport. On a
practical level, characterization of virB gene function in Agrobacterium will
likely contribute to understanding the molecular mechanism by which
macromolecules are transported across membranes.