* 9104518
* Mathematical Sciences: Applied and Computational Mathematicsand Experimental Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Jerry Bona, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1996
* USD 423,942.00

In this project the principal investigator and his colleagues will continue
their research on various aspects of applied mathematics, numerical analysis and
fluid dynamics. In particular, they will conduct analytical, numerical and
experimental studies of viscous flows with free boundaries and viscous flows
inside pipes and channels, a variety of water wave problems and the behavior of
waves on sloping beaches. And they will perform theoretical analyses of
numerical techniques like multi-grid methods that are so essential in resolving
fluid phenomena that are beyond the present capabilities of analysis and
experimentation. The study of fluid dynamical phenomena provides a challenge to
applied mathematicians because so much of the work involves an interplay among
the three basic techniques of mathematical analysis, numerical computation and
laboratory experimentation. Given the interdisciplinary nature of the subject it
is essential for applied mathematicians to collaborate with experimentalists and
computational scientists, in order to tackle successfully difficult and
important problems involving fluid flow. In this project the principal
investigator has assembled the perfect team consisting of fluid dynamicists.
numerical analysts and experimentalists. Their goal is to continue their
important work on understanding and quantifying the fluid dynamics of viscous
flows and water waves.