* 9104198
* Self Organizational Origin of Fibrous Texture and Twisting  of Agate Quartz:  Dynamic Crystallization Model
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Enrique Merino, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1994
* USD 105,194.00

This project is to continue work on the genesis of repetitive, associated self-
organization patterns of texture and composition of quartz in volcanic agates.
The main patterns to be studied are (a) the systematic interlayering of bands
made up of twisted (and very fine and high-Al) chalcedony fibers with bands made
up of non twisted (and coarser and low-Al) fibers, and (b) the systematic
association of fibrosity with banding, and of non-fibrosity with lack of
banding. We theorize the fibrous habit and texture are produced by a
morphological instability of the crystallization front. This spatial instability
causes the front autonomously to develop regularly spaced fingers, each of which
becomes a quartz fiber. The fibers produced by the morphological instability
pierce through decreasing Al contours produced by another instability (an
autocatalytic one, which is temporal), and grow by accretion of conical
"sleeves," their rims being forced to incorporate more Al than their centers.
This causes the fibers to grow twisted. This project will unravel the dynamics
of agate crystallization -- a complex self-organization process with
geochemical, crystallochemical, and petrologic significance well beyond agates.
It will clarify also the geochemical factors that control crystal morphology and
authigenic-texture type in other minerals and other low-temperature
environments.