* 9104425
* SGER:  Reproductive Neurobiology of Chimeras
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Arthur Coquelin, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1992
* USD 30,000.00

A major function of the brain is to initiate and direct an individual's
behaviors. While behaviors are controlled by dispersed groups of highly
intertwined neurons, the particular neurons responsible for particular behaviors
have not been identified. This problem remains unsolved simply because there are
so many neurons and their possible interconnections are so complex that the task
seems Herculean. Dr. Coquelin's aim is to unravel this tangle by capitalizing on
some recent advances in the fields of behavioral genetics and developmental
biology. He has selected two different strains of inbred mice that differ in
their expression of some specific hormonally induced behaviors. Dr. Coquelin
will combine very young embryos from these two different inbred strains. The
offspring, referred to as chimeras, will possess a mosaic of cells in all
tissues, including the brain. When they mature, the mice will perform the kind
of behavior according to the type of neurons which were inherited from the
particular genetic strain. The origin of these neurons will be identified by
immunocytochemical procedures. Thus, generating chimeras will enable him to
identify the sets of neurons which are responsible for some genetically
determined hormone-regulated behaviors. Such information eventually will help us
locate and fix behavioral abnormalities which may arise congenitally, from
disease, or accidentally.