* 9104141
* U.S. "Little Science":  A Comparative Study of the Content  and Context of Laser and High-Temperature Superconductivity Research (History and Philosophy of Science) -- VPW
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Joan Bromberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lola E. Rogers
* 11/30/1993
* USD 122,598.00

The investigator proposes to compare two fields of "table- top" science
separated by 25 years: lasers in the early 1960s and high-temperature
superconductors in the mid-1980s. Focus will be upon continuities and changes in
two kinds of behavior: the international relations of the scientific teams, and
the changing connections of university teams with industry and government, and
the impact of these linkages on the contents of the research. The project should
afford significant insights into the nature of modern science, particularly the
dichotomization between "big" and "little" science, as well as to the
significance of the relations between university teams and other sectors of the
research community. It furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities
for women to advance their careers in science or engineering through research,
and to encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the
investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host campuses. In this
project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second objective
include: teaching three courses over five academic quarters in the history and
philosophy of science--two in the history of 19th and 20th century physics and
one in U.S. science policy, leading a seminar series in the history of U.S.
science policy designed for faculty and graduate students, participating in the
physics colloquium, advising students and recruiting some to work on special
problems, giving public lectures to make visible female participation in the
history of the "hard sciences," an area of scholarship in which women are at
present underrepresented, and organizing a symposium on the effect of
intersectorial linkages on university research for one of the major societies.