* 9104150
* Geminiviruses as Models for Plant Nuclear DNA Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Linda Hanley-Bowdoin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1994
* USD 315,000.00

Geminiviruses constitute a family of plant viruses with single- stranded DNA
genomes that replicate via double-stranded DNA intermediates in the nuclei of
infected cells. They encode a single protein for their replication and can
recruit the remainder of the replication machinery from their host. These
characteristics suggest that geminiviruses are excellent models for studying
plant nuclear DNA replication. The overall goal of our research is to understand
the molecular events that mediate geminivirus DNA replication using tomato
golden mosaic virus (TGMV) as our prototype. We will identify the TGMV
replication origin by deletion analysis and by assaying viral DNA fragments for
their ability to support replication of nonviral DNA in plant protoplasts. The
sequence and structural requirements of the TGMV origin will be characterized by
analyzing replications containing site-specific mutations. Our initial studies
of trans-acting factors involved in replication will focus on the single TGMV-
encoded protein, AL1, required for replication. Two important questions we will
ask are does AL1 bind specifically to the TGMV replication origin and what is
its catalytic role in replication. We plan to purify AL1, study its catalytic
properties, and determine if it requires host proteins for activity. The long
term goal of our research is to identify and characterize the plant proteins
involved in TGMV replication and to determine their roles in normal cellular
processes.***//