* 9104669
* Metal Cluster Active Sites in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Lawrence Que, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/1995
* USD 300,148.00

Proteins with active sites consisting of di-iron centers bridged by oxo or
hydroxo groups comprise a new subclass of metalloproteins. This class includes
proteins that perform a variety of functions in biology -- dioxygen transport
(hemerythrin), oxygen activation (methane monooxygenase), the conversion of
ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotide (ribonucleotide reductase), and phosphate
ester hydrolysis (purple acid phosphatases). This project will focus on the
latter two enzymes. Ribonucleotide reductase is the key enzyme in the
biosynthesis of deoxyribonucleotide, while purple acid phosphatase may be
involved in the regulatory mechanisms of important biological processes. For
ribonucleotide reductase, Dr. Que will investigate three aspects: a) the
spectroscopic properties of the diferrous form and how it interacts with
dioxygen, b) the stoichiometry of tyrosyl radical formation and its implications
of cluster- cluster communication via long range electron transfer, and c) the
use of cryoenzymological techniques to trap intermediates in the reaction of the
di-ferrous form with O2 and spectroscopic characterization of these
intermediates. For purple acid phosphatase, experiments will be carried out to
test a proposed active site model and a proposed mechanism of enzyme action.
Physical techniques to be used include ultra- violet, visible and infra-red
spectroscopy, resonance Raman spectroscopy, NMR, EPR, Mossbauer spectroscopy,
magnetic circular dichroism and EXAFS.