* 9104566
* Multiple Description Source Codes with Applications to      Packetized Speech
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Jerry Gibson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 12/31/1993
* USD 226,548.00

This research is a study of the design of multiple description source codes for
correlated sources and for speech. A multiple description source code provides
the receiver with two different descriptions of the source sequence. Hence, if
one description is lost, the other can be used to reconstruct the source. It is
also desired that if both the descriptions do reach the receiver, the
performance is strictly better than if only one of the descriptions were to
arrive. Thus the two descriptions must be different and individually good. The
first objective is to study multiple description codes for correlated sources.
This includes the design of good codes as well as the derivation of performance
bounds which are not currently available in the literature. The final goal is to
design good, low complexity multiple description codes for correlated sources.
The second objective is to study the applications of multiple description source
codes to speech transmission over packet- switched networks. Packet losses are a
significant detriment to speech quality and multiple description source codes
are a good way to reduce performance degradations due to packet losses. This
research will investigate whether significant quality improvements can be
achieved by designing low bit rate waveform and vocoder based multiple
description speech coders.