* 9104865
* U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research on Damage Evolutions and  their Sensitivities during Metal Forming Process
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Abhijit Chandra, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1994
* USD 14,400.00

This award supports Abhijit Chandra of the University of Arizona to collaborate
in materials engineering research with Viggo Tvergaard of the Department of
Solid Mechanics of the Technical University of Denmark. They share an interest
in the forming of metal and in understanding the processes that affect the
properties of the finished product. In particular, their collaborative research
focuses on understanding the phenomenon of local instabilities generated by
interactions of microdefects in a damage cluster. Professor Tvergaard has
developed various models for damage evolutions in situations involving
plasticity and creep. Professor Chandra has worked extensively on metal forming
processes and on design sensitivities of these processes. This complementary
expertise is combined very effectively in the proposed collaborative research
plan. During a metal forming process, the workpiece material is subjected to
intense stress and deformation fields. As a result, the material undergoes large
plastic strains and rotations in order to produce new and desirable shapes of
the workpiece. However, the stress and deformation fields may cause local
instabilities that may nucleate microscopic voids. Growth of such defects
results in degradation of the mechanical properties of the finished product, and
may even lead to its failure. The results of the proposed research will be very
helpful in designing forming processes that avoid or minimize the development of
this damage in the workpiece.