* 9104171
* Systematic, Phylogenetic and Biogeographical Studies of     Harpalines (Coleoptera: Carabidae: Harpalini)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1995
* Gerald Noonan, Milwaukee Public Museum
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1995
* USD 70,000.00

The proposed research is part of a unified plan, in progress since 1968, to
increase knowledge of the classification, phylogeny, and biogeography of
harpaline carabid beetles (Carabidae: Coleoptera). The project includes three
species level revisions: (1) the 30 species of the nominate subgenus of
Anisodactylus; (2) the eight species of the subgenus Anadaptus (genus
Anisodactylus); and (3) the approximately 25 North American and probably also
the approximately 25 species from elsewhere of the subgenus Stenolophus (genus
Stenolophus). Completion of the three species level revisions will allow
accurate identification of adults of groups possibly suitable for monitoring of
environmental changes in wetlands. The three groups were selected because
comparison of data from the three studies will provide insights into
biogeographical topics such as: (1) production of new species in refuges; (2)
vicariance (splitting of ancestral species by the development of geographical
barriers) induced by the Cochise Filter/barrier in the south western United
States; (3) changes in geographical ranges over time; and (4) differences in
distribution patterns of taxa in areas with and areas without once extensive
lowland Wisconsin glaciation. Data from the present study will be combined with
that from a former study of the genus Harpalus to propose and test general
models for the evolution of new species of North American carabid beetles.