* 9104922
* Developing an Absolutely-Dated Holocene Tree-Ring Chronologyfrom Sub-Fossil Huon Pine in Tasmania for Paleoclimate and  Isotopic Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1993
* USD 204,181.00

This is a 2 year project aimed towards developing a continuous, absolutely
dated Holocene tree-ring chronology from live and sub-fossil huon pine located
in western Tasmania, Australia. Based on the known ages of sampled living trees
(>1000 years old) and a series of overlapping radiocarbon dates from recovered
sub-fossil logs, all from the Stanley River in western Tasmania, tree-ring
specimens are in hand for developing a chronology almost 3000 years in length.
In addition, other sub- fossil logs recovered from deposits at the Stanley River
have radiocarbon dates that extend back beyond the present radiocarbon
calibration curve derived from Northern Hemisphere trees. Consequently, there is
the proven potential for a 9-10,000 year tree-ring chronology from Tasmania that
would include the climatically interesting Hypsithermal warm period (ca. 7-9,000
BP), with the realistic prospect of it eventually extending back to the Younger
Dryas cold event (ca. 10-11,000 BP) and the glacial- interglacial transition
(ca. 13-14,000 BP). We will exploit to the fullest extent possible the Stanley
River sub-fossil wood now in hand, sample additional logs from that locality,
and explore Tasmania for other huon pine sites in an effort to locate pre-9,000
BP wood for extending the radiocarbon calibration curve. In the process, we will
also develop a network of 1000 year long modern tree-ring chronologies for
Tasmania and, if possible, New Zealand that will be used to reconstruct past
climate in that sector. The precisely dated wood produced by this project will
be available for other scientific studies, including stable isotope and
carbon-14 analyses, in order to make this project as scientifically productive
as possible.