* 9104646
* Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Uptake in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Paul Black, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1995
* USD 276,250.00

Long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs ıC12 - C18!) traverse the cell envelope of
Escherichia coli by a high affinity, saturable, energy- dependent process that
requires the functional activities of at least two genes, fadL and fadD. The
fadL gene encodes an outer membrane-bound protein (FadL) that mediates transport
across this membrane layer. The fadD gene encodes acyl CoA synthetase, an inner
membrane associated enzyme that activates fatty acids concomitant with
transport. There is increasing evidence that a low molecular weight periplasmic
fatty acid binding protein and an inner membrane-bound oleic acid binding
protein also participate in transport. In the proposed study, site-directed,
chemical- saturation, and deletion mutagenesis of the cloned fadL+ gene will be
used to distinguish biochemical properties associated with FadL: LCFA binding,
LCFA transport, bacteriophage T2 binding, and heat- modifiability. These studies
will be augmented by the use of affinity labeled long-chain fatty acids to
identify potential amino acid residues of FadL involved in binding and
transport, and to characterize binding- and transport-deficient mutants. The
acyl CoA synthetase gene (fadD) sequence will be determined followed by
mutagenesis experiments to evaluate the structural and functional features of
this enzyme required for this transport process. The goal of this work is to
provide an understanding of how long chain fatty acids bind to and traverse the
cell envelope of Escherichia coli. In broad terms, the results of these
experiments will provide information describing the molecular basis of protein-
fatty acid interaction during transport and fatty acid activation prior to
metabolic transformation.