* 9104857
* Estrogen and Progesterone Receptors: Ligands and            Conformation Changes.
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1995
* Debra Skafar, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 03/31/1995
* USD 266,912.00

Progesterone is a steroid hormone that is important in the menstrual cycle and
in pregnancy. Steroid hormones are small molecules that work by binding to
certain types of protein in the cell, called receptors, and changing their
shape. This somehow causes the cell to produce different proteins and / or
different amounts of certain proteins. It is these changes in the kinds and
amounts of proteins produced that ultimately cause the biological effects of the
hormone. This research project is trying to answer a very basic question: what
does binding of that small molecule, the steroid hormone, do to the shape of the
receptor? There are two important reasons for focusing on this question. First,
binding of the steroid is the first event in what is called signal transduction
- i.e., converting the steroid hormone "signal" to the biological response.
Second, not all steroid-like molecules that bind to a steroid receptor produce
the same responses. So there must be a difference in the binding of different
small molecules to the receptor and the changes that they produce in the shape
of the receptor that causes different responses. Similar experiments will be
performed with the estrogen receptor, which is a protein that binds estrogen
instead of progesterone. By using biochemical techniques to investigate these
changes, this research will produce a better understanding of how steroids
work.//