* 9104983
* Plant Terpene Metabolism: Monoterpene Hydroxylases and Sesquiterpene Cyclases
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1997
* Rodney Croteau, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1997
* USD 404,100.00

Most monoterpenes and sesquiterpenes are derived by cyclization of prenyl
pyrophosphates to olefins followed by oxidative modification initiated by
cytochrome P450-dependent hydroxylation. Studies with two sesquiterpene
cyclases, differing in physical properties and reaction complexity, will test
the hypothesis that the same active site residues play similar roles in the
electrophilic mechanism of this enzyme type. Studies with three closely-related
(-)-limonene hydroxylases, that differ in position of allylic hydroxylation of
this simple monoterpene olefin, will test the proposal that minor alterations in
active site topography underlie regiochemistry of oxygen insertion by these
cytochrome P450 enzymes. Homogeneous proteins will be used to generate
antibodies and partial amino acid sequences, and a molecular cloning and
expression strategy adopted to obtain complete primary sequences and larger
amounts of the enzymes. Radioactive modifying reagents will be employed to
selectively label active site cysteine and histidine residues of the cyclases,
and photolabile substrate analogs will be utilized to label hydrophobic regions
of both cyclase and hydroxylase sites. Active site peptides will be prepared,
sequenced, compared, and located on the proteins. The role of specific residues
in cyclase catalysis will be determined by protection against chemical
modification using analogs representing different substrate binding domains, and
by directed mutagenesis. Limonene-tethered heme- directed inhibitors, as well as
19F-NMR methods, will be used to probe the spatial relationship between the heme
iron of the cytochromes and the limonene substrate. These studies will provide
new information on the nature of these novel cyclase and hydroxylase catalysts
and a clearer understanding of the origin of terpenoid natural products.
Terpenoids play an important role in the interaction of the plant with its
environment. An understanding of terpenoid biochemistry will allow a deeper
understanding of the role of these compounds in plants. In addition to the well
known essential oils of resins of commerce, serious consideration is being given
to nontraditional uses of these plant metabolites as renewable sources of
energy- intensive chemicals. A broad range of terpenoids are of pharmacological
significance and many are of agrochemical utility. New knowledge gained from
this work will assist in efforts to increase the production of these valuable
plant metabolites.//