* 9104058
* Mathematical Sciences: Exploitation of Symmetry in          Discretization Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Eugene Allgower, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1995
* USD 284,000.00

Boundary element and finite element discretizations of integral equations and
partial differential equations over surfaces and bodies often lead to very large
linear systems of equations. If the domain enjoys any symmetry, the
computational effort involved in numerically solving these systems can be
significantly reduced via the effective use of techniques based upon group
representation theory which have recently been given by the investigators. This
algebraic approach yields a decomposition of the original large problem into a
number of smaller subproblems, each corresponding to an irreducible
representation of the symmetry group of the domain. The size of each reduced
problem is that of the large problem divided by a factor equal to the order of
the group divided by the dimension of the representation. Previous work on
exploiting symmetry has involved reducing partial differential equations to
subdomains and adapting boundary conditions over the symmetry axes. Such
techniques do not apply to boundary integral methods. It is proposed in this
project to develop flexible codes which systematically implement reductions for
a variety of symmetry structures. Constructions of symmetry-respecting
discretizations and theoretical investigations relating to sparseness and
parallel implementations will be carried out. Many problems in science and
engineering have as their natural domain a surface or body which is symmetric in
some way. For example, circles, circular disks, spheres, intervals, squares, and
cubes, of any dimension, all have obvious symmetry. In addition to the symmetry
of the domain of the problem, often the equations themselves reflect a symmetry
in the physics of the problem. For example, the differential equations governing
heat flow are symmetric, in the sense that heat will flow in all directions
without any preferences in the absence of any outside stimulus. When both the
equations and the domain of the problem enjoy some symmetry, algebraic
techniques may be used to reduce the computational effort involved in
numerically solving the given problem on the given domain. This project will
focus on making the necessary theoretical investigations and developing
algorithms for exploiting symmetry in the field of numerical analysis.