* 9104542
* Environmental and Developmental Regulation of Plant         Proteinase Inhibitor Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1997
* Clarence Ryan, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/1997
* USD 792,589.00

Research is proposed to further understand the structure, function, evolution
and the regulation of synthesis of antinutrient proteinase inhibitor proteins
that are present in plant tissues as defensive proteins against invading insects
and pathogens. The proteins were first identified, isolated, and characterized
in the PI's laboratory, and were subsequently found to be synthesized in potato,
tomato, and alfalfa leaves in response to insect attacks or to severe mechanical
wounding. As part of studies of wound signal transduction systems that regulate
the expression of proteinase inhibitor genes in plants, the PI's lab has
isolated and characterized several proteinase inhibitor genes from tomato and
potato plants. With these genes they have been able to study the structure,
organization, and regulation of proteinase inhibitor gene families that are
expressed in response to both developmental and environmental signals. They have
recently discovered an 18 amino acid polypeptide as a new signaling molecule for
the proteinase inhibitors, and have found a volatile signalling molecule for the
inhibitors, and have found a volatile signalling molecule for the inhibitors,
methyl jasmonate. In the interest of practical applications, several proteinase
inhibitor genes have been used by the PI successfully to genetically engineer
plants to improve their defense against predators.