* 9104576
* Function of a Lysosome Associated Membrane Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1995
* James Cardelli, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/1995
* USD 223,993.00

The project focuses on studies of the biosynthesis and function of D-LAMP-2, a
Dictyostelium protein which appears to be a homologue of the human lysosomal
associated membrane protein 2 (H- LAMP-2). Antibodies to H-LAMP-2 and
oligonucleotide probes will be used to clone and sequence the cDNA coding for
D-LAMP-2. Radiolabel pulse-chase, microscopy, and subcellular fractionation
approaches will be used to examine the transport and processing of D-LAMP-2 in
growing cells, and in mutant Dictyostelium cells altered in secretion and
transport of lysosomal hydrolases. The biosynthesis and intracellular location
of D-LAMP-2 will also be examined as a function of the developmental cycle of
Dictyostelium. Also, antisense RNA and gene disruption techniques will be used
to generate strains unable to produce D-LAMP-2. The function of the lysosomal
system will be assessed by: determining if "normal" lysosomes are formed;
examining the transport, sorting, and secretion of lysosomal enzymes; measuring
the rate of endocytosis and phagocytosis; and determining if cells undergo
normal differentiation. Together, these approaches will provide relevant new
information on the role of LAMPs in the biosynthesis and function of lysosomes
in growing and differentiating cells. Until now, most studies on lysosomal
biogenesis (in both animal and slime mold systems) have focused on how the
lysosomal enzymes enter the lysosomal compartment. Recently, a few lysosomal
membrane marker proteins have been identified in mammalian cells; while these
have been well characterized with respect to protein structure, there is as yet
no clue as to their possible function. The discovery of a possible homologue of
one of these lysosomal membrane proteins in the slime mold Dictyostelium comes
at a fortuitous time, since it is only recently that Dictyostelium has become
readily amenable to genetic and molecular-genetic manipulations. It is now
possible to create mutant strains of the cells with specific genetic
alterations. By creating mutants with specific alterations in the LAMP
homologue, and assessing the resultant phenotypes with respect to lysosomal
function, it should be possible to address the question of function of these
proteins.