* 9104945
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of Facies Variation in a   Peat-Accumulating Delta, Sarawak, Malaysia
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1994
* James R. Staub, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1994
* USD 132,453.00

Coal exploration models have vacillated from one spectrum extreme to another
during the past 30 years. When the Mississippi delta was believed to be the
stereotypical depositional regime for thick peat accumulations (coal analogues),
all attention was focused on the identification and delimitation of deltaic
lithofacies. When it was demonstrated that conditions in the Mississippi delta
were not precursors to thick peat accumulation, coastal models were generated in
which thick peats were restricted to coastal plain sites adjacent to one or more
deltas. No longer were deltas the exploration target. In modern peat
accumulating regimes of southeast Asia both extremes do occur but intermediate
conditions also prevail. Previously, the PI has identified five phytotaphonomic
facies in the clastic-dominated, tide-influenced Mahakam River delta of eastern
Kalimantan, Indonesia. In this system the only peat that has been encountered is
detrital in origin, accumulating along the delta front. The present project is
designed to test whether or not the same macrofloral biofacies are
characteristic of a contemporaneous delta, the Rajang River delta, Sarawak (on
the opposite side of the island of Borneo), in which ombrogenous peat swamps
have formed. The project is designed to recover vibracores in the same clastic
sedimentary environments as was previously sampled in the Mahakam River delta in
order to determine if deltaic biofacies are applicable throughout the gradient
of deltaic types occurring in the same climatic regime. In addition, the project
offers the opportunity to assess palynofacies and determine whether or not
proportions of palynodebris actually can be used to differentiate sedimentary
environments, or if the systematic affinities of pollen and spores are necessary
data to apply palynofacies characteristics as an aid in environmental
interpretation. Additionally, macrofloral biofacies will be used to test whether
the predisposition for autochthonous peat accumulation is based more on the
vegetational community succession (as reflected in differences in prevailing
edaphic conditions) than on other physical parameters.