* 9104082
* In Vitro Studies on Nucleosome Dissolution and Assembly     During Transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Vaughn Jackson, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Continuing Grant
* Todd M. Martensen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 276,000.00

The aim of this proposal is to understand the mechanisms whereby histones
interact with DNA such that RNA and DNA polymerases as well as sequence-specific
proteins can access the DNA to complete their nuclear functions. The relevance
of these analyses is to the need to understand the processes that regulate
programmed differentiation and then subsequently maintain that differentiated
state during proliferation of the cells. These processes are distorted during
carcinogenesis to produce the malignant phenotype. Procedure for purfication of
the individual histones have been developed, including uH2A and uH2B which
maintains the structural integrity of the proteins such athat reassembly of
heterotypic interactions is very efficient. Procedures have also been developed
to measure rapid rates of nculeosome formation and measure the effects of
transcription-induced stresses on nucleosome stability. These assays involve
measuring superhelical densities of the DNA, its protection from nucleases, and
accessibility of the histone to conjugation by 125 Iubiquitin. With combinations
of these procedures it will be possible to examine the role of uH2A, uH2B in
providing accessibility of nucleosomal DNA sequences to sequence-specific
proteins, the role of H2A and H2B exchange in facilitating transcription rates,
and the processes involved in the assembly of nucleosomes during replication and
transcription.