* 9104424
* U.S.-France (INRIA) Joint Seminar:  Transfer of Mathematics to Industry in the U.S. and France, Minneapolis, Minnesota, October 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Willard Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1992
* USD 9,750.00

This award will support a joint seminar between US and French mathematicians on
the topic of the transfer of mathematics to industry in the US and France. The
seminar will be held at the Institute for Mathematics and its Applications
(IMA), University of Minnesota, in October 1991. The US organizers are Drs.
Avner Friedman and Willard Miller of the IMA. The co-sponsoring organization is
the French National Institute for Computer Science and Automation (INRIA),
Roquencourt, France. Both the IMA and INRIA have extensive contacts with
industry. The IMA has recently initiated a program "Postdoctorates in Industrial
Mathematics" and the annual and summer programs at the IMA also bring in large
number of visitors from industry. A different experience of contact with
industry is going on at INRIA, which has a long tradition of multidisciplinary
research, mixing computer science and applied mathematics (control and
scientific computing). This research is done in cooperation with various
industries, such as Dassault, Aerospaciale, Peugot and Electricite de France. It
is largely performed in common projects, involving INRIA researchers, engineers
from industry and PHD students, most of whom are later recruited by industry. In
addition, INRIA organizes many seminars, symposia and advanced courses aimed at
transferring new ideas and techniques to industry. The proposed seminar is the
result of a decision by IMA and INRIA to bring together key individuals from
universities and industry, who are playing roles in building bridges between the
two communities. The goals of the seminar are: 1) to facilitate transfer of
mathematical problems of present interest to industry, and mathematical
knowledge applicable to industry, 2) to outline future mathematical research
directions in industry, and 3) to discuss the best methods of educating
mathematics graduate students to be successful in industry, while doing good
mathematics.