* 9104585
* Physics Of Solid State Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1993
* Malcolm Polk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Solid state polymerization is a technique commonly employed for increasing the
molecular weight of condensation polymers after bulk polymerization has been
completed. Solid state polymerization offers one of the most attractive routes
for obtaining extremely high strength, high modulus, thermally stable,
chemically resistant polymers. The technique involves heating the polymer to
within about 50oC of the observed melting temperature in an atmosphere in which
various molecular weight building reactions are driven towards completion by the
removal of low molecular weight condensation byproducts. The chemistry of solid
state polymerization is relatively well understood, the mechanisms responsible
for the enormous increase in tensile strength of thermotropic polymers have not
been fully elucidated. This work is aimed at obtaining a better understanding of
the large increase in tenacity that sometimes occurs during the solid state
polymerization of oriented thermotropic polymers. Specific polymers that
facilitate analysis of end group clustering, mobility, and reaction will be
synthesized in order to elucidate the effect of end group mobility, reactivity,
or clustering. The changes in the number of end groups, and their proximity will
be followed using solid state NMR after solid state annealing. The effect of
heat treatment will be analyzed using some chemical and physical techniques. It
is hoped that the work will elucidate the optimal mechanisms for the synthesis
of stiff, strong, chemically resistant, essentially defect-free, high
dielectric, and lightweight materials.