* 9104528
* Cell Division Pattern in Plants: Division Plane,            Cytoskeleton and Organelle Migration in Selaginella         Stomatogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Roy Brown, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1993
* USD 158,378.00

The role of the cytoskeleton in regulation of the division plane, mitosis and
morphogenesis will be investigated in stomatogenesis in the fern ally,
Selaginella. This simple system takes advantage of two of the most dramatic
examples of precisely defined morphogenetic pathways known in plants:
stomatogenesis and monoplastidic cell division. In stomatogenesis, the guard
mother cell differentiates from epidermal initials to depart on a pathway
leading to formation of a pair of specialized guard cells. In monoplastidic
division, nuclear and plastid division are intimately coordinated by precise
morphogenetic plastid migrations and by organization of the spindle at the
plastids. The overall objective of this research is to use the determinated
pathway of stomatogenesis and the phenomenon of morphogenetic plastid migration
to answer questions of fundamental importance in plant morphogenesis.
Morphogenetic plastid migration provides an accurate marker of changes in
polarity during the cell cycle. This migration will be compared with the better
known circadian and photostimulated chloroplast migration in Selaginella.
Movement of chloroplasts has been well studied and provides one of the better
understood examples of actin driven motility in plants. Proposed studies include
live observations and direct and indirect localization of f-actin and
microtubules using light (video enhanced differential interference contrast,
fluorescence, confocal laser scanning) and transmission electron microscopy.
Drugs will be used to perturb cytoskeletal proteins to determine function in
control of division plane, organelle migration, and division, and in cell
shaping and wall deposition that leads to the distinctive form of mature guard
cells. Such studies will increase our understanding of the phenomenon of plastid
polarity in monoplastidic cell division, and will contribute to the general
knowledge of the role of the cytoskeleton in patterned development in a
multicellular plant tissue.