* 9104610
* Manganese Peroxidase Gene Expression: Regulation by Mn
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Michael Gold, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

The lignin degradative system (LDS) of the white rot basidiomycetous fungus
Phanerochaete chrysosporium is capable of degrading the plant cell wall polymer,
lignin, and a range of aromatic pollutants. The major components of this
nonspecific oxidative system are two extracellular heme-containing peroxidases,
manganese peroxidase (MnP) and lignin peroxidase (LiP). The LDS is expressed
during secondary metabolic growth, the onset of which is triggered by limiting
nutrient nitrogen. Recently, we discovered that MnP expression is also regulated
at the level of gene transcription by Mn ion and heat shock and the primary goal
of the proposed project is to elucidate on the molecular level the mechanisms of
Mn regulation of mnp gene transcription. Isolation and analysis of mutants and
titration with promoter copies will be utilized to determine the type of
regulation. The promoter regions of P. chrysosporium mnp genes will be analyzed
to determine the sequences responsible for Mn and heat shock regulation of
transcription, using promoter-reporter constructs, deletion analysis and
synthetic promoter elements. DNaseI footprinting and gel mobility shift assays
will be used to assay putative DNA- binding transcription factors, and the
factors will be isolated. A possible requirement for Mn in post-transcriptional
events will be examined.