* 9104068
* U.S.-U.S.S.R. Cooperative Science:  Workshop in Quarternary Terrestrial Records (Fairbanks, AK; June 1, 1991)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1993
* R. Dale Guthrie, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gerson Sher
* 05/31/1993
* USD 29,404.00

Drs. Mary E. Edwards and Russell D.Guthrie, University of Alaska, Fairbanks and
Andrei V. Sher, Severtsov Institute of Evolutionary Animal Morphology and
Ecology, Moscow, USSR will hold a workshop at the University of Alaska,
Fairbanks in June 1991 to deal with common problems in the interpretation of
paleoecological and paleoclimatological records in Beringia, eastern Siberia and
Alaska. The workshop would be preceded by extended work in the field at two
critical fossil localities which contain somewhat comparable records to those in
northern Siberia. This reciprocates a field-workshop held on the lower Kolyma
lowland in Siberia, sponsored by the Soviet Academy of Science. The far north is
a special place for studies of past environments and their relevance to future
global changes. Beringia has repeatedly linked the biota of eastern and western
hemispheres, affecting both continents in major ways. Beringia is an important
location for Quaternary studies, as this region contains a good record of past
climatic events and their resulting ecological changes. The datable sediments
document the effects of these changes in the form of paleosols, plant micro- and
macrofossils, and in rapid mammalian evolution. Their main objective is to bring
together U.S. and U.S.S.R. scientists in an extended field-workshop situation to
increase the flow of information east and west, and to develop a joint research
strategy for the future. This project in paleoecology/paleoclimatology fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
researchers in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest.