* 9104284
* Photodissociation Dynamics of Small Polyatomic Molecules:   Collisional and Collisionless Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1991,08/31/1996
* Hanna Reisler, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 08/31/1996
* USD 503,000.00

Professor Reisler is supported by a grant from the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program for a two-part study: One is the photodissociation dynamics of
small polyatomic molecules with emphasis on the influence of the electronic
structure of the excited state on the dynamics. The other is collisional
dissociation of highly vibrationally excited molecules. The experiments will be
done with crossed molecular beams, multiphotoionization detection and
photoinitiated vibrational excitation; product state distributions will be
measured. The ultimate goal is to achieve better control over the outcomes of
molecular dissociations by selective access to specific regions of the potential
surface. The immediate goal is to study the evolution of parent molecule
excitation into product fragment excitations. The systems to be studied are
cyanogen halides and related molecules. %%% The influence of the stretching and
bending motions in the molecule on the final outcome when light causes a
molecule to come apart into fragments will be studied. The questions to be
answered in this study are: What products are formed and how is the energy
disposed of among these fragments, that is, what is the energy distribution into
the various forms of internal energies of the fragments?