* 9104637
* Ribosome Synthesis Conference Cold Spring Harbor Sept 11-15,1991.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 12/31/1992
* USD 10,000.00

Ribsomes were among the first complex cellular components to be studied from a
regulatory viewpoint. As knowledge of the regulation of ribosome synthesis has
increased, it is understood that ribosome synthesis involves the regulation of
numerous processes, including transcription RNA processing RNA-protein
interaction and nucleo-cytoplasmic communication. Furthermore, the synthesis of
all the ribosomal components is coordinated and balanced with the production of
many other cell constituents. It is clear that the study of the synthesis of
ribosomes is very important in its own right. In addition, the regulation of
ribosome synthesis impacts on the synthesis of virtually every other cellular
component, and responds to (or perhaps is a central component of) the as yet
poorly elucidated regulatory networks which control cell growth proliferation
and development in response to external stimuli. The study of ribosome
biosynthesis may therefore be one of the most promising approaches to an
understanding of these larger regulator networks. The molecular mechanisms which
regulate ribosome synthesis have recently been partly elucidated in a few
organisms, but many key elements of how regulation occurs remain either
unclarified or undiscovered. New vitality has been injected into the field both
by modern genetic and biochemical methodologies and by broadening the field to
include a diverse set of organisms, each with some common and some unique
characteristics of ribosome synthesis. This has led to rapid progress, but also
to some fragmentation of the field. The objective of the "Ribosome Synthesis"
meeting is to bring together researchers working on aspects of ribosome
synthesis ranging from transcription to assembly, in both prokaryotic and
eukaryotic ribosome synthesis. The integration of all aspects of ribosome
synthesis will motivate each participant to reflect on the place of his or her
work in the overall process and thus foster the interchange of ideas that will
serve to focus models of ribosome synthesis in all species.