* 9104548
* Adaptational and Phenotypic Differences in Capacity for     Intracellular pH Regulation in Molluscan Cardiac Myocytes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1991,06/30/1996
* W. Ross Ellington, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 06/30/1996
* USD 239,700.00

Marine bivalve molluscs such as oysters, clams and mussels often are found in
habitats where oxygen availability may vary dramatically with time. For
instance, species which live in the intertidal zone may go through daily cycles
of air exposure at low tides. Most species close their shells to avoid
desiccation. However, this results in a severe depletion of internal oxygen
since the organism is effectively sealed from the respiratory environment.
Surprisingly, many of these species survive without oxygen for extended periods
due to the ability of their cells to produce energy in the absence of oxygen.
One major drawback in making energy without oxygen is that metabolic acids
accumulate as waste products. This study will investigate how the cells of these
animals deal with the metabolic acids produced during period of hypoxia.
Experiments will be conducted to see if cells from high intertidal species
(frequent exposure to oxygen deprivation) show a higher capacity for dealing
with these metabolic acids than cells from low intertidal species (infrequent
exposure to oxygen deprivation). Additional studies will investigate whether the
capacity for cells to cope with acid loads is enhanced when animals are
subjected to chronic oxygen stress. These studies will provide information on
the unique mechanisms by which these animals are adapted to their habitats and
also yield insights into general mechanisms applicable to higher organisms.//