* 9104385
* Support of 7th International Conference on Partitioning in  Aqueous two-phase Systems - Advances in Separations in Bio- chemistry, Cell Biology &amp; Biotechnology
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1991,06/30/1992
* J. Milton Harris, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 06/30/1992
* USD 10,000.00

Separation methods by which biological materials may be isolated with great
sensitivity and in large scale, while remaining in a nondenaturing environment,
are of substantial interest in a variety of scientific disciplines. Consequently
the technique of partitioning in two-phase aqueous polymer systems is frequently
the method of choice for both research and commercial purifications of proteins,
nucleic acids, and cells. The great potential of the method and interest in it
is revealed by the publication in recent years of three books and hundreds of
papers on partitioning and by the commercial, large-scale application of
partitioning by several major companies in the U.S., Europe, and Japan. As a
result of the rapidly expanding development of partitioning techniques,
international conferences have been held biannually since 1979. The 7th
International Conference on Partitioning in Aqueous Two-Phase Systems will be
held in New Orleans, June 2- 7, 1991. This is the first time in over a decade
for the meeting to be held in the United States and it is expected to attract a
group of leading scientists of varied disciplines and backgrounds. The
Conference participants are typically involved in a variety of biotechnical
separation in addition to partitioning, and as a consequence the Conference
includes sessions on: novel and competing separation technologies, gravitational
effects on separation and related processes, biotechnical applications of PEG
chemistry, and polymer- protein and polymer-surface chemistry. The grant is used
for partial support of travel, registration, and per diem. At least two other
federal agencies (NASA and ONR) and several industrial companies also partial
support of this conference.