* 9104761
* Genetics of Yeast Virus Double-stranded RNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Peter Russell, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 308,000.00

The proposed research will define the important cis-acting viral sequences and
the trans-acting host (yeast) genes necessary and sufficient for establishing an
infection and for in vivo replication of the L-A and M1 double-stranded (ds) RNA
viruses that are components of the Killer virus system of yeast. The term
"replication" here means dsRNA viral replication, with emphasis of RNA packaging
and RNA genome replication. The specific aims for the research proposed are as
follows: 1) Develop and efficient procedure for the transformation of yeast with
RNA. 2) Develop replicon systems for analyzing the molecular details of
infection and replication. The replicons will be single stranded (ss) RNA
transcribed in vivo from DNA clones and introduced into yeast by transformation.
The replicon RNAs are subgenomic RNAs which will require viral helper functions
in trans to replicate. 3) Compare properties of successful replicons with the
properties of natural L-A and M1 viruses; i.e. dsRNA molecules per virus
particle;effect pm L-A virus number in wild-type yeast strains and strains
carrying superkiller (ski) mutations; compatibility with M1; and host genes
required for replication. 4) Identify the 5' and 3' sequence requirements, and
sequence context effect for infection, replication and translation by
manipulating replicon sequences through in vivo mutagenesis. 5) Identify host
genes required for replicon replication by isolating yeast mutants that
interfere with replicon replication, and suppressors of those mutants.