* 9104987
* Software Support for the Yale Haskell Implentation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Paul Hudak, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 12/31/1993
* USD 203,638.00

Haskell is a general purpose, purely functional programming language, designed
by a 15-member international committee, and named after the logician Haskell B.
Curry. The committee was formed because it was felt that research and
application of modern functional languages were being hampered by the lack of a
common language. The design was completed in April 1990, and has been very well
received both inside and outside the functional programming community.
Naturally, there is a great need for a good, robust, and freely available
implementation of Haskell. The Yale Haskell implementation has the potential to
serve this role, it being based on years of functional language implementation
experience at Yale, and being the most comprehensive implementation of Haskell
currently available supporting both compiled and interpreted code, separate
compilation, and program development tools. However, Yale Haskell needs further
support to be truly effective and this award provides that support. Maintaining
such a system is not an easy task, and falls more in the category of software
maintenance than research. Because of the rapid growth of functional
programming, the demand for an effective and reliable implementation of Haskell,
and the lack of other implementations as comprehensive, necessitates support for
Yale Haskell. The goals are to stabilize, maintain, distribute, and improve the
implementation.