* 9104031
* Mathematical Sciences: Connections Between Topology and     Representation Theory - Emphasis Year Proposal
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Eric Friedlander, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1992
* USD 24,000.00

The subject of the special year funded by this award will be interdisciplinary
in nature, emphasizing developing connections between topology and modular
representation theory with applications to algebraic K-theory, algebraic
geometry, algebraic number theory, and the cohomology of groups. Algebraic
topology has freely employed numerous techniques from algebra and algebraic
geometry. Analysis of splittings in the stable homotopy category now employs
modular representation of finite groups and global studies of the stable
homotopy category have introduced familiar concepts from algebraic number
theory. On the other hand, the application of topological techniques to study
algebraic cycles and the topological analysis of rings of integers in number
theory provide two very recent examples that the interaction goes both ways. The
solutions of the Sullivan and Segal Conjectures have lead to numerous
connections with the representation theory of compact Lie groups and these
connections have provided powerful new techniques in homotopy theory. This grant
will fund an Emphasis Year on the above subject at Northwestern University
during 1991-92. An integral part of this special year is an international
conference to be held in March, 1992. This special year and conference are
timely and will provide a needed forum for new developments and a foundation for
further results.