* 9104888
* Hydromechanical Constraints on the Ontogeny and Evolution ofScaphitid Ammonites
* GEO,EAR
* 10/11/1991,09/30/1995
* Neil Landman, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 09/30/1995
* USD 85,298.00

We plan to investigate the hydromechanical properties of closely related group
of scaphitid ammonite species in the context of their phylogenetic framework and
their distribution with respect to time, lithofacies, and geography. We have
chosen an endemic, monophyletic group of approximately 25 species ranging from
the Turonian to Santonian (Upper Cretaceous) of the Western Interior of North
America. These species preserve in their shells a record of their growth and
manifest profound morphological changes during ontogeny, eventually developing
an uncoiled body chamber at maturity. In addition, these species display a wide
diversity in adult shell shape ranging from relatively compressed species with a
well-developed "scaphitid" body chamber to relatively depressed species in which
the body chamber is "normally" coiled. Using a flow tank and drag measuring
apparatus, we will study the hydromechanical implications of ontogenetic changes
in size and shape for each species. This will allow us to construct species
specific hydromechanical ontogenetic trajectories (HOT's) covering all of
postembryonic growth. We will supplement this information with studies of the
siphuncle and septa, which may provide information on relative habitat depth. We
will compare these HOT's with the paleoenvironmental and evolutionary
distribution of the respective species within the well documented context of the
Western Interior Seaway. Thus, this comparison will elucidate for the first time
the extent and way in which functional hydromechanical constraints have
contributed to the evolution and geographic distribution of a closely related
group of ammonites.