* 9104560
* Regulation of Adrenal Steroidogenesis in Birds
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,12/31/1993
* James Cronshaw, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 12/31/1993
* USD 153,400.00

The bird adrenal gland is capable of synthesizing several cortisone-like
hormones. One of these is responsible for the regulation of certain aspects of
carbohydrate metabolism in the organism, while another acts on the kidney to
ensure proper salt and water balance. Cells isolated from the gland respond to
incubation media containing the pituitary hormone, corticotropin by producing
the two types of cortisone-like hormone. The cells also respond to incubation
media containing a hormone called angiotensin II. Under these circumstancs, they
produce relatively large amounts of the salt- and water regulating hormone, but
none of the carbohydrate-regulating hormone. These effects of corticotropin and
angiotensin II on isolated tissue samples simulate the responses of the adrenal
gland in organisms subjected to stress and diets containing different levels of
salts. Until a few years ago, it was assumed that the secretion of these
hormones was controlled exclusively by corticotropin and angiotensin II but
evidence has recently accumulated to indicate that factors of neural origin may
also act, to regulate the synthesis and release of adrenal steroid hormones.
Nerve cells terminating in the adrenal gland contain, and may secrete, a variety
of polypeptides, in addition to the typical adrenalin-like hormones. The
proposed studies will contribute to our understanding of the ways in which
regulators derived from nerve cells influence the overall control of adrenal
steroid hormone synthesis. The experimental model will be the developing adrenal
gland in the duck embryo. Through the use of the latest ultrastructural,
histochemical and immunocytochemical techiques the nature, the loci and the
distribution of the adrenalin-like and peptide factors will be investigated. At
the same time the functional development and responsiveness of the adrenal
steroidogenic cells during embryonic development will be assessed in terms of
their secretory and synthetic properties. Since the hormones produced by the
adrenal gland are absolutely essential to the survival of all vertebrates,
including Man, it is important to understand the nature of the control
mechanisms involved in the regulation of this important endocrine gland. Also,
knowledge of how these glands function in birds is not only of fundamental
interest to the biologist, it is also important to society in general, for birds
constitute an important source of food for many millions of people around the
world.//