* 9104565
* Mineral Transformations in Low Grade Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Donald Peacor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1995
* USD 244,100.00

The evolution of fine-grained pelitic rocks from early diagenesis through low
grade metamorphism is being studied with an emphasis on techniques of scanning
and scanning transmission electron microscopy (SEM/STEM). The textures,
compositions and structures of minerals from sequences of samples representing
the ranges of a variety of processes are each being characterized in order to
distinguish the changes that characterize the processes. Specific projects
include: (a) characterization of the smectite to illite transformation. (b)
evolution of the composition, defect- state and crystal dimensions of illite, in
part to determine the origins of changes in illite "crystallinity." (c)
evolution of changes in chlorite leading to changes in chlorite crystallinity.
(d) prograde hydrothermal alteration of MORB with emphasis on the evolution of
mixed-layer relations of trioctahedral phyllosilicates. (e) prograde evolution
of trioctahedral mixed- layer phyllosilicates in pelites. (f) evolution of Na/K
dioctahedral micas. (g) contact metamorphism of pelites. (h) formation of
homogenized shales with chlorite/mica "stacks." (i) relation between XRD
patterns and mixed-layer clay sequences. The research addresses the fundamental
question as to how fine-grained sediments become metamorphic rocks.