* 9104410
* Mathematical Sciences: Modelling, Analysis, and             Computational Simulation of Platelet Aggregation in Large   and Small Vessels
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Aaron Fogelson, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1994
* USD 74,740.00

Platelet aggregates form on blood vessel walls in response to vascular injury;
they are also major constituents of the life-threatening blood clots associated
with vascular disease and with the use of cardiovascular prostheses.
Microscopic-scale models of aggregation, which involve interactions among the
blood's fluid dynamics and the mechanics and chemistry of the platelets, are
appropriate for studying aggregation in the small vessels of the
microcirculation. The project will explore changes in the models to attain more
realistic aggregate growth rates, and improvements in the associated numerical
methods to extend simulations to three dimensions and to substantially longer
time periods. These changes will complement recent advances in experimental
technique to allow the first detailed comparison of simulations with
experiments. To facilitate these comparisons, the investigator has established
collaborations with leading experimental scientists. The investigator will also
continue computational and analytical exploration of a new class of continuum
models he has formulated for studying aggregation in larger vessels such as the
coronary arteries. Of particular interest is the chemically-induced liquid-to-
solid phase transition exhibited by these models. The project will characterize
its dependence on flow and chemical parameters. The mathematical analysis and
simulations to be carried out in this project complement traditional laboratory
experimentation. They provide detailed information, of a type which is generally
not attainable in the laboratory, about the dynamic interactions among the
components of the aggregation response. This additional information will
increase insight into the physical and chemical controls on the aggregation
process. These studies will also lay the foundations for further development of
models of aggregation and for their application to clinically interesting
questions such as how flow and vessel geometry interact to influence aggregation
within natural vessels, such as the coronary arteries, or prosthetic devices,
such as vascular grafts or artificial hearts.