* 9104731
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/1993
* USD 9,200.00

Metals entering streams in association with milling waste particles and spoil
leachates have produced toxic concentrations of arsenic, cadmium, lead, and zinc
in fluvial deposits. To understand metal transport dynamics in streams requires
the integration of knowledge from several disciplines, including geomorphology,
sedimentology, and geochemistry. The complexity of such integration helps
explain why few investigators have attempted to describe metal dispersion in
terms of the sedimentary units in which they are stored. This doctoral
dissertation research project will focus on determination of the physical and
geochemical controls on the distribution of trace metal storage in fluvial
sediments in the Upper Mississippi Zinc-Lead District. The research will
describe the spatial patterns of metal storage by (1) mapping of surface and
subsurface floodplain and channel deposits; (2) analyzing total metal
concentration, particle size and mineralogic composition; and (3) identifying
sediment-meal phase relationships. A goal of the project is development of a
model that characterizes the interaction of watershed sediment and metal
pollutant budgets. This project will contribute to a better understanding of the
geomorphic and geochemical factors that determine the distribution and residence
times of metal storages in mined watersheds. It will increase our understanding
of the effects of nonpoint pollution sources on long-term water quality problems
and the use of geochemical tracers in environmental-based studies. This project
also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to
continue to develop independent research skills.