* 9104932
* Verification of the Apparent Crustal Stress Anomaly in the  Western Midcontinent
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Bezalel Haimson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1993
* USD 70,430.00

Two recent independent studies, one in the SE corner of South Dakota, and the
other in north central Kansas, indicate a striking departure in the stress
regime west of the Midcontinent Rift (MCR) from that established in Wisconsin-
Illinois and more eastern states and assumed until now to prevail throughout the
Midcontinent stress province. Near-surface in situ stress measurements in South
Dakota and a focal mechanism solution of an earthquake in Kansas (depth 1.3 km
or greater) both indicate a 90o rotation in the direction of the maximum
horizontal stress which is uniformly northeastern in all the previous
Midcontinent measurements. The new findings are supported by two earlier focal
mechanism solutions suggesting west-northwest stress direction. However, this
fascinating and important observation, which may require a redistribution of the
stress provinces in the continental U.S., is incomplete in that stress
magnitudes representative of the upper crust are difficult to ascertain from
near-surface tests, and are impossible to determine from focal mechanism
solutions. The goal of this project is to verify the unexpected results west of
the MCR, and complement them with credible estimates of the magnitudes of in
situ principal stresses, by conducting a comprehensive series of hydraulic
fracturing stress measurements in basement granite at depths of about 600 m
using the existing Quimby, Iowa Scientific hole.