* 9105483
* Development and Evolution of the Vertebrate Head:  A        Symposium at the American Society of Zoology Meeting,       Atlanta, GA; December 29, 1991
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1991,10/30/1992
* Brian Hall, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 10/30/1992
* USD 5,000.00

Funds are requested for a one day symposium entitled "Development and Evolution
of the Vertebrate Head". This symposium, sponsored by the American Society of
Zoology's Division of Developmental and Cell Biology and co-sponsored by the
Division of Vertebrate Morphology will be held as part of the Society's 1991
annual meeting in Atlanta, Georgia. The goal of this symposium is to develop a
stronger understanding of the special role of development in evolution by
focusing on a single topic, the vertebrate head. To accomplish this goal, the
organizers will bring together biologists from a wide range of fields, all of
whom are actively pursuing research into one or more areas of developmental
and/or evolutionary biology of the vertebrate head. Among the invited speakers
are both world renowned experts and some of the most promising young
investigators in this field. Their topics span from functional morphology and
evolution, through morphological and experimental embryology, cell/tissue
culture to molecular analysis providing comprehensive inclusion of the various
'levels' at which the development of the vertebrate head is studied. With this
wide range of experts, focusing on a single issue, the vertebrate head, this
symposium will be able to synthesize a more fundamental understanding of the
relationship of development and evolution. Proceedings of the symposium, which
will be published either by American Zoologist or is a separate book volume,
will provide students and scientists with an interest in development and
evolution, a timely and insightful synthesis on our current understanding of the
interrelationships of these two biological fields and will provide a useful
reference source for future studies for many years to come.