* 9105211
* RUI:  Photoionization of Excited States of Atoms and Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1992
* Jayanti Lahiri, Southern College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Barry I. Schneider
* 11/30/1992
* USD 15,870.00

Photoionization cross sections and photoelectric angular distribution asymmetry
parameters will be calculated for excited states of atoms and ions over a broad
range of hv, n, 1, nuclear charge and stage of ionization, employing Hartree
Slater wave functions. Oscillator strengths and discrete to discrete transitions
will also be studied. The investigation will focus on understanding the
systematics of variation of the Cross sections and angular distributions over
the periodic system. Hartree Fock calculations will be done for any of these
transactions, as may be warranted, for greater accuracy. Isoelectronic sequences
will be investigated to study the gradual change in behavior towards hydrogenic.
Changes in photoionization pattern over isonuclear and iso-ionic sequences will
also be looked into. To fully understand the interaction of photons with matter,
radiative recombination cross sections. Consequently every system investigated
for photoionization will also be investigated for radiative recombination. The
method at present employed is a little restrictive in the sense that a study of
the very highly excited states becomes impossible due to a numerical problem of
convergence, To overcome this computational limitation, an attempt will be made
at formulating a new methodology based on the quantum defect theory.