* 9105429
* Signaling Mechanisms and Mobility of the EGF Receptor
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* David Gross, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1993
* USD 81,500.00

This project focuses on the regulation of ionic signaling in mitogen-stimulated
cells in culture. Both epidermal growth factor (EGF) and extracellular ATP will
be studied as mitogenic agonists. Individual cell ionic signals will be studied
by a combination of fluorescent probe imaging and patch clamp electrophysiology.
Heterologous interactions between these agonists will be examined. The chemical
kinetic consequences of the signal transduction cascade, from activated receptor
through G-protein, lipase, kinase, and soluble second messengers, will be
modeled. Kinetic predictions will be compared with single cell data to clarify
the roles of the various signaling components in the temporal response pattern
of intracellular calcium changes subsequent to a primary mitogenic signal. This
research focuses on the signal transduction cascade following activation of the
cellular receptor for epidermal growth factor. Optical microscopy in combination
with fluorescent indicators of cytosolic free calcium ion concentration and of
membrane potential will be used to study these factors at the level of a single
cell. A mathematical model of the signaling cascade will be constructed to aid
in the understanding of this complex sequence of events. The results of this
research will contribute to understanding of the molecular basis of the response
of cells to external signaling molecules.