* 9105485
* Sigma Pi Interactions in Hydrocarbon Cation Radicals        and SS Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Stephen Nelsen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Richard A. Caldwell
* 04/30/1995
* USD 374,673.00

With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Nelsen will study the
detailed mechanism of the reaction of alkene cation radicals with oxygen, and he
will also investigate electronic interactions in compounds that contain sulfur-
sulfur bonds. In the first part of this project, Dr. Nelsen will study carbon
skeletal rearrangements that accompany the reaction of certain alkylated alkenes
and dienes with ground state oxygen. These skeletal rearrangements cause some
alkenes to produce five-membered ring peroxides in competition with four-
membered rings. In the second part, experimental and theoretical studies will be
performed that are designed to probe the influence of electronic effects on
rotational barriers in compounds that contain S-S bonds. %%% A particularly
fascinating group of peroxides, called "dioxetanes", have two carbons and two
oxygens linked together in a four-membered ring. Dr. Nelsen has developed a new
type of reaction in which dioxetanes are produced directly from ground-state
oxygen and alkenes via an intermediate cation radical. His approach permits the
synthesis of new dioxetanes that cannot be made by other, more traditional
methods for preparing dioxetanes. In the first part of this project, Dr. Nelsen
will study the detailed mechanism of this process. In the second part,
experiments will be performed that are designed to clarify the mechanism by
which electronic interactions in compounds that contain sulfur-sulfur (S-S)
bonds affect their chemistry. Since the strength of the S-S bond has important
consequences in biological systems, the results of this aspect of Dr. Nelsen's
overall study may have impact upon drug design (in addition to their fundamental
importance to physical-organic and theoretical chemistry).