* 9105280
* Regulation of Expression of the Nitrogen Fixation (nif)     genes of K. pneumoniae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Sydney Kustu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1994
* USD 300,000.00

The nifA gene product (NIFA protein) is required to activate transcription of
the nitrogen fixation (nif) operons in a wide variety of gram-negative bacteria
belonging to the phylum "Purple bacteria and their relatives". To activate, NIFA
binds to sites 100 bp upstream of nif promoters and allows RNA polymerase sigma
(54 holoenzyme form) to denature the DNA strands around the transcription
startsite- that is, to isomerize from closed to open complexes. We succeeded in
demonstrating activity of the NIFA protein from Klebsiella pneumonia in vitro by
developing an assay that allowed us to detect activity in crude preparations. We
found that NIFA is assisted in activating transcription by the integration host
factor (IHF), a small protein that bends the DNA between upstream NIFA sites and
nif promoters to increase contracts between the activator and polymerase. During
the next grant period, we will attempt to purify active NIFA and study its
properties-its DNA-binding and its presumed ATPase activity, which is rare for
transcriptional activators. In addition, we will use electron microscopy to
characterize specialized nucleoprotein structures (SNUPS) that form at nif
promoters in the presence of activator, polymerase, and IHF. In the presence of
the NIFL protein, Klebsiella NIFA is inactivated by molecular oxygen or combined
nitrogen. We will attempt to demonstrate this inactivation convincingly in crude
preparations and, using it as an assay, to purify and characterize NIFL.