* 9105469
* Community Persistence and the Pattern of Community          Variability Over Time: A Test Using Fossil Assemblages From Four Marine Transgressions in the Breathitt Formation......
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Richard Bambach, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 01/31/1994
* USD 60,998.00

This study will use the fossil record of four separate marine inundations of
eastern Kentucky to test for community persistence on a time scale of 10 - 10
years. Each marine inundation resulted in the establishment of benthic habitats
that were colonized by the same or similar species of marine invertebrates and
preserved as layers of fossiliferous shale. Four marine units will be sampled
with replication at multiple locations to obtain complete fossil species
abundances for each sample. The lithological and microfaunal characteristics of
each sample will be used to determine which samples formed in comparable
habitats. Samples from comparable habitats will be statistically compared.
Replicate samples will provide an estimate of variation due to sampling that
will form the basis for judging the significance of variation between localities
within a marine unit. Statistical tests comparing multiple localities within a
marine unit will demonstrate the geographic pattern of variation in community
structure that existed during each marine inundation. The variation in species
abundances seen within each marine unit will, in turn, provide a basis for
judging whether the same community structure was reassembled after major
disruptions and persisted through some or all of the marine inundations. The
project is designed to rigorously test (a) whether fossil assemblages represent
communities in a more highly structured sense than just the coincidental co-
occurrence of component species, and (b) whether fossil communities (as
represented by fossil assemblages from particular habitats) persist through time
despite major disruptions.