* 9105550
* Lipid Metabolism and Photosynthesis in Fatty Acid Mutants ofArabidopsis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* John Browse, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1995
* USD 259,000.00

The acyl lipids of chloroplasts contain characteristically high proportions of
trienoic fatty acids. Because this feature is universal among higher plants, it
has been inferred that the fatty acid composition of chloroplast membranes is
important for maintaining photosynthetic function. However, the enzymology and
regulation of polyunsaturated fatty acid synthesis are poorly understood, and
there is at present no accepted model of exactly how photosynthesis might be
dependent on a highly unsaturated membrane. The principal investigator has
isolated a series of Arabidopsis mutants with specific alterations in leaf fatty
acid composition and these have provided a novel means to study both plant lipid
metabolism and the physiological significance of membrane lipid composition.
This proposal describes experiments to characterize the biochemistry of newly
isolated mutants, and of double mutants produced by crossing mutant lines. This
aspect of the project will involve assaying enzymes of fatty acid synthesis as
well as in vivo labeling experiments and analysis of the fatty acid compositions
of individual lipids and subcellular fractions. The most extreme double mutants
are unable to grow autotrophically, but many of the mutations only affect growth
and development of the plants at low temperatures. For this reason,
photosynthesis in the different mutants will be analyzed under a range of
environmental conditions using non-invasive fluorescence and light absorption
techniques which can be used on intact plants. These experiments would provide a
clear picture of exactly how photosynthesis is affected by thylakoid lipid
composition under the different growth conditions normally encountered by
temperate plants. The improved understanding of lipid metabolism and
photosynthesis that will result from the work are important prerequisites to
modifying these processes for increase plant productivity. //