* 9105624
* Insulin Receptor Metabolism: Hormone-Induced Changes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1993
* Victoria Knutson, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 08/31/1993
* USD 75,000.00

The insulin receptor binds its ligand, insulin, at the plasma membrane of the
cell. This binding event initiates two processes: 1) Autophosphorylation of the
receptor protein on tyrosine residues. This autophosphorylation ultimately leads
to the changes in cellular metabolism associated with insulin action. 2)
Endocytosis of the insulin-receptor complex and the subsequent movement (routing
or trafficking) of the receptor through the multiple compartments of the
endosomal pathway. Both of these processes are affected by chronic treatment of
the cultured cells with either insulin or glucocorticoids. The hypothesis to be
tested in this project is that the key step by which these hormones regulate
cellular insulin receptor number is by regulating the rate at which the receptor
is inactivated and degraded. From previous work, the inactivation and
degradation of the receptor occurs within the endosomal compartment. Therefore,
the hypothesis will be tested through the following goals: 1) The various
endosomal compartments through which the active insulin receptor moves in the
basal or hormone-simulated states will be isolated by preparative isoelectric
focusing. By metabolically labeling the receptor with 32 P-phosphate, changes in
the autophosphorylation state of the receptor as it moves through the endosomal
compartments will be quantified. 2) The mechanism(s) by which the insulin
receptor protein is inactivated will be determined in the basal and hormone-
stimulated states. Isoelectric focusing will be utilized to ascertain the
endosomal compartment in which inactive receptor is activated. The enzymes
responsible for these processes will be characterized and isolated. These
studies will provide the first characterization off the physico-chemical status
of a receptor protein as it moves through the various compartments of the
endosomes, and will provide a mechanism by which a membrane-bound receptor is
inactivated and removed from the cell.