* 9105609
* Protein Import into Mitochondria
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Keith Verner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/1995
* USD 278,688.00

The goal of this proposal is to investigate events that occur in the cytosol of
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae prior to or during the import of proteins
into mitochondria. Emphasis is placed on interactions between mitochondrial
precursor proteins and cytosolic components. Such components will be identified
and their function in the import process assessed. The influence of cytosolic
factors on precursor conformation will be analyzed. Experiments will be
performed to determine if precursor proteins fold tightly in the cytosol
subsequent to their synthesis in the cell or are either prevented from folding
or actively unfolded prior to the import reaction. Experiments will also be
conducted to evaluate the overall importance of a cotranslational import
mechanism and to determine if precursor synthesis and import are coupled in
vivo. To achieve these goals, S. cerevisiae will be used to perform both in
vitro and in vivo experiments. A completely homologous yeast in vitro import
system that has been recently developed will be a fundamental component of the
approach. Since both the cytosolic extract required for in vitro precursor
synthesis and mitochondria are isolated from the same type of cell, interactions
between these two cellular components can be studied and the results more
directly applied to the situation in vivo. The mitochondrion, a vital organellar
component of the eukaryotic cell, is made up of proteins from two genomic
sources: some of mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the mitochondrion's own
DNA and synthesized by its own transcriptional and translational machinery,
while others are encoded by the nuclear genome and synthesized by the
cytoplasmic translational machinery. The question of how these proteins get from
their sites of synthesis to their functional locations in the mitochondrion is
an important and widely-studied one. The two aspects of the problem addressed in
this proposal, namely (1) whether or not cytosolic factors are involved in the
import of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins into the mitochondria, and (2)
whether or not some proteins are translocated into the mitochondria co-
translationally, that is, while they are still being synthesized, as opposed to
post- translationally, that is, after the synthesis of the protein is completed,
are important, somewhat controversial, and timely. It is anticipated that these
studies will lead to fundamental new insights into the mechanism of
mitochondrial biogenesis.