* 9105802
* G Proteins and Insulin Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Guillermo Romero, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1995
* USD 229,000.00

Insulin is one of the most important regulators of biological functions.
However, our present knowledge on the mechanisms of action of insulin is very
limited. Insulin interacts with cells by binding to a specific surface receptor
and, upon binding, generates specific biochemical signals that control various
metabolic processes that occur inside the cell. One of the various signals used
by insulin is the generation of small chemical mediators. These mediators are
complex sugars that act by regulating a number of biochemical functions that
determine the metabolism of glucose, fat and other cellular components. However,
the mechanisms by which insulin regulates the generation of these mediators are
not understood. Members of a family of regulatory proteins (G proteins) are
involved in the generation of insulin mediators. It is not clear, however, how
the insulin receptor communicates with these proteins. Several alternative
hypotheses exist. For instance, upon binding of insulin, the receptor becomes
activated and may change the structure of other proteins by attaching phosphate
groups in specific sites located in the target protein. Alternatively, the
activated receptor may interact directly with these regulatory proteins,
modifying them transitorily and inducing their activation without generating any
long term chemical changes in the protein. These and other possibilities will be
examined by taking advantage of several types of modified insulin receptors
generated by recombinant DNA technology in which specific functions have been
impaired. It is possible that the major defects associated with the resistance
of Type 2 diabetics to insulin may be related to the mechanisms by which insulin
transmits signals to the interior of the cell. This proposal addresses directly
some important questions on the biochemical events that lead to the generation
of insulin mediators and the work proposed here should increase our
understanding of the molecular defects that lead to the diabetic state.//