* 9105334
* Molecular Analysis of the Aphid Transmission of Pea Enation Mosaic Virus
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1995
* Steven Demler, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 11/30/1995
* USD 270,000.00

Recent analyses of the luteovirus and related PEMV group have identified a
capsid subunit implicated as the determinant of circulative aphid transmission.
It is hypothesized that the recognition between virus and vector is mediated by
specific receptors occurring in the aphids' salivary system. THe objectives of
this study are twofold. First, it is proposed to apply sequence analysis of
transmissible and nontransmissible strains of PEMV to examine the mechanism of
expression and suppression of this phenotype. Second, the specificity of the
virus-vector interaction will be exploited to produce specific probes for
application in EM in situ localization studies to identify the site(S) within
the vector leading to this recognition. This research concerns the molecular
basis of aphid transmission of a group of economically important plant viruses
known as the pea enation mosaic viruses. This study will provide information on
the viral protein domains involved in aphid transmission of the virus, and the
genetic mechanisms that lead to the expression of specific viral phenotypes. In
addition, it will provide information on the pathway of virion transport, as
well as on the presence and location of viral receptors in the aphid vector.
Since there is currently no known plant resistance mechanisms for these viral
groups, understanding this transmission process may suggest methods for both
vector and virus control.