* 9105463
* The German Mesolithic/Neolithic Transition
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1992
* Michael Jochim, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* name not available
* 06/30/1992
* USD 15,776.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Michael Jochim will
conduct archaeological excavations at the site of Henauhof Northwest 2 (HNW-2)
located in south-central Germany. Preliminary work by Dr. Jochim indicates that
the site was occupied by Mesolithic hunter-gatherers approximately 6500 years
ago. It lies on the shoreline of a former lake and is rich in both lithic and
faunal remains. During one season of fieldwork Dr. Jochim and his colleagues
will excavate an area of 80-100 square meters. All finds will be measured in
three dimensions and all sediments screened. In addition, soil samples will be
studied to recover small lithic debitage and faunal remains. Soil samples will
be taken for palynological and botanical analysis and charcoal samples collected
for radiocarbon dating. Botanical floral and lithic analysis will be conducted.
The period around 6500 years ago marks a time of marked change in this region.
The local Mesolithic inhabitants, who for thousands of years hunted and
gathered, were exposed to intrusive "Linear Band Ceramic" (LBK) cultures which
were intrusive to the region and which followed a Neolithic way of life. The LBK
peoples planted crops, kept domestic animals and used ceramic vessels. Because
archaeologists are interested in questions of culture change and contact, the
interaction between Mesolithic foragers and LBK immigrants is a subject of great
interest. Several models, ranging from avoidance to open warfare to cooperation
have been proposed yet data is not available to select among them. Because the
HNW-2 contains rich well stratified remains from the appropriate time period, it
has the potential to shed light on this issue. The small scale work proposed for
this one season project should establish a basis for a larger project. This
research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to a
large number of Europeanist archaeologists. It will, hopefully, provide new
insight into how cultures interact and change Finally it will aid in the
training of students.