* 9105293
* Essential Roles of Pro-Sequence in Subtilisin Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Masayori Inouye, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1994
* USD 90,000.00

There are a large number of proteins whose three dimensional structures have
been determined. However, virtually very little is known as to how these
proteins are folded. In order to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of protein
folding, the role of the pro-sequence in the folding of subtilisin E, an
alkaline serine protease produced by Bacillus subtilis has been studied. This
protein is produced from the pre-pro subtilisin consisting of the pro-sequence
(signal peptide) of 21 residues, the pro-sequence of 77 residues, and the mature
protease of 275 residues. The pro-sequence is absolutely essential for the
production of enzymatically active subtilisin, and functions as an
intramolecular chaperon for protein folding. This is a novel, unprecedented
finding and provides and ideal and unique system for studying the molecular
mechanisms of protein folding. In this application the exact role of the pro-
sequence in the folding pathway will be elucidated. It is of interest to
investigate how the pro-sequence interacts with mature, active subtilisin and
pursue biochemical and biophysical characterization of pro-subtilisin and of
pro- peptides of various sequences and lengths. By using molecular genetic
approaches as well as synthetic pro-peptides, the site or regions responsible
for refolding denatured subtilisins will be determined. The goal in this
proposal is to elucidate the precise roles of the pro-peptide in the folding of
subtilisin, which is expected to provide important insight into understanding of
the molecular mechanisms of protein folding. For this purpose, the following
experiments will be performed: 1. Isolation of mutant pro-subtilisins defective
in autoprocessing and their characterization; 2. Isolation and characterization
of mutations within the pro-peptide defective in producing active subtilisin; 3.
Isolation of second site suppressor mutations a new method developed in the
laboratory will be extensively employed using localized PCR random mutagenesis;
4. Characterization of folding intermediated accumulated as a result of
mutations; 5. Production of the wild-type and mutant pro-peptides by organic
synthesis and by recombinant DNA technology. Their biochemical an biophysical
characterization and their interaction with mature subtilisin.