* 9105711
* lecular Biology and Biochemistry of Heme and Copper-        ntaining Dissimilatory Denitrifying Enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Jean LeGall, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 240,000.00

That type of anaerobic (or alternative) bacterial respiration called
denitrification entails utilization of branched electron transport chains.
Nitrate is reduced to nitrite by electrons donated by reduced quinones to a
b-type cytochrome subunit and thence to the molybdo-iron-sulfur subunit of
nitrate reductase, a complex, membrane-bound enzyme conserved in all known
denitrifiers. Nitrite is reduced to nitric oxide by electrons passing from the
cytochrome bc1 complex to cytochrome c551 and then to cytochrome cd1, the
nitrite reductase conserved in 90% of denitrifying isolates. The other apparent
denitrifiers make use of a copper protein nitrite reductase that reduces nitrite
to nitric oxide and appears in several cases tested not to link reduction to
phosphorylation but to function as a nitrite detoxifier. Nitric oxide reductase,
as integrally membrane-bound enzyme and reportedly very nearly purified in only
two or there laboratories, appears to be a bc-type cytochrome. Nitrous oxide
reductase is an eight-copper protein conserved in several denitrifiers and
reported in one case to have a c- type cytochrome subunit. Ancillary enzymes
(e.g., cytochrome c',superoxide dismutase, and cytochrome c peroxidase)
apparently serve to protect this type of respiration from possibly damaging
oxidants. To study the copper enzymes of Achromobacter cycloclastes, obtaining
tertiary structures for cupredoxin and the N2O reductase, a Model of docking
mechanisms for electron transfer among these copper enzymes will be developed.
Genes for the copper enzymes will be cloned in E. coli and site- directed
mutagenesis will be used with the possibility of transfer of the genes into P.
stutzeri mutants lacking nitrite and/or nitrous oxide reductase. One goal will
be reestablishment in vitro of the entire physiological electron transfer chain
from pyridine nucleotide to terminal oxidant. Two unusual, perhaps unique,
cytochromes that appear to bear ancillary roles in denitrification will be
studied intensively. These are, first, the high-spin-heme-bearing "b'-type"
protein from B. halodenitrificans which reversibly binds nitric oxide; and,
second, the cytochrome c-552 from anaerobically but not aerobically grown P.
stutzeri Zobell strain, which undergoes alteration to become a cytochrome c
peroxidase. Investigation of the unusual properties of the B. haloldenitrificans
nitrite reductase will be carried out to determine how the enzyme fits into the
Gram + cell. The mechanism for regulating the performance of D. desulfuricans
hexaheme as either nitrite or nitric oxide reductase will be investigated.