* 9105451
* elF-2 Activity in Vaccinia Virus Infected Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Rosemary Jagus, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 210,570.00

Eukaryotic initiation factor 2, eIF, is an essential protein synthesis
initiation factor that is subject to regulation by reversible phosphorylation.
As part of the cellular antiviral defense mechanism, an interferon-induced,
dsRNA-dependent protein kinase,eIF-2.-PKds, becomes activated on viral infection
and phosphorylates the alpha subunit eIF-2. This results in a limitation of
functional eIF-2 available for protein synthesis with a concomitant reduction of
protein synthesis. A number of animal viruses, including vaccinia virus, have
evolved mechanisms to inhibit the activation of eIF-2.-PKds in interferon-
treated cells. The ability of vaccinia virus to grow in interferon-treated cells
stems in part from the production of a vaccinia early gene product, termed
specific kinase inhibitory factor, SKIF, that prevents activation of
eIF-2.-PKds. In addition vaccinia virus encodes a gene which has homology with
the alpha subunit of eIF-2 and encodes a 10 kDa protein. Although the function
of the eIF-2 alpha-like gene is not known, an eIF-2 alpha-like peptide of
approximately 10 kDa accumulates early in vaccinia virus infection. The first
aim of this proposal is to monitor the effect of vaccinia virus infection on the
levels and activation state of elF-2.-PKds, as well as the phosphorylation state
of elF-2. in vaccinia virus infected Hela cells. The reagents necessary to do
this, antibody to elF-2.-PKds and elF-2. are available. The second aim of ths
ptoposal is to investigate the function of pK2 and to determine whether its
product has elF-2>.-like activity and whether it is involved in the ability of
vaccinia virus to grow in interferon- treated cell. The K2 gene has been cloned
into the expression vector, pTM1, which will enable us to synthesize
radiolabelled PK2 in vitro, as well to transfect the gene into mammalian cells.
The gene will be transferred to a bacterial expression vector to allow the
production of milligram quantities of pK2 for biochemical analyses. The
properties of the vaccinia encoded elF-2.-like gene product will be compared
with those of cellular elF-2. with reference to its guanine nucleotide binding
properties, its ability to enter preinitiation complexes, and its ability to
function as a substrate for elF-2.-PKds.