* 9105554
* Studies on the Cytopathogenic Protein from Naegleria Ambebaeand its Activities in Cultured Vertebrate Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Thelma Dunnebacke, Public Health Foundation Enterprises, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 08/31/1995
* USD 240,000.00

Free living amoebae of the genus Naegleria were found to contain a filterable
agent (NACM, Naegleria amoeba cytopathogenic material) that could destroy a
variety of vertebrate cells in culture in a highly distinctive manner. After a
delay of 4-6 days, a new product, detected by monoclonal antibodies made to
NACM, developed in the cytoplasm of the treated cells at a time shortly
preceding the rapid and complete disintegration of the entire culture. Active
products from such cells could be passaged on new cultures. The objective of
this investigation is to identify by amino acid sequence the biologically active
NACM and to use this identity to determine the causal relationship between it
and the new cell products. The isolation methods include hydrophobic
interaction, gel permeation, and affinity chromatography, followed by
preparative and analytical electrophoresis. The identification methods include
bioassay, determination of amino acid sequence, peptide synthesis and antibody
production and use in immunoassays, immunochemical identification, quantitation,
and analysis. %%% Essentially, NACM is a protein which, in some as yet unknown
fashion, triggers in cultured vertebrate cells both the production of more of
itself (or a close homolog) and the specific death of the cell. Elucidation of
the mechanism underlying the NACM phenomenon could have broad implications for
biology.