* 9105660
* Ultrafast Dark Spatial Solitary Wave Propagation Phenomena: Physics and Device Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1995
* David Andersen, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 06/30/1995
* USD 190,525.00

Recently, the propagation of dark spatial solitons in a variety of different
material systems has been observed by the PI. These systems include sodium
vapor, various thermal liquids, and the bulk semiconductors ZnSe and GaAs. The
work described in this proposal will consist of experimental, theoretical, and
numerical efforts, and represents a comprehensive program designed to understand
the fundamental nature of the propagation of dark spatial soliton eigenmodes in
general self-defocusing nonlinear optical media. We will investigate in detail
the collision and stability properties of these solitons when they are subjected
to experimental perturbations. Such perturbations may include loss (both linear
and nonlinear absorption), deviation from the simple Kerr-law dependence of the
real part of the refractive index, and instabilities induced by the difference
in dimensionality between the experimental situation and the one typically
assumed for theoretical treatments of the problem. In addition to the
experiments to be performed in bulk nonlinear optical media, a series of
experiments designed to investigate the propagation characteristics of dark
surface waves will be performed. Dark surface waves are a new kind of wave
discovered by the PI which are closely related to dark spatial solitons and are
expected to have application in the area of nonlinear integrated optics.