* 9105914
* High Altitude Hunter-Gatherer Adaptation in the Middle RockyMountains
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Mary Lou Larson, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1994
* USD 134,003.00

This action permits Dr. Frison and his colleagues to continue archaeological
excavation at the Helen Lookingbill archaeological site which is located at an
altitude of 8600 feet in northwestern Wyoming. Previous work has demonstrated
that the site contains stratified deposits which date from ca. 10,000 to 5,000
years ago. The rich and well-preserved faunal and lithic remains contain a
record of human activity which spans the Paleoindian and Early Archaic periods.
The team will continue careful excavation with exact plotting of individual
pieces. Faunal and lithic remains will be analyzed and supplemented with a
number of other studies. Additional work on site geology will provide clues to
site formation processes. Such work on a broader regional level combined with
pollen analysis should show how climate changed over time in this high altitude
area and thus provide a backdrop for the understanding of human response. The
region will also be surveyed for available stone sources which will be
chemically characterized. Lithic materials from the site will be matched to
these to give a picture of broader environment use. While many archaeological
sites have been excavated in the adjacent Great Plains region, relatively little
is known about how native American populations adapted to the harsher high
altitude environments. From information to date it appears that a different
cultural trajectory was followed in this latter region and that agriculture was
not adopted. To understand human adaptation, it is necessary to excavate rich
stratified sites with long cultural sequences and to date them accurately. The
Helen Lookingbill site provides an excellent opportunity for this. This research
is important for several reasons. It will increase our knowledge of a relatively
unknown region of North America. It will shed light on how human societies at a
simple level of technological organization adapt to a harsh and changing
environment. It will also further development of excavation and recording
techniques pioneered by Dr. Frison and his colleagues. These will have
widespread archaeological applicability.