* 9105902
* Genetic Dissection of Disturbances of Meiosis &amp;             Spermatogenesis in Drosophila.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* David Haymer, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1995
* USD 367,000.00

We propose continuing the investigation of the Segregation distorter (SD) system
which results in abnormal meiosis and/or spermatogenesis in Drosophila. The main
elements of the SD system include the euchromatic allele Sd and the
heterochromatic element E(SD), whose products interact to cause dysfunction of
sperm containing a repetitive DNA sequence (Rsps) mapping to the 2 centromere.
Transpositions, partial deletions and additions of Rsps DNA by P-element
mediated transformation will be used to specify dose-response relationships
between number of SD elements, Rsps repeat copy number, and level of sperm
dysfunction, and to demonstrate directly the role of the DNA repeats in causing
sperm dysfunction. These experiments will also lead to a cytogenetic
characterization of 2R heterochromatin; in particular, a side product may be the
use of chromosome rearrangements with breakpoints tagged by Rsps DNA repeats to
identify centromeric DNA. We will use P-element mutagenesis to produce tagged
mutations in E(SD), Sd or other as yet uncharacterized genes of the SD system,
and we will use detachment of X^X chromosomes to yield Dp (2;X)E(SD)
chromosomes, useful for measuring the dosage relationships between Sd and E(SD)
in causing sperm dysfunction. These should allow detailed analysis of E(SD), the
last major locus of the SD system so characterized. An understanding of genetic
changes leading to errors in sperm development in Drosophila may provide clues
for a better understanding of the normal fertility process in more complex
eukaryotic organisms.***//