* 9105888
* RUI:  Endoplasmic Reticulum and Protein Secretion in Heat   Shocked Plant Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Mark Brodl, Knox College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1995
* USD 236,000.00

The long-term goal of this research is to understand the cell biology of higher
plant responses to environmental stress. The model system for investigation is
the heat shock response of the aleurone layer of barley grains. The cells of
this tissue are normally dedicated to protein secretion; however, heat shock
dramatically redirects their cellular activities. The synthesis of secretory
proteins is abruptly arrested when the tissue is subjected to heat shock, yet
the synthesis of nonsecretory proteins continues. This is accomplished by the
selective destabilization of otherwise stable secretory protein mRNAs. Heat
shock also causes the loss of endoplasmic reticulum lamellar structures upon
which secretory protein mRNAs are translated; only small fragments of ER remain.
This appears to provide the discriminatory mechanism for selectively stopping
the synthesis of secretory proteins, as nonsecretory protein mRNAs are not
translated by ER-bound ribosomes. The work proposed investigates the molecular
and cellular basis for these heat shock-induced events. In vitro translation
reactions supplemented with barley microsomes will be used to investigate
whether the ER fragments of heat-shocked aleurone cells can serve as sites for
the translation and translocation of proteins. The ER lamellae are supported by
a cytoskeleton. In other organisms, the cytoskeleton has been shown to be
unstable during heat shock. Immunofluorescence microscopy will be used to
investigate the effect of heat shock on cytoskeletal elements of barley aleurone
cells. Heat-induced shifts in the buoyant densities of ER membranes have been
observed; these will be investigated by assaying protein:lipid ratios of
microsomes isolated on sucrose density gradients. Secretory protein mRNAs
contain secretory signals that direct them to be translated on ER lamellae.
Aleurone cells transformed with signal sequence - reporter gene constructs will
be used to determine of the presence of such a signal is sufficient to render
the mRNA unstable during heat shock. These experiments should provide insights
into the cell biology of ER, as well as reveal mechanisms for regulating protein
expression during heat shock. These efforts will ultimately build a better
understanding of how plants respond and adapt to stress.