* 9105116
* Affinity Labeling of Purine Nucleotide Sites in Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Roberta Colman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 01/31/1995
* USD 274,500.00

Purine nucleotides have a multi-functional role in cellular metabolism. For
example, they are directly involved in kinase and ATPase reactions, they functin
as regulators of many allosteric enzymes, they are involved (through the effects
of cyclic AMP) in the action of several hormones, they contribute to the
aggregation of platelets, and they participate in dehydrogenase reactions as
part of the coenzyme molecule. The immediate aim of this study is to develop the
tools which will allow systematic exploration of the amino acid residues in the
purine nucleotide sites of proteins. The general approach of affinity labeling
will be used based on reagents previously synthesized in this laboratory as well
as on new reagents which incorporate, at various positions of the purine or
ribose ring, alkylating agents capable of reacting covalently with the protein;
the purine nucleotide moiety will thus provide the specificity for chemical
modification of the proteins within the binding sites. The effects of these
nucleotide alkylating agents on the rabbit muscle pyruvate kinase as well as on
the rat liver ecto-ATPase will be examined. The aggregation of blood platelets
is induced by ADP, presumably by binding to receptor sites on the platelet
surface membrane. Affinity labeling with the purine nucleotide analogues will be
used to identify and isolate the ADP receptor protein of platelet membranes.
Further, the effects of reactive cAMP derivatives on the platelet cAMP
phosphodiesterase will be explored. For each enzyme, the kinetics of the
affinity labeling reaction will be examined, the extend of reagent incorporation
will be determined and radioactive peptides will be isolated from proteolytic
digests of labeled enzyme to identify the modified residue. The first class of
nucleotide analogues which we described, the fluorosulfonylbenzoyl nucleosides,
has already been used to react at specific sites of more than 50 proteins; it is
likely that the newer compounds which we develop will similarly have broad
applicability in the labeling of nucleotide sites in proteins and that these
studies will serve as prototypes for the use of these compounds to probe other
enzymes.