* 9105890
* Analysis of Processes Associated with Replication of        Subviral RNAs in the TCV System
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Anne Simon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Todd M. Martensen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 281,759.00

The processes by which plant viral and subviral RNAs replicate and produce
disease symptoms are not understood. One particularly intriguing question
concerns the origin of linear subviral RNA multimers. A proposed model suggests
that multimers are formed by the same process as the generation of discontinuous
RNAs in the same system; the replicase reinitiates synthesis before releasing
the newly synthesized strand. This model will be tested by following the
formation of multimers and monomers in a protoplast replication system as well
as analyzing different satellite RNA mutations which affect the ratio of
monomers and multimers produced in vivo. A second question involves the recent
finding that reiterative copying of redundant nucleotide can occur under
specific circumstances in a subviral RNA accumulating in plants. In certain
animal viruses, this process, known as replicase stuttering, results in the
exposure of cryptic reading frames. A model involving a stable stem loop
structure in the region of the nucleotide additions will be tested using
deletion analysis and in vitro mutagenesis techniques. The possibility of a
physiological role for reiterative nucleotide copying will be addressed by
transferring a "stuttering cassette" to a heterologous viral RNA and testing for
the ability to insert additional, non- encoded nucleotides. //