* 9105582
* Salt Tolerance and Sodium Transport in Freshwater and Salt  Tolerant Charophyte Algae
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Mary Bisson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1995
* USD 242,100.00

The ability to tolerate saline conditions is a variable and complex trait in
plants. Salinity tolerance includes the ability to respond to osmotic stress and
resistance to toxicity of individual ions. These traits are significant in
determining the natural distribution of plants, and are important in
agriculture, because salinity may limit productivity, especially in irrigated
soils. The study will be done on Charophytes, complex macrophytic algae closely
related to the line which gave rise to higher plants. These algae have large
internodal cells, permitting experimental manipulations not possible in other
plants. Two closely related species, Chara corallina, an obligate freshwater
species, and C. buckellii, a species collected from a salt lake which can be
cultured in fresh or salt water will be studied. The two species differ in their
ability to regulate turgor and in their tolerance to sodium and magnesium. Dr.
Bisson will study ion fluxes and the mechanism by which they occur in intact
cells, cells with permeabilized plasmalemma, cells whose internal contents have
been perfused away and replaced by controlled solutions, isolated vesicles of
membrane, and patches of membrane. The aim is to elucidate the mechanism of
movement and how this movement is controlled by environmental and cytoplasmic
factors to confer resistance to salt toxicity.//