* 9105202
* Collaborative Research: Solving Chess with Probabilistic    Planning and Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Hans Berliner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 02/28/1993
* USD 22,000.00

This is collaborative research with Stuart Russell at the University of
California-Berkeley (IRI-90204557). Game-playing is an important domain for two
reasons: first, it exhibits in a clean form two of the major problems facing AI
systems, namely how to pay attention to only a small fraction of the
possibilities in complex domains, and how to use a large quantity of evidential
information to make decisions; second, it has long been considered a litmus test
for ideas about problem solving and for the quality of AI ideas in general,
particularly in comparison to human intelligence. Recent work on control of
search by Russell and Wefald and on probabilistic inference in problem solving
domains by Hansson and Mayer, suggests that the PI's will be able to break the
grip of brute-force methods on high-performance systems. The object of the
proposed research is to test out these ideas, with a view to demonstrating
feasibility of an intelligent chess program with the potential to perform at a
high level. Should the effort succeed, the PI's will continue with a concerted
attempt to defeat the human world champion. The purely scientific benefits
should be significant, in terms of demonstrating the feasibility of large-scale
probabilistic inference and metalevel control; the benefits to the field of AI
in the larger national context will be immeasurable, since several influential
critics will be disarmed, and success will avoid the extremely deleterious
conclusion the "all your need for AI is faster chips".