* 9105086
* Asymptotically Reliable Serial Production Lines:  A         System-Theoretic Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Semyon Meerkov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 08/31/1993
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this research is to contribute to the understanding of fundamental
system-theoretic properties of manufacturing processes modeled as serial
production lines in mass production environment. A particular class of processes
addressed is referred to as asymptotically reliable serial production lines.
Such lines consist of machines that have, in isolation, very good performance
characteristics. Nevertheless, being placed in a production line, they may (and
often do) operate much less efficiently. Therefore, the main problem addressed
in this project is how to design a serial production line so that its
performance is as close to that of machines in isolation as possible. A study to
develop formalized, analytical procedures for optimal buffer capacity
assignment, feedback control of row material dispatch, and optimal quality
control system design will be performed. The approach of the study is based on
an asymptotic analysis of Markov chains that describe production systems under
consideration. Although simplified analysis of Markov processes has been
utilized in modern System and Control theory on a number of occasions, the
asymptotics employed in this work has not been explored and exploited in the
past. It is expected that the results of this project will contribute to the
science base of manufacturing systems modeled as serial production lines.