* 9105801
* Structural and Functional Analysis of Two Parvalbumins of   Extramuscular Origin
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,01/01/1992
* Michael Henzl, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/01/1992
* USD 44,400.00

The parvalbumins were originally identified as calcium-binding cytoplasmic
proteins in striated muscle where they are thought to function as calcium
buffers. The subject of this research is the structure and function of two
members of the parvalbumin family of proteins from non-muscle tissues. The
parvalbumin, oncomodulin, binds calcium and magnesium far less tightly than rat
parvalbumin, despite 53% sequence identity. Production and characterization of
additional site-specific variants of oncomodulin will further elucidate the
factors responsible for ion-binding affinity in this family of calcium binding
proteins. These results should have relevance not only to calcium-binding
proteins, but to protein- ligand interactions in general. A surprising result of
prior studies was the finding that a molecule previously known as Avian Thymic
Hormone (ATH) is a member of the parvalbumin family, expressed specifically in
the thymus. Avian thymic hormone is believed to facilitate avian T-lymphocyte
maturation, but virtually nothing is known about its mechanism of action.
Pursuit of this finding by identifying a receptor for ATH on bone marrow
precursor cells and/or immature lymphocytes is a second major goal of this
proposal. Characterization of the receptor should provide insight into the
physiological significance of the parvalbumin-like thymic hormones. Avian thymic
hormone and the muscle-associated parvalbumin from chicken are both expressed in
a tissue-specific manner. Comparison of regulatory sequences in the two
parvalbumin genes and characterization of specific DNA-binding proteins should
provide insight into regulation of tissue-specific gene expression. Parvalbumins
are calcium-binding proteins believed to function as cytoplasmic calcium ion
buffers in muscle. There is evidence to suggest that they play additional,
possibly regulatory, roles in non-muscle tissues. This research is directed
toward understanding the molecular structure and cellular function of these
proteins. The results of this research will contribute new knowledge concerning
the molecular basis for the role of calcium binding proteins in cellular
signaling.