* 9105010
* Massive Burial Dolomitization: The Jurassic Vajont Oolite   of Northeastern Italy
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Lawrence Hardie, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1993
* USD 139,839.00

The origin of massive replacement dolomite remains one of the major unresolved
problems of sedimentology. Presently favored interpretations for the origin of
massive dolomites have centered on "early" low temperature processes involving
surface or near- surface waters, and alternative processes such as "late" burial
dolomitization have been overlooked by all but a few workers. The recent
development of theoretical and computer models of groundwater flow systems in
sedimentary basins makes the time ripe for a new look at burial dolomitization.
Fluid flow is the one new factor of major significance that needs to be added to
our attempts to resolve the dolomite problem. This is a study of the dolomite of
the Jurassic Vajont Oolite of the Venetian Alps in northern Italy where
preliminary field and geochemical work indicates that dolomitization occurred at
elevated temperatures under burial conditions. The approach will be to integrate
fieldwork, petrography, isotope and fluid inclusion data, and hydrologic
modeling. The Vajont Oolite offers several special features that make such a
study worthwhile: (1) it is massively but not completely dolomitized so that
dolomitization fronts that give direct clues to the subsurface pathways of the
dolomitizing fluids can be mapped (see Newton, Hardie and Phillips, 1990); (2)
it consists of shallow water ooids that were resedimented in deep water by slope
processes before alteration, thus shallow water dolomitization processes are
ruled out; (3) the ooids and their intergranular cements are well preserved in
the undolomitized parts of the Vajont sot hat it is possible to document in
detail their pre-dolomitization petrography and isotope geochemistry; thus, the
changes produced by dolomitization can be identified and measured; (4) exposures
of partly but massively dolomitized Vajont in roadcuts reveal that
dolomitization fluid pathways were controlled by fracture and fault planes of
Late Tertiary age (Alpine orogeny), indication unequivocally that the
dolomitization was of "late" burial origin. The results of the study could shed
new light on the role of deeply circulated subsurface fluids in the origin of
massive dolomites, particularly those that act as reservoirs to oil, gas, and
hydrothermal ores.