* 9105361
* Activation of Mast Cells and Eosinophils: Studies at the Single-Cell Level
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1995
* Clare Fewtrell, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 11/30/1995
* USD 305,500.00

Activation of non-excitable cells leads to an increase in intracellular calcium
and the generation of other intracellular signals which together initiate the
physiological response. Single-cell studies of stimulus-response coupling in
non-excitable cells are proposed, using two immune effector cells, the mast cell
and the eosinophil, as model systems. The mast cell has been a valuable model
for many years. In contrast, remarkably little is known about signal
transduction in eosinophils, in spite of their importance in a variety of immne
responses. Studies on mast cells will continue to utilize the well-established
rat basophilic leukemia cell line. Guinea pig eosinophils will be used for more
preliminary studies of signal transduction in eosinophils. Quantitative image
enhanced microscopy will be used to measure Ca2+, membrane potential, exocytosis
and chemotaxis in single cells. In many cases more than one of these parameters
can be monitored simultaneously in many individual cells. Electrophysiologcal
measurements, utilizing the perforated patch configuration of the whole cell
recording technique, will be used to identify calcium currents or any other
conductances that are activated in response to various stimuli. Simultaneous
measurements of intracellular Ca2+, ionic current, and exocytosis are also
planned. The long term goal is to identify the mechanisms by which intracellular
Ca2+ is increased and to determine what aspects of the Ca2+ signal are important
in the exocytotic and/or chemotactic response of a cell. When mast cells or
eosinophils interact with certain protein or peptide effectors (such as
immunoglobulins), the effectors bind to receptors on the surfaces of these cells
and result in a specific physiological response (such as secretion of the
contents of specific storage granules). The question addressed in these studies
is how the binding of a receptor at the outside of the cell results in the
physiological response, a phenomenon termed stimulus-response coupling. It has
already been established that intracellular calcium is increased as a result of
stimulation, and that the increased calcium levels leads to the generation of
other intracellular signals culminating in the response. This project will probe
the role of calcium in stimulus-response coupling, using a combination of novel
and established techniques (sometimes simultaneously) in order to extend our
understanding of the mechanism of this form of transmembrane signal
transduction.