* 9105666
* Prehistoric Human Ecology on the Golfo Dulce, Southern CostaRica
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* John Hoopes, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 47,356.00

During preliminary field reconnaissance in 1990, Dr. John Hoopes located 22
prehistoric sites on and around Golfito bay, Costa Rica. Ceramic and lithic
artifacts indicate that these cover a time range from 500 B.C. to 600 A.D. Among
the most important discoveries were two large shell midden sites with excellent
preservation of organic materials. This is rare in wet tropical regions. Each of
these sites contained high concentrations of well-preserved mammal, bird, fish
and human bone in addition to shell. Large quantities of charcoal and pottery
were also present. With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Hoopes will
conduct excavation at both shell middens. He will collect samples of a wide
variety of organic as well as inorganic remains. A team of specialists has been
assembled to analyze these and it will place specific emphasis on those aspects
which will permit reconstruction of prehistoric environmental and subsistence
patterns. Lake core sediments will also be collected to allow placement of these
sites into a broader paleoenvironmental context. Finally, a preliminary survey
of local caves and rockshelters will be conducted to search for sites dating to
the earliest periods of occupation of the region. While considerable
archaeological attention has been focussed on the development of agriculture in
temperate regions, relatively little is known about how human populations
adapted in tropical areas. Yet it is clear that chiefdoms and complex societies
developed in such regions in Middle America and the goal of this research is to
learn about the subsistence base which allowed this to happen. It is also known
that prehistoric groups in the American tropics utilized both root crops as well
as maize, but it is not clear when the latter was adopted and the role it may
have played in the development of social complexity. It is not lack of
archaeological interest but rather poor preservation which has hampered research
and what makes Dr. Hoopes sites so important is the excellent preservation of
both faunal and floral remains. In addition to the regional knowledge which will
emerge, this research is important because it will increase our understanding of
long-term human adaptations to the humid tropics. It will also provide insight
into how tropical forests may be used on a sustained basis. Given the
involvement of graduate students, the research will contribute to the training
of young scientists.