* 9105912
* Studies on the Role of Adenovirus Elb Oncoprotein in Gene   Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Lynne Vales, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/1995
* USD 255,000.00

This proposal presents experiments to delineawte the function domains of the
adenoviral encoded 21 kDa E1B protein required, along with adenoviral E1A
protein and the 55 kDa E1b protein for cellular transformation. Evidence
suggests that this protein leads to increase levels of another adenovirus mRNA
that encodes a viral capsid protein, polypeptide IX (pIX). The 21 KDa E1B
protein is also known to stabilize DNA in transfected and infected cells. The
experiments presented are designed to determine if the E1B protein also
activates gene expression using the already well studies pIX transcription unit.
The function of the 21 kDa E1B protein during oncogenesis is unknown and its
contribution to cellular transformation in the presence of adenovirus encoded
E1A proteins and the 55 kDa E1B protein is also unknown Therefore, the
possibility that this protein activates gene expression will be analyzed and the
role of this activity in transformation will be examined. The functional domains
of the 21 kDa E1B protein will be mapped using deletional analysis and examines
for activation of pIX gene expression in transient expression assays. The pIX
promoter region will be altered to test for activation by the E1B protein.m If
confirmation of pIX gene activation by E1B protein is obtained and a specific
domain of the E1B protein that mediates this activity is identified, then this
domain will also be tested for DNA stabilization property and transforming
ability using appropriate viral constructs. The possible affects of the 21 kDa
E1B protein on the retention of proteins bound to the pIX promoter will be
examines using gel retardation assays. Extracts from uninfected and infected
cells will be compared for differences in retardation of a DNA fragment
containing the pIX promoter region. Identification of the proteins involved in
retarding the pIX promoter DNA will be performed using competing oligonucleotide
containing the already identified pIX promoter elements. The ultimate goal is to
determine if E1B protein does activate gene expression, if this activity
correlates will transforming activity. These analyses will provide the
foundation for extended analyses of the mechanism by which E1B protein activates
pIX gene expression in a system defined in vitro. This research may apply to the
means by which the 21 kDa E1B protein participates in cellular transformation.