* 9105523
* Mutational Analysis of Intermediate Filaments in Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Michael Klymkowsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 07/31/1995
* USD 240,000.00

Intermediate filaments (IFs) are a major structural component of striated
muscle. To study the organization and functions of muscle IFs, we have
constructed two types of mutant forms of the IF protein vimentin. C-terminal
truncations of vimentin co- assemble with and disrupt IFs. The expression of
such "disruptive" mutants in the rat myogenic cell line L6 will be used to study
the effects of disrupting IF organization during the course of muscle
differentiation in vitro. A combination of light and election microscopy will be
used to determine whether an intact IF system is required for myoblast fusion,
the establishment of sarcomeric organization, the formation and stability of
costameres (i.e. regions of interaction between Z- lines and the plasma
membrane), or the lateral alignment of myofibrils into myofibers. To complement
these in vitro studies, we will examine the effects of disruptive vimentin
mutants on skeletal muscle organization in the developing Xenopus tadpole. In
the context of the swimming tadpole, functions of IFs related to mechanical
integration of muscle and muscle components may become more obvious than in
cultured cells. To identify proteins involved in muscle IF organization, we have
made mutants forms of vimentin that do not co-assemble with endogenous IFs.
These soluble, "non-assemblying" mutants retain either the C- and/or N-terminal
domains of the vimentin molecule intact. It is through these domains that IF
proteins are thought to intact with other molecules. Non-asssemblying mutants
are therefore expected to interact with, and perhaps sequester, specific IF-
associated proteins involved in the interaction between IFs and the Z-disc, the
plasma membrane, microtubules and mitochondria. We will determine whether the
expression of non- assemblying vimentin mutants affects IF organization or
cellular differentiation in muscle and myogenic cells. We will then determine
whether specific cellular proteins co-isolate with the exogenous, non-
assemblying, mutant proteins. The study of these proteins should extend our
understanding of how the changing organization of IFs during myogenesis is
controlled. The result of our studies should provide a clear definition of the
functions of IFs in striated muscle and, through the identification of IF-
associated proteins, a better understanding of the molecular architecture of
muscle.