* 9105226
* Comparative and Developmental Analysis of Surface Domains
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* G. Benjamin Bouck, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1995
* USD 270,000.00

This study will address the regulation of cell form and the segregation of
surface domains in a model unicellular system, Euglena. In Euglena, cell form is
maintained by a peripheral membrane skeleton that is bound to the plasma
membrane by an integral membrane protein, IP39. The interactions between IP39
and the two major membrane skeletal proteins (articulins) will be dissected by
isolating the binding region, evaluating the significance of phosphorylation of
that site, and determining its amino acid sequence with a combination of partial
peptide sequencing and deduction of amino acid sequences from cDNA clones. The
80 and 86 kD membrane skeletal proteins (articulins) will be radiolabeled and
fragmented to identify their binding domains to each other and to IP39. Partial
peptide sequencing will be correlated with the deduced amino acid sequences now
available from the cDNA clones of both proteins. A genomic library will be
constructed and the cDNAs will be used to identify clones with 80 and 86 kD
encoding regions. Regions 5' (upstream) to the cDNAs will be of particular
interest as they may contain sequences specific for regulating the synthesis of
proteins of the cell surface. A 205 kD protein associated with the membrane
skeleton will be further assessed, as it has immunoidentity and a size similar
to the vertebrate membrane skeletal proteins. C-DNA clones for the 205 kD
proteins will be selected and sequenced for comparative studies. Targeting
signals for flagellar specific components (mastigonemes and the paraxial rod)
will be sought from analysis of amino termini obtained from sequence analysis of
cDNA clones for paraxial rods and mastigoneme proteins. Regions upsteam to the
cDNAs will be sequenced using clones from the proposed genomic library in order
to identify regulatory signals specific to flagella-localized proteins as
distinguished from the cell surface restricted articulins and IP39. The long-
term goal of this research is to understand the molecular and biochemical bases
for generating and maintaining cell form and for targeting proteins to areas
critical to generating cell form.