* 9105017
* Composition and History of the Siberian Lithosphere:  Major Element and Isotopic Evidence from Udachnaya Xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Francis Boyd, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John L. Snyder
* 12/31/1993
* USD 61,400.00

A collaboration between petrologists and geochemists of the Carnegie Institution
of Washington, Washington, D.C., and the Institute of Geology and Geophysics,
Novosibirsk USSR, will be organized to carry out chemical and isotopic research
on xenoliths of mantle rocks erupted in Siberian kimberlites. Soviet scientists
will participate in the research performed in Washington in visits ranging from
2 to 8 weeks. Development of models for the origin of continental cratons with
their massive mantle roots has been based in considerable part on investigations
of xenoliths from southern Africa. Further progress requires comparative study.
The Siberian craton is best suited because xenoliths are abundant and because
extensive collections and basic research have been carried out by Soviet
investigators. Attention will be focused on low-temperature, craton-forming
peridotites and on megacrystalline dunites that sometimes contain diamonds. Bulk
analyses will permit comparison of the Karpvaal and Siberian cratons. Analyses
for Os, Sr, Nd and Pb will be virtually the first performed on SIberian mantle
rocks and may provide records of craton evolution that have been obscured in
African xenoliths by post-Archaean metasomatism. Insights to the timing and
nature of diamond-forming processes and to the location and distribution of Re
and Os in mantle minerals will be sought.