* 9105585
* Analysis of Genes That Contribute to Embryogenesis in the   Zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* David Grunwald, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 01/31/1995
* USD 330,000.00

The goals of the proposed study are 1) to identify genes that contribute to
cell differentiation and formation of the body plan during embryogenesis of the
zebrafish, Brachydanio rerio, and 2) to characterize when and where in the
embryo cell or region specific gene expression originates. To examine gene
function during development, Dr. Grunwald will generate transgenic zebrafish
that harbor promoter-less lacZ reporter genes integrated at random locations in
the genome. Expression of the reporter gene will necessarily be derived from
endogenous transcriptional promoters. Patterns of gene expression that signal
early embryonic differentiation events will be recognized by virtue of the
expression of the lacZ transgene. Developmental mutation that arise from
disruption of host genes and that disturb the normal structure of the one day
embryo will be recognized using simple anatomical and behavioral screens. The
developmental mutations and their associated phenotypes will be characterized in
detail. Mutations of interest will be molecularly isolated and analyzed. To
characterize in detail the ontogeny of the earliest tissues that arise during
zebrafish embryogenesis, Dr. Grunwald will examine the expression of well
defined tissue specific genes. Analysis of the expression of Vg1 will contribute
to an understanding of the maternal contribution to development in animals with
pluripotent blastomeres. Establishing when and where tissue specific gene
expression originates will help clarify the relation between cell movements at
gastrulation and the induction of tissue differentiation, and will be a critical
first step toward developing experimentally testable hypotheses regarding the
forces that promote tissue differentiation in the zebrafish embryo.