* 9105112
* Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotopes in Soils as Indicators of      Continental Paleoclimates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Xiahong Feng, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 02/28/1995
* USD 303,489.00

There is far less quantitative information about the evolution and history of
climate on the continents than in the deep sea. Among the reasons for this is a
scarcity of quantitative proxy indicators of continental climate. The work
outlined is an effort to develop and apply techniques for using oxygen and
hydrogen isotope ratios of minerals in soil profiles as indicators of climatic
conditions during the soil-forming process. The initial stage of the research
will consist of detailed studies of a series of active weathering profiles
developed on a variety of parent materials in a variety of climatic regimes.
Weathering profiles targeted for this study include lateritic soils in the
Amazon Basin of Brazil, saprolites on the Virginia Piedmont, and weathering
profiles developed on Hawaiian basalts under varying rainfall regimes. The
approach combines careful field description, petrographic and mineralogical
study, isotopic analysis of soil water and isotopic analysis of separated soil
minerals. We expect this proposed study of modern weathering profiles to lead to
an understanding of the climatic factors which control the isotopic compositions
of soil minerals. In a later stage of the project we will apply the results of
the initial stage of the work to the study of paleosols. The most important
result expected from the proposed work is the development of new tools for the
study of continental paleoclimates. When these tools are widely applied in this
and later studies, the information obtained will be useful for global
paleoclimatic reconstructions and the testing of climate models.