* 9105941
* Households, Popular Consciousness &amp; Economic Crisis in      Argentina and Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Henry Selby, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1994
* USD 119,092.00

This project studies changes in family and household ideology, organization and
practices in the lower and middle classes of two cities in Latin America, one in
Argentina and one in Mexico. At the present time Mexico is apparently recovering
from a depression of 8 years, while Argentina is entering a new, more drastic
stage of economic problems. The project will examine the survival strategies of
households in two cities, looking at the internal organization of the
households, how they manage their funds, investments, and time, and how they
deal with changes in the labor market. The project will examine how people
represent their household responsibilities to themselves and to others, and how
they understand local, regional, national, and international economic changes.
Methods include surveys, intensive interviews and participant observation, in
collaboration with Argentinean and Mexican social scientists. This research is
important because Latin America has undergone severe economic stress, and will
continue to do so for the near future, at the same time that its population has
become increasingly urban. Anthropological research has established the profound
importance of the household in understanding how people cope with difficulties.
This project will add to our knowledge by comparing similar households in
countries at different stages of economic development. The ultimate goal is to
construct a folk theory of labor economics and the international system, in
order to understand how Latin Americans understand their economic plight. This
sort of information will be important to policy makers in assessing the impact
of different international policies on the urban population.