* 9105487
* Translational Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotic   Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Joanne Ravel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1994
* USD 225,000.00

The overall objective of this proposed research is to elucidate the intermediate
steps in the initiation of protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells. The major
objectives are to elucidate the mechanism of action of the eukaryotic protein
synthesis initiation factors (eIF)-3, 4F, 4A, and 4B in the binding of mRNA to
the ribosomes and to identify primary, secondary or tertiary structures in the
mRNA that affect the interaction of the mRNA with these factors and determine
the efficiency with which the mRNA is translated. The specific aims are: 1) to
make specific changes in the 5' ends of mRNAs and determine what effect(s) these
changes have on the amounts of eIF-3, 4F, 4A, and 4B required to initiate
translation; 2) to identify those structures in the mRNA that determine whether
initiation of translation is dependent on a M7G cap structure at the 5' end of
the mRNA; 3) to identify the recognition and/or binding sites for eIF-3, 4F, 4A,
and 4B on the mRNA; 4) to determine when the initiation process eIF-4F, 4A, and
4B are released from the mRNA; 5) to identify the factors required to initiate
translation of uncapped mRNAs, such as poliovirus mRNA, at an internal AUG
initiation codon; and 6) to determine whether eIF-4B or the cap binding subunits
of eIF-4F or (iso)4F are phosphorylated and if so, what effect phosphorylation
has on the activities of these factors. These studies will be carried out in the
wheat germ system with highly purified preparations of eIF-3, 4A, 4B, 4C, 4F and
(iso)4F and with unmodified and modified form of several mRNAs. The mRNAs will
be prepared by in vitro transcription of plasmids containing the cDNAs for .-
and >-globin mRNA, satellite tobacco necrosis virus (STNV) RNA, alfalfa mosaic
virus (AMV) RNA 4, barley .-amylase mRNA, poliovirus RNA (Lansing strain,
truncated), and Kozak hp7 CAT mRNA. Primer extension and nuclease and/or
chemical protection analysis will be used to identify the binding sites for
eIF-4F, 4A and 4B or mRNA and antibodies will be used to determine when the
factors are released from the mRNA. The results of this investigation will
provide additional information will regard to intermediate steps in the
initiation of protein synthesis in plants as well as other eukaryotic cells. The
results obtained will provide additional insights into the regulation of gene
expression at the level of translation.