* 9105247
* Metabolism of Circulating Hormones by the Fish Gill
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/1991,12/31/1996
* Kenneth Olson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 12/31/1996
* USD 278,500.00

In addition to its well-known respiratory function the mammalian lung plays an
important role in regulating a variety of plasma hormones and also serves as a
highly efficient biological filter of other blood-born molecules. The anatomy of
the lung is ideally suited to perform these activities, 1) the entire blood
volume first passes through the lung before it is divided between the other
organs, and 2) the extensive capillary network of the lungs provide a very large
surface for interactions between plasma molecules and metabolically active
cells. Previous work in this laboratory has shown that the fish gill has
anatomical features identical to the lung and subsequent studies have confirmed
that the gill, like the mammalian lung is able to metabolize circulating
hormones such as angiotensin and the catecholamines, epinephrine and
norepinephrine. Thus hormone regulation by respiratory organs developed very
early in vertebrate evolution and is not a feature unique to the lung. The
proposed research will further delineate the metabolic capabilities of the gill
with respect to a variety of important cardiovascular hormones including
angiotensin, atrial natriuretic peptides, catecholamines, serotonin and a novel
vasoactive peptide hormone T60K that was recently found in this laboratory. An
isolated perfused gill technique has been developed to quantify metabolism and
identify the important enzymatic steps. Findings form these studies will be
compared to hormone metabolism in intact fish to further identify the over-all
importance of the gill in hormone regulation. In addition, preliminary screening
will be done on the ability of the gill to metabolize foreign compounds such as
those found in polluted environments. Isolation and culture of pillar cells,
endothelial cells unique to the gill, will also be done to permit cell-specific
metabolic activity. Results form this research will be important to
endocrinologists and physiologists interested in endocrine control mechanisms
and the phylogenetic development of the vascular endothelium as a metabolic
organ. These results are also important because they provide the initial
direction for further work on the ability of the gill to metabolize toxic
substances, the latter delivered to the gill via the blood or the environment.//