* 9105318
* Toward a Model for Mineral Dissolution Kinetics
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* William Casey, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1994
* USD 118,786.00

The objective of this study is to compare the acid-base surface chemistry and
dissolution kinetics of a series of minerals of similar composition and
increasing structural complexity. This series includes bromellite (corundum,
quartz), phenakite, chrysoberyl (and beryl). This study is intended to establish
a link between models for dissolution of simple oxides, which are easily
studied, and rock-forming minerals containing several potential sites for
dissolution. The research entails determining the dissolution rate laws for
phenakite, chrysoberyl and beryl as a function of pH and temperature in the
range of 15-80 degrees C. Data already exist for the other minerals. An
essential part of the research is comparison of the dissolution activation
energies with the enthalpies of hydrogen- and hydroxyl-ion adsorption. This
comparison will determine the extent that variations in equilibrium adsorption
enthalpies with pH account for the reported variation in dissolution activation
energies with solution pH. The proposed minerals have properties which are
uniquely suited to establish the aforementioned link. All dissolve sufficiently
slowly that solute diffusion does not affect the reaction rate. Thus the acid-
base surface chemistry, which controls the pH-dependence of the reaction rate,
can be easily characterized. Most importantly, the coordination chemistry of
cations to oxygens is consistent in the entire series of minerals. This research
involves fundamental understanding of the kinetics of dissolution in common
rock-forming minerals necessary to get at the basics of rock weathering are
metamorphism.