* 9105007
* Transcriptional Regulation of Steroid Gene Networks
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Roger Miesfeld, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 249,000.00

Hormones are important physiological molecules which control a variety of
cellular processes during both development and homeostasis of most all plants
and animals. Steroids represent one class of hormones found in mammals, they are
produced by several small glands as by-products of cholesterol. Steroid hormones
circulate through the blood and enter cells by passive diffusion. The most
important mediators of steroid effects are steroid receptor proteins, which when
bound with the steroid molecule, form activated complexes that ultimately
regulate the expression of specific target genes in the nucleus. The integration
of signals coming from multiple steroid receptor interactions in a variety of
cell types, results in a coordinated response to changes in the enviroment. For
example, most steroid molecules differ by only a few atoms of carbon and oxygen,
yet increased stress leads to secretion of glucocorticoids signalling the liver
to release stored glycogen while seasonal changes in the weather cause male
birds to alter the production of androgens thereby directly influencing certain
brain cells that control mating songs. Recent advances in the molecular biology
of steroid hormone action now make it possible to begin studies at the cellular
level to investigate the mechanisms that control these seemingly intricate
responses. We propose to perform a series of molecular analyses using cloned
androgen and glucocorticoid receptor sequences to identify critical residues
important for binding of these receptors to the regulatory regions of responsive
target genes. Using three basic approaches these experiments should: 1) identify
the nucleotide sequence of optimal receptor binding sites on DNA, 2) delineate
structure- function relationships of the androgen receptor which distinguish it
from the glucocorticoid receptor, this comparative analysis may reveal important
differences between the receptors would explain the observed cell-specific
effects of these hormones, and 3) integrate androgen and glucocorticoid receptor
sequences into the chromosomes of cells that normally lack these receptors and
determine how this alters their hormonal responsiveness. We anticipate that as a
result of these basic studies aimed at dissecting the molecular interactions of
steroid receptors with target gene DNA, we may gain a greater understanding of
the circuitry which controls complex hormonal responses to developmental and
environmental cues.