* 9106041
* Biochemical Characterization of Retroviral Transactivator   Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1995
* William Dynan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 285,000.00

The retroviruses HTLV-1 and HTLV-II are distinguished from many other RNA tumor
viruses because they encode regulatory proteins that interact with the host cell
RNA synthesis machinery. One of these proteins, the tax gene product activates
transcription via a target sequence located upstream of the RNA synthesis
iniation site in the proviral LTR. The principal objectives of the present work
are to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying tax transactivation and to
identify the specific cellular proteins that interact with the tax gene product.
Functional Tax protein will be purified from eukaryotic cells infected with a
recombinant baculovirus vector. It will be determined whether purified Tax
protein binds to or modified any of the previously purified cellular
transcription factors that interact with the HTLV-1 LTR, including NF-1, HEF-1T,
and various other proteins that bind in or near three 21 bp sequence repeats
present in the target region. Binding will be measured directly in
coprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays. In addition, Tax will
be incubated with preparations of purified cellular transcription factors to
determine whether any of the polypeptides present in these preparations are
released from multisubunit complexes or otherwise modified. In separate
experiments, purified Tax protein will be added to nuclear extracts from
uninfected cells in an attempt to develop a Tax-responsive system for in vitro
transcription of the HTLV proviral promoter. As a complementary approach, anti-
Tax antibody will be prepared and added to Tax- containing reactions in an
attempt to block transcription by steric interference. In addition, a Tax
protein affinity column will be prepared and tested for its ability to deplete
nuclear extracts of general and promoter-selective transcription factors.
Finally, structure-function studies of Tax protein will be initiated. These will
include characterization of the differences between Tax protein from HTLV-1 and
HTLV-II, using the transcription and protein binding assays described above.
Also, these studies will include characterization of a mutant that alters the
transactivation specificity of HTLV- I tax to that of HTLV-II tax, two deletion
mutants that are transactivation negative, and a mutant that is a transdominant
inhibitor of HTLV-II tax. Methods of scaling- up tax expression will also be
developed, with the ultimate objective of producing Tax protein in quantities
and purity necessary for physical and structural studies.