* 9106732
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Strain Softening       Response of High Strength Concrete
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1996
* Surendra Shah, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1996
* USD 16,825.00

This award supports members of the NSF Science and Technology Center for
Advanced Cement-Based Materials at Northwestern University, headed by Professor
Surendra P. Shah, to collaborate with members of the Department of Civil
Engineering of the Technische Hochschule Darmstadt, Germany, directed by
Professor Gert Koenig. They are joining their resources and expertise in
experimental research to determine the factors that influence the strain
softening response of concrete in uniaxial compression and tension. The research
plan combines the expertise of TH Darmstadt in large-scale structural testing
and design with the knowledge of materials science being developed at the Center
for Advanced Cement-Based Materials. Recent advances in concrete technology have
made it possible to make concrete with compressive strength more than double
that of normal strength concrete. This high strength concrete is used more and
more in current construction, because of perceived beneficial characteristics,
but there is growing evidence that it is being used improperly in some cases.
The increased strength is due in part to an improved bond between the cement-
based matrix and aggregate in concrete. However this improved bond makes the
high strength concrete more brittle than normal concrete. The failure mechanisms
are poorly understood. Different failure mechanisms result in different strain
softening response. A better understanding of the strain softening response will
help to define the appropriate use of this new material.