* 9106939
* Dissertation Research: La Elvira: A Paleoindian Site in     Southwestern Columbia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* David Browman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1993
* USD 11,910.00

Under the guidance of Dr. David Browman, Mr. Cristobal Gnecco, a graduate
student at Washington University will collect data for his doctoral
dissertation. In 1985, an extensive archaeological site was discovered in the
course of road and sewer construction in the Popayan Valley in southwestern
Colombia. Preliminary analysis indicates that the stone tools are attributable
to paleoindian hunters and gatherers and may date to approximately 11,000 years
ago. With NSF support, Mr. Gnecco will return to the La Elvira site and conduct
careful stratigraphic excavation. He will strip a large horizontal expanse both
to recover additional cultural materials and to set the site into a clearer
geological context. Distributional data thus collected will hopefully shed light
on the spatial organization of activities. Both organic and obsidian materials
will be dated by radiocarbon and hydration techniques respectively. Finally, Mr.
Gnecco and his collaborators will attempt a paleoclimatic reconstruction of the
site. A core will be obtained and pollen and plant macrofossils analyzed.
Regional vegetation will be collected to provide a comparative base. Although
archaeologists agree that the first people to enter the New World crossed from
Asia via the Bering Land bridge into Alaska, it has been surprising to learn
that some of the earliest known archaeological sites are located in South
America. Just how and when the first peoples entered this part of the world is
unknown. It is also surprising that while in North America these "paleoindian"
peoples are associated with big game hunting in relatively open environments, in
South America such appears not to be the case. The question of paleoindian
prehistory in South America is complicated by the relative dearth of
archaeological data. In this context, information recovered from the La Elvira
site is extremely important. It is also interesting that this rich
archaeological occurrence is located in a forested valley. This research is
important for several reasons. It will help to fill a glaring archaeological gap
and the data will be of great interest to a large number of prehistorians. The
research should shed new light on the adaptations of early New World peoples and
will help in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.