* 9106847
* Regulation of Competence for Genetic Transformation in      Streptococcus pneumoniae
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1995
* Donald Morrison, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/1995
* USD 310,000.00

This project studies pneumococcal transformation, a naturally occurring,
inducible gene replacement mechanism that is relatively simple and very
efficient. Competence for genetic transformation in pneumococcus (Streptococcus
pneumonia) occurs during a brief period of highly specialized protein synthesis,
coordinated among all cells of an actively growing culture. During a period of
approximately 10-20 minutes, the competent cells can transport DNA into the
cytoplasm and replace homologous genes in the chromosome very efficiently. To
identify and clone genes involved in this DNA-processing mechanism, and
determine their roles, classical genetic techniques are used, including the
efficient gene replacement provided by the natural transformation process
itself, in combination with molecular methods in vitro and recombinant DNA
cloning in E. coli, to establish the molecular genetics of the system. Gene
disruption mutations are made by inserting a drug resistance marker that is
expressed both in pneumococcus and in E. coli. These studies will identify,
clone, map, and sequence genes required for synthesis and secretion of a
proteins that acts in an intercellular regulatory circuit to control the system
responsible for the temporary differentiation at competence. They also will
characterize other components of the regulatory circuit.