* 9106129
* Molecular and Cell Biological Characterization of a         Drosophila Melanogaster Gene with Homology to Human         Gelsolin
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1996
* Heinz de Couet, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 07/31/1996
* USD 240,000.00

A transcript at the flightless gene locus of Drosophila melanogaster exhibits
significant homology with the cytoskeleton regulating protein factor gelsolin
from vertebrates. When mutagenized, the gene causes either severe disruptions of
the flight muscle structure or embryonic death. Gelsolin is implicated in a
plethora of morphogenetic processes by either promoting the formation of actin
filaments from monomeric subunits, or by restricting their length in a calcium
dependent fashion. The molecular analysis of the Drosophila homologue of this
family of actin-severing proteins will, for the first time, provide a way to
correlate the molecular structure of a cytoskeleton-regulating factor with the
cellular effects of a specific mutation. The project proposes to determine
transcriptional patterns of the flightless gene by DNA sequence analysis and to
study the developmental and tissue-specific expression by in situ hybridization
and immunocytochemistry. Furthermore, it is intended to analyze mutant alleles
by the polymerase chain reaction to obtain information about functional sites
within the molecule, and to study the effects of over expression in situ by germ
line transformation with a construct containing the gelsolin gene under the
control of heterologous promoter. The results from this study are expected to
provide a detailed understanding of functional domains of gelsolin its
evolution, and of its role during embryonic development and myogenesis.