* 9106854
* A Multifactor Study of Clutch Size Determination in the     Eastern Kingbird
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Michael Murphy, Hartwick College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 01/31/1995
* USD 59,422.00

Many organisms are currently showing alarming decline in abundance. Among
birds, species that build open-cup nests, breed in North America and winter in
the New World tropics (Neotropics) are showing the sharpest declines. The
reasons for the declines are not known. To understand why populations are
suffering it is necessary to document survival patterns of (a) adults, (b)
nests, and, (c) independent young. In addition, it is crucial that we understand
what factors control and/or limit reproduction. Clutch size (number of
eggs/nest) is the primary reproductive variable among birds, and all else being
equal, individuals that lay the largest clutches and produce the most young
should dominate. It is therefore hard to understand why clutch size in some
species of birds is smaller than the most productive brood size (number of
young/nest). Understanding this phenomenon is important because reproductive
processes have a direct impact on population dynamics, and therefore
conservation practices. This project proposes to examine five hypotheses that
have been put forth to explain why clutch sizes are often smaller than the most
productive brood sizes. The Eastern Kingbird (Tyrannus tyrannus), a long
distance migrant that winters in Amazonia, typically lays just three eggs but
can raise 4 and sometimes 5 young. Experiments will be conducted to determine if
small clutch size in kingbirds is related to (a) low food availability, (b) high
predation pressure on nests, (c) trade-offs with parental survival (i.e.,
raising many young increases adult mortality), (d) trade-offs with offspring
survival (i.e., young fledged from large broods are smaller and have lower
survival rates), or, (e) unpredictable increases in clutch size due
intraspecific brood parasitism (i.e., the addition of eggs to a completed nest
by a different female). The results of this study should help to clarify the
puzzle of "submaximal" reproduction and also provide specific information on
survival, reproductive success and population stability in the Eastern Kingbird.