* 9106186
* Dissertation Research: Technology and Culture in the        Pliocene, West of Lake Turkana, Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1992
* NONE NONE, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1992
* USD 11,947.00

Under the direction of Dr. John Harris, Mr. Mzalendo Kibunjia will collect data
for his doctoral thesis. In prior work, Mr. Kibunjia has discovered three
archaeological sites located to the West of Lake Turkana in Kenya which date to
between 1.8 and 2.3 million years in age. Given the geological nature of the
region, it is highly likely that additional sites are present. Mr. Kibunjia will
conduct detailed stratigraphic excavation at the three sites and analyze the
lithic and mammal remains recovered. He will then use geological and other
relevant data to set these sites into a broader ecological context. He will also
conduct a regional survey to locate, and hopefully excavate, other similar
occurrences. Archaeological evidence indicates that the first recognizable stone
tools produced by hominids (early humans) date to just over 2 million years ago.
All come from sites in Eastern and Central Africa. Because use of complex tools
is a uniquely human hallmark, archaeologists are very interested in the
development of this trait. Very few sites, however, have been located and the
data from these is sparse. Therefore, the Lake Turkana sites are of great
archaeological significance and their excavation will hopefully shed new light
on early human adaptive strategies. This research is important for several
reasons beyond those described above. The data gathered will be of direct
interest to a large number of archaeologists who will also study these remains.
The project will assist in the training of an extremely promising young
scientist and because he is Kenyan it will also contribute to strengthened
U.S.-Kenya scientific relations.