* 9106165
* Analysis of the iab-5, 7 region of the bithorax complex of  Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,09/01/1992
* Madeline Crosby, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 09/01/1992
* USD 62,100.00

Many regulatory genes of flies, mice, humans, and other metazoan organisms share
a specific sequence motif known as the homeobox. A group of these genes share
other characteristics as well, including their ordered arrangement in large gene
complexes. The significance of these highly conserved patterns of organization
is unknown, but suggests that mechanisms for the genetic control of development
may be highly conserved, even while may involve processes not yet encountered in
simple regulatory systems. An example of such a highly ordered gene complex is
the bithorax complex, which plays a key role in the determination of segmental
identity during development of fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The work
described in this proposal contributes to the genetic and molecular analysis of
the bithorax complex, concentrating upon one regulatory region: the infra-
abdominal-5,7 (iab-5,7) region of the Abdominal-B domain. This region, which is
60kb in size and located 3' of the gene it controls, is required for the proper
development of three specific segments of the fly. Three major projects are
proposed: (1) Recovery of new mutations within the iab-5,7 region using
mutagenic agents which cause small deletions. (2) Comparison of the iab-5,7
region in D. melanogaster and a distant Drosophila species, D. virilis, by
sequence analysis and cross-species transformation experiments. (3) Functional
analysis of cis- regulatory elements within iab-5,7 using P-factor-mediated
transformation. How regulatory genes such as the bithorax region of Drosophila
control the genetic determinants leading to body morphology is a fundamental
mystery and the results from this project should give us a little more insight
into the process.***//