* 9106127
* Protocols & Software Structures for Network Managers-Agents Interactions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1991,10/31/1995
* Yechiam Yemini, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 10/31/1995
* USD 327,429.00

Current network management technologies and standards are based on a
centralized management paradigm. Management logic is centralized in managers who
access management-information bases (MIBs) at device agents. Manageability is
bounded by the number of MIB variables that may be centrally accessed and the
access speed. Thus management does not scale for large, complex, high-speed or
low bandwidth networks. This project aims to develop and study a novel
alternative to centralized management: management by delegation. Management
applications would, under this paradigm, delegate programs to agents who will
apply them to monitor and control network devices. Management functions could be
flexibly distributed to agents and execute in close proximity to devices.
Delegation thus decentralizes management rendering it scalable for large,
complex and fast networks. Success in this project would mean that the principal
investigator has established novel protocols for delegation of programs and
remote control of their executions; created efficient architectures for
execution, coordination and security of management; established semantic models
of management functions and language constructs to script them; established the
performance behaviors of the proposed delegation mechanisms in comparison to
current centralized management models; embedded and demonstrated these
technologies within real network-management systems and tools, and exported them
to academia and industry. Success would mean that the research has resulted in
establishing unifying principles and mechanisms for effective distributed
scalable network management.