* 9106898
* A Molecular Phylogenetic Perspective on Salamander Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1995
* Allan Larson, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 09/30/1995
* USD 237,000.00

The purpose of this research is to reveal the evolutionary relationships among
the different groups of salamanders by studying the information stored in their
genetic material (DNA). Information contained in the separately inherited
nuclear DNA and mitochondrial DNA is used to provide two independent inferences
of the evolutionary relationships of the different groups of salamander. The
evolutionary relationships and historical diversification of a group of
organisms constitute essential knowledge for understanding the group's
diversity, value as a natural resource and need for conservation. Nine major
groups of salamanders are currently recognized as taxonomic families
(Ambystomatidae, Amphiumidae, Cryptobranchidae, Dicamptodontidae, Hynobiidae,
Plethodontidae, Proteidae, Salamandridae and Sirenidae); earlier results of this
project suggest that the Dicamptodontidae as currently recognized incorrectly
groups two very different evolutionary lineages. The evolutionary relationships
of the salamander families to each other and the relationships of the major
lineages contained within each family constitute the focus of this work. The
experimental procedure consists of purifying DNA from specimens, isolating
comparable ("homologous") segments of DNA, obtaining the nucleotide sequence of
those DNA segments, and using statistical tests to discriminate alternative
hypothesis of salamander evolution. The patterns of relationship among species
are then used to investigate the processes by which the organismal diversity
observed in each group arose, giving special attention to developmental
patterns. Evolutionary relationships among the salamander families are used to
investigate the evolution of larval reproduction, which has occurred multiple
times in salamanders. Evolutionary relationships within the Plethodontidae and
Salamandridae address the evolution of the diverse, specialized feeding
mechanisms that are observed in these families. All levels of this analysis
contribute to a revised taxonomic classification of the salamanders. This work
also reveals the evolutionary properties of the nuclear and mitochondrial DNA
sequences studied. Particular attention is given to evaluating whether the
molecular evolutionary pattern meets the assumptions of the analytical methods
used to obtain evolutionary information from DNA sequence comparisons. This
result provides general information regarding the best analytical methods to use
and the magnitude of evolutionary divergence times over which these molecular
comparisons will be informative. This facilitates the use of molecular sequence
comparisons for conducting similar studies on other groups of organisms.