* 9106704
* An Investigation of the Cellular Events that Control the    Deposition of Patterned Walls in Plant Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Candace Haigler, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1995
* USD 255,000.00

This research will exploit a unique developmental system in which isolated
mesophyll cells differentiate synchronously to form tracheary elements.
Tracheary elements are characterized by distinctly patterned secondary walls,
but it is not known how wall deposition and patterning are controlled. Prior
results demonstrated requirements for calcium sequestration and transport before
and during wall deposition, thereby providing the first evidence for a
regulatory ion the might coordinate diverse events in cell wall deposition.
These and other results will be extended in three directions: (1) Determination
of which events in wall deposition are regulated by calcium; (2) Determination
of how wall patterning is controlled, particularly in regard to self-determining
interactions of wall components; and (3) Characterization of a plasma membrane
associated protein associated with cell wall patterning. The research will use
modern cytochemical, spectroscopic, and molecular biological techniques for
molecular dissection of cell wall structure and control of patterning. It will
represent the first attempt to obtain a molecular understanding of the temporal
and spatial control of synthesis of cell wall tracheary elements, which are
classical specimens in plant developmental biology and have a significant role
in plant adaptation.