* 9106660
* A Study of the Thermal Physiology of the Dinosauria Through the Use of Oxygen Isotpes in the Bone Phosphate
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1994
* William Showers, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 05/31/1994
* USD 80,371.00

The question of whether dinosaurs lacked effective temperature control (were
heterotherms) or were endothermic homeotherms has given rise to much
controversy. Their reptilian character suggests heterothermy; in contrast, their
rise to dominance over early mammalian stocks suggests high physiological
efficiency - homeothermy. Despite much argument, the criteria considered to date
do not yield a convincing answer. Such an answer may be obtained from oxygen
isotope ratios in dinosaur bone. A basic premise, well substantiated, is that
the isotopic composition of bone reflects two variables: the composition of the
body fluids from which it was deposited, and the temperature at which deposition
occurred. A second premise, also well established, is that the isotopic ratios
in the body fluids of an individual are uniform at any one time. This implies
that any isotopic differences in bone deposited in a given individual at any
time will reflect differences in temperature. Observations to date suggest that
in mammals, body temperatures vary only slightly between extremities and body
core, whereas notable differences exist in heterothermic reptiles (such as the
Komodo dragon). Isotopic values will be compared from extremital and body core
bones selected from articulated or partially articulated dinosaur skeletons. The
results will give the first direct evidence of dinosaur thermal physiology.