* 9106221
* SGER:  Exploratory Comparison of Eight Nuclear and mtDNA    Sequences Among Selected Taxa of Deltocephaline Leafhoppers (Homoptera:  Cicadellidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* H.Derrick Blocker, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 25,000.00

The Deltocephalus-like genera of leafhoppers have posed a difficult problem for
workers because of an absence of phylogenetic information and definitive
characters necessary for generic separation. Towards obtaining a clearer picture
of phylogenies in this group, the investigators hope to perform cladistic and
molecular analyses of a subset of 24 nearctic genera in which fusion of the
connective and aedeagus appears to represent a synapomorphic character of the
subset. A current problem in the field of molecular systematics is that there is
no agreement as to which DNA sequences can be used in insect taxonomic studies
at the generic level. Almost all molecular systematic studies to date have
compared species at higher taxonomic levels. Most of the sequences which have
been examined at these levels are monomorphic at lower taxonomic levels. At the
other extreme there are sequences which demonstrate extensive intraspecific
variation but which may present no recognizable homology at higher taxonomic
levels. Funding is requested for one year to examine eight different DNA
sequences in leafhoppers selected at four taxonomic levels. Five candidate
nuclear regions and three mtDNA regions have been identified. The nuclear DNA
regions include: 1,2) two internal spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) in the rDNA cistron,
3) a hypervariable region of the 28s from the rDNA cistron, 4) an intron in the
invariant histone H2A gene and 5) the ribosomal S14 protein gene and its intron.
The mitochondrial genes are: 1) a region of the 12s rDNA 2) the 16s rDNA and 3)
a region of the cytochrome oxidase III gene. All regions will be amplified with
PCR and sequenced. These regions will be initially compared among three species
in three tribes in the leafhopper subfamily Deltocephalinae, if the sequences
show variation at this level, two additional species will be compared within two
of the three tribes. If intergeneric variation is detected within tribes then
two species within one genus will be examined. If variation is detected at this
level then an examination of intraspecific variation will take collection from
different geographic populations of one species. With this protocol the
taxonomic level at which each of these sequences can be used can be determined.
The goal is to identify 2-3 DNA sequences which can be used in an intensive
survey of 24 genera of the Deltocephalus-like genera of leafhoppers.