* 9106502
* Large Scale Displacement High Performance Liquid            Chromatography for Separation of Peptides and Proteins
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1996
* Jana Jacobson, Lygra-mura Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 05/31/1996
* USD 281,987.00

The goal of this research program is to develop systems for efficient,
economical, high-purity recovery of proteins and peptides by displacement
chromatography. In order to meet the purity requirements for human therapeutic
use, the biotechnology industry employs state-of-the-art separation techniques
borrowed from protein chemistry. Among the highest resolution separation
processes is high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), which has found a
limited use on a large scale for purification of proteins. The main features
impeding broader acceptance of process scale HPLC purification, in addition to
the high cost of columns and equipment, are the large solvent volumes, low
column capacity and loss of biological activity, particularly for proteins that
irreversibly denature or aggregate at the concentrations, and under the
conditions encountered during typical chromatographic operations. Displacement
chromatography is an alternative to yield much higher throughput, more efficient
utilization of stationary and mobile phases, and high resolution. In addition,
displacement chromatography can be performed on conventional ion exchange and
reversed phase chromatography columns, does not require the expensive production
of exotic column reagents as do affinity separation techniques, and it involves
operating steps that are readily scaled up.