* 9106949
* A Bit-Parallel, Word-Parallel, Massively Parallel           Associative Processor for Scientific Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Isaac Scherson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1994
* USD 228,236.00

Classical SIMD associative processors execute arithmetic in a bit- serial word-
parallel manner. Current massively parallel machines also perform bit-serial
arithmetic in a fine grain computing environment. This bit-serial property is a
limiting factor in increasing processing speeds. A simple but powerful new
architecture based on the classical associative processor model is proposed
here. By distributing logic among slices of storage cells such that a number of
bit-planes share a simple logic unit, bit- parallel arithmetic in a massively
parallel environment becomes feasible. For m-bit operands, complex operations
such as multiplications execute in O(m) cycle as opposed to O(m2) for bit-
serial machines. The simplicity of the architecture enables its implementation
using VLSI technology, and hence allows the construction of a word-Parallel,
bit-Parallel, massively Parallel (P3) computing system. The main goal of the
proposed work is to build an experimental P3 machine which is to be embedded
into a heterogeneous supercomputing environment. The need for such architecture
and for an actual working prototype stems from a number of applications which
cannot be solved in conventional spercomputers. In this proposal, space science
applications are outlined as this work is also supported by NASA.