* 9106802
* RUI: Regulation of Nitrogenases in the Cyanobacterium            Anabaena Variabilis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Teresa Thiel, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1996
* USD 259,000.00

Filamentous cyanobacteria are unique microorganisms which can produce energy by
plant type photosynthesis and reduce atmospheric nitrogen by nitrogen fixation.
Nitrogen fixation is severely inhibited by the oxygen produced by
photosynthesis; hence, these two incompatible metabolic processes are spatially
separated. Photosynthesis occurs in vegetative cells and nitrogen fixation
occurs in heterocysts. Heterocysts are terminally differentiated cells which
arise in a semi-regular pattern in a filament in response to starvation for
fixed nitrogen. Nitrogenase is the enzyme complex, localized in heterocysts,
that is responsible for the reduction of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia. The PI
is interested in the regulatory signals which control expression of nitrogenase
genes in heterocysts. She has recently found a new set of genes that appear to
code for a second nitrogenase in Anabaena variabilis. This second nitrogenase is
genetically similar to a vanadium- dependent nitrogenase characterized in two
species of Azotobacter. It does not appear to be another copy of the
conventional nitrogenase of Anabaena. The PI proposes to analyze the two
nitrogenase genes of Anabaena variabilis in an attempt to identify regulatory
sites and regulatory gene that are important in developmental control of
expression of nitrogenases.