* 9106685
* Primary Processes in Heliobacterial Reaction Center
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Robert Blankenship, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 02/28/1995
* USD 278,000.00

The heliobacteria, a newly discovered family of non-oxygen evolving
photosynthetic bacteria, have a reaction center that is broadly similar to
Photosystem I of oxygen evolving organisms. The goal of this project is to
develop the heliobacteria as a bacterial model for Photosystem I in the same way
that the purple photosynthetic bacterial have been very successfully used as a
model for Photosystem II. Dr. Blankenship isolated the reaction center from
Heliobacillus mobilis in an active form,, and is characterizing its chemical and
physical properties using a variety of techniques. Preliminary femtosecond
absorption difference spectra suggest that a 670 nm absorbing species is not the
primary electron acceptor in the heliobacteria, in contrast to reports from
other laboratories. Experiments are proposed to identify the chemical nature of
the primary acceptor. Redox titrations indicate that a species that undergoes
two electron reduction under some conditions is an early acceptor. This species
is probably a menaquinone, analogous to the phylloquinone acceptor A1 in
Photosystem I. Experiments are proposed to characterize this acceptor, as well
as subsequent Fe-S protein acceptors. The properties of the membrane-bound
cytochrome that acts as electron donor to the reaction center will also be
investigated.