* 9106649
* Chemistry of Free Atoms and Reactive Clusters/Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Kenneth Klabunde, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1994
* USD 320,600.00

Free atoms and clusters of atoms will be used as synthons and catalysts. Organic
and inorganic chemicals will be allowed to interact with early transition metal
atoms and resultant intermediates trapped to yield useful organometallic
reagents. Selected metal atoms will be trapped in low temperature solvents, and
these solvated metal atoms will be used to prepare new bimetallic molecular
clusters and nano-scale metal and bimetallic particles. The low temperature
growth of such particles should yield unusual morphologies ranging from layered
structures to homogeneous solid solutions. EXAFS, XPS, XRD, Mossbauer, and
chemical and catalytic probe reactions will be used for characterization.
Analogous studies of thin films produced from solvated metal atoms and clusters
will be pursued also, with the goal of gaining knowledge about what affects
adhesion. Extensions of this methodology to dielectric materials will also be
attempted. %%% In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organo-
metallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Kenneth J. Klabunde of Kansas
State University will continue studies of the chemistry of free atoms and
clusters of atoms. Materials that can be prepared by this methodology include
useful organo- metallic reagents, bimetalic clusters, thin films, and dielectric
materials. The results of this research are potentially of direct interest to a
number of fields of technology, including catalysis, electronics, and ceramics.