* 9106776
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  Low Dielectric Constant    Cordierte Electric Substrates Via Porosity Controlled       Sol-Gel Process
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Burtrand Lee, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 03/31/1995
* USD 47,537.00

This award will support a long-term visit by Professor Burtrand I. Lee,
Department of Ceramic Engineering, Clemson University, to Japan for a twelve
month cooperative research project with Dr. Ken Takahashi, Department of
Ceramics, Hitachi Research Laboratory in Hitachi City, Japan. The researchers
plan to undertake a study of low dielectric constant cordierite electronic
substrates via porosity controlled sol-gel process. Porosity controlled
cordiertie substrates will be produced by direct casting of hydrolyzed metal-
organic precursors of MgO, Al2 O-3, and SiO -2 followed by gelation, drying, and
heat treatments. The aging and drying procedures will be developed to hasten the
process. The substrates will be characterized for microstructure, phases,
porosity, film thickness, dielectric constants, and sintering behavior as a
function of porosity. The research results have the potential of contributing
significantly to the fundamental understanding of sol-gel processing and may
produce materials suitable for engineering end-use evaluations in electronic
circuits. It may also lead to the expansion of ceramic materials in electronic
packaging applications. The Hitachi Research Laboratory is a highly recognized
and prestigeous facility with state of the art equipment. It is a world leader
in many aspects of ceramic electronic packaging. This collaboration, therefore,
should contribute to furthering ceramic electronic technology in the United
States. It is anticipated that the collaboration between the researchers will
continue beyond the termination of this formal agreement.