* 9106471
* Spectroscopic Determinations of Excited State Properties of Organometallic and Inorganic Compounds
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Jeffrey Zink, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/1994
* USD 320,000.00

Four approaches will be used to investigate the electronic excited states of
metal-containing molecules under conditions ranging from single crystals at low
temperatures to the gas phase. The first group of experiments is the detailed
assignment of excited states by using single crystal polarized spectroscopy. The
second component of the program is the determination of excited state
distortions from vibronic structure in electronic spectra. The experiments will
focus on emission and excitation spectra of molecules in the cold collision-free
conditions of a supersonic free expansion jet as well as in condensed media. The
third group of experiments will determine excited state distortions from
analysis of resonance Raman excitation profiles. Thus, the excited states can be
examined mode by mode even when the electronic spectrum is broad and
featureless. Finally, the geometries of molecules in excited states will be
measured by using excited state pump-probe Raman spectroscopy. The goal of all
of the experiments is the unified understanding of excited state orbital
characteristics, potential surface displacements and geometries of metal
compounds. %%% In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Jeffrey I. Zink of the
University of California at Los Angeles will continue studies of the
determinations of excited state properties of metal-containing molecules by
spectroscopic methods. These studies provide crucial, fundamental information
necessary for the understanding of many photochemical processes in which
sunlight is used as an energy source.