* 9106746
* Experimental Phylogenies Using Viruses for Testing          Phylogenetic Methods
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1995
* James Bull, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 12/31/1995
* USD 253,000.00

Biologists have long been interested in reconstructing the history of life, and
there are many procedures that have been used to provide such reconstructions.
However, there are almost no examples in which the phylogeny is known in
advance, whereby the reconstruction methods can be tested directly. In this
study, viruses (T7 bacteriophage) will be grown in the laboratory in the
presence of a mutagen to generate known phylogenies, DNA sequence information
will be obtained from the resultant lineages, and these data will be used to
test methods of phylogeny reconstruction. Experiments will consider (i) the
effect of the shape of the tree (branching structure and branch lengths) on the
accuracy of reconstruction methods, (ii) the effect of environment of molecular
convergence, and (iii) constancy of rates of molecular change. The data gathered
will be DNA sequences and restriction enzyme cleavage sites of the viral genome.
This study will impact the field of systematic biology both in establishing an
empirical methodology for experimental phylogeny construction and in providing
direct tests of phylogenetic inference methodology. These phylogenetic methods
have become increasingly important to many fields of biology. Preliminary data
have been collected to demonstrate both the technical feasibility of the study
and the utility of the system for these objectives.