* 9106117
* Formation and Detoxification of Lipid Hydroperoxides in     Photosensitized Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Albert Girotti, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 08/31/1995
* USD 229,998.00

Membrane damage in the form of lipid peroxidation may mediate the cytotoxic
effects of many photoactivatable dyes and pigments (photodynamic sensitizers).
Lipid hydroperoxides (LOOHs) generated by sensitized photooxidation of
unsaturated phospholipids and cholesterol have numerous adverse effects on
membrane structure and function. Many aspects of photoperoxidation are still
poorly understood at the molecular and cellular level, including (a) relative
reactivity of different lipid classes and how this is modulated; and (b)
enzymatic detoxification reactions, specifically those involving selenium and
glutathione. Building on past experience in membrane photooxidation, this
project will address each of these questions in comprehensive fashion,
progressing form studies on model systems (liposomal membranes, erythrocyte
ghosts) to the cellular domain (cultured leukemia and endothelial cells). A
variety of biologically relevant sensitizers (porphyrins, phthalocyanines) and
state-of-the-art analytical techniques (clonogenic survival assays, liquid
chromatography with radiochemical and electrochemical detection) will be used.
These studies are timely and relevant in view of (a) the rapid development of
practical new approaches that exploit photodynamic effects (e.g.
phototherapies), and (b) the growing risks of environmental toxicity.//