* 9106430
* 57th Symposium:  The Cell Surface                           Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Symposium held early          June in Cold Spring Harbor, New York
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Bruce Stillman, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/1993
* USD 19,667.00

The Cold Spring Harbor Symposia are held yearly at the beginning of June at the
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York. They bring together
approximately 300-400 scientists from all over the world to present and evaluate
new data and ideas in rapidly moving areas of biological research. Each year a
topic is chosen that seems to be at a stage where general and intensive scrutiny
and review is needed. A Cold Spring Harbor Banbury meeting in 1988 set the stage
for the subsequent merger of a wide range of approaches to the cell cycle. For
the first time those working on signal transduction, ascomycete genetics and
marine invertebrates began to be able to talk in a common language. This
followed the realization that several critical cell cycle regulators are
conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution. Following a period of remarkable
unification, the cell cycle field has now developed into one that attracts the
attention of scientists from a variety of very different disciplines. The 56th
Cold Spring Harbor Symposium entitled The Cell Cycle is designed to bring
together those who work on aspects of signal transduction, mitotic control,
mitosis, and DNA replication. By illustrating the very different approaches that
are taken to a common problem, this Symposium will reinforce the interactions
that have recently brought this field such vitality.