* 9106957
* Intrinsic Reactivity of DNA Secondary Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Steven Rokita, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 229,500.00

An accurate description of NA secondary structure must now include many
conformations beyond those represented by a random coil or Watson-Crick double
helix. Structural variants such as cruciform, hairpin, and hinged DNA along with
the more transiently formed bulged or slipped sequences are often cited as the
possible origin of mutational hotspots. Such aberrant conformations may
adversely affect both the fidelity of DNA repair and the rate of nucleotide
modification. This study has been designed to examine the molecular basis of
this latter process by systematically evaluating the effect of duplex structure
on the reactivity of DNA in a well defined model system. Photochemical
modification of synthetic oligonucleotides serves as the primary method of
derivatization and specifically, pyrimidine dimerization will be used to
indicate the requirements of base mobility and orientation for DNA
hyperreactivity. Kinetic and product analysis will determine the reaction
efficiencies in helical and hairpin conformations containing mispaired or
unpaired nucleotides. Concurrent chemical and enzymatic studies will generate a
traditional and necessary context for interpreting the photochemical results. 1)
Selective oxidation of DNA by KMnO4 will indicate the general accessibility of
the thymine bases and 2) strand scission catalyzed by S-1 nuclease will
demonstrate the related accessibilty of the sugar phosphate backbone.