* 9106868
* Higher-level Phylogeny of Chiroptera:  Evidence from the    Postcranial Musculoskeletal System of Recent and Fossil Bats
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Nancy Simmons, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 12/31/1996
* USD 152,500.00

Almost one-quarter of living mammal species are bats -- members of the order
Chiroptera. Bats play a variety of important ecological roles. Many bat species
prey on nocturnal insects, while others are essential to the pollination of
flowering plants. Increasing human impact on bat populations and species has
serious implications for agriculture and insect pest management. Despite many
previous studies, there is still little agreement among biologists concerning
relationships among higher-level bat groups (e.g., genera and families). Without
such knowledge, it is difficult to interpret the wide ranges of variation in
wing architecture, sonar capabilities, and ecology seen in different bats. A
clear understanding of bat diversity -- important for setting conservation
priorities -- depends upon resolving the relationships (phylogeny) of bats. In
this study, the problem of bat relationships will be addressed through a
detailed analysis of the anatomy of the skeleton (excluding the cranium) and the
muscles of a wide variety of bats. Recent bats will be studied using dried
skeletons, muscle dissections, and cleared and stained specimens. Fossil bats
will be studied by direct observation and x-ray analysis. The object of these
studies will be to identify similarities and differences in anatomical structure
that can be used to evaluate relationships. Data collected in this study will be
employed in a variety of computer-assisted analyses designed to produce testable
hypotheses of relationships within and among families of bats. The relationships
of bats to other mammalian groups (such as Primates) will also be investigated.
In conjunction with data from molecular studies and previous surveys of other
anatomical systems, this study should provide a new framework for understanding
the structural design, behavior, and ecology of bats.