* 9106073
* Stable Isotopic Constraints on The Paleoclimate of a High-  Latitude Cretaceous Terrestrial Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Kurt Ferguson, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 11/30/1993
* USD 110,000.00

The Cretaceous has long been considered a time of equable climate while the
cenozoic is regarded as a time of ice ages. Recent work suggests that the
concept of an ice free Cretaceous may need to be re-examined. The best place to
look for the extremes of Cretaceous climate is within a high latitude
terrestrial sedimentary basin. Such rocks exist within the Otway and Strzelecki
groups, southeastern Australia, which were deposited at high latitude (&gt;70
degrees S) during the lower Cretaceous. Stable isotopic measurements provide a
vehicle for inferring the surface temperature. Previous work on the carbonate
concretions recovered from terrestrial sandstones revealed extremely O-depleted
values for calcite, and these data indicate precipitation from low O meteoric
fluids and annual temperatures on the order of 0 degrees C. In addition,
isotopic profiling of individual concretions and cemented beds indicates that
secular changes in the O values of calcite cements can be correlated on three
different scales: within an individual concretion, within a relative age
sequence in a composite concretion, or over meter scales in a vertical section
by comparing the isotopic compositions of concretion cores. This type of
detailed isotopic work in conjunction with textural studies indicate that it is
possible to differentiate in these rocks the near surface primary meteoric water
signature from complications arising from subsequent diagenetic events.
Interpreted in terms of temperature change, the maximum O change would
correspond to about a 5 degree C change in mean annual surface temperature. In
this study, we propose to further constrain the carbonate oxygen isotope data
with O/ O data on phosphate from fossil bones, and with D/H and O/ O data from
paleosols. Because of the high paleolatitude of this site and because of its
terrestrial character, any Cretaceous global climatic changes should be
amplified and easily detected in sequential samples in stratigraphic sections.
The changes already detected in limited stratigraphic sampling suggest that it
may be possible to recognize Milankovitch climatic forcing in the isotopic
record of the Cretaceous, southeastern Australia.