* 9106011
* Development of Molecular Biology Approaches to Arabidopsis  thaliana
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1997
* Ronald Davis, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1997
* USD 675,649.00

We propose to develop a number of new techniques to facilitate the genetic and
molecular biological analysis of higher plants. The model organism is
Arabidopsis and the model signal transduction pathway is the touch response
pathway which results in a phenomenon known as thigmomorphogenesis. The
technologies that we propose include: (1) the development of inducible promoter
systems, (2) a method for conducting homologous DNA recombination for gene
disruption, and (3) a negative selectable marker for use in the isolation of
non-inducible mutants. Several inducible promoters which respond to exogenously
added substances such as nitrate or steroid (glucocorticoid, estrogen, etc.)
will be developed. Systems will be developed that allow induction in whole
plants or in a specificly targeted tissue. Using this system we will explore the
physiological consequences of the induction of a touch response gene, such as
calmodulin. Single or multiple combinations of genes can be induced with this
system. We will also develop methods for gene disruption using homologous
recombination. The initial investigation will target the tms2 gene; such
disruption can be directly selected and should facilitate rapid assaying for
homologous recombination. This gene disruption system will be applied to the
disruption of the touch response pathway genes. Since homozygous disruptions of
these genes may be lethal we propose to place the genes under inducible promoter
control. Physiological consequences can then be assessed by withdrawal of the
inducer. We also propose to identify genes involved in the overall touch
response pathway by fusing touch response promoters to the tms2 gene for direct
selection of non-inducible mutants. Technique development has often made
possible significant advances in conceptual insights.***//