* 9106764
* Systematics and Phylogenetics of Temperate Polypodium
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1996
* Christopher Haufler, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 155,000.00

Using modern technologies such as determination of chromosome numbers,
electrophoresis of enzyme variants, and scanning electron microscopy of minute
morphological features, it has been possible to explicate patterns of hybrid
speciation in ferns quite accurately. We know comparatively little, however,
about the ancestry of the basic, non-hybrid-derived species. By studying members
of the Polypodium vulgare complex, a group of about twelve species of temperate
ferns, the proposed research will develop and test hypotheses about the
systematics of basic diploid species. Comprehensive data bases will be
accumulated on morphological features, biogeography, chromosome constitution,
enzyme variability, and chloroplast DNA mutations. These data bases will provide
the basis for a detailed exploration of the relationships among these species
and should enable the analysis of Polypodium species to be extended into the
tropical ecosystems. Through these studies we should gain insights on how the
diversity in this relatively unexplored part of the world has contributed to the
origin of our temperate flora. Thus, with the completion of the proposed
research, we should have a modern synthesis of information on the primary and
secondary speciation pathways in temperate Polypodium. By applying this model,
modes and mechanisms that characterize patterns of diversity may be generalized
for understanding the systematics of fern species and perhaps for a variety of
other temperate plant groups.