* 9106784
* Oxalate Biogeochemistry of Forest Soil Ectomycorrhizal Mat  Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,02/29/1996
* Robert Griffiths, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford N. Dahm
* 02/29/1996
* USD 299,795.00

Drs. Griffiths, Caldwell, Baham and Cromack have shown that certain specialized
ectomycorrhizal species of Gautieria and Hysterangium form extensive hyphal or
rhizomorph mat structures that are significant features of temperate coniferous
forests. In comparison with soils without obvious mat development, both types of
mats have elevated pore-water concentrations of dissolved organic carbon,
fluoride, oxalate, and sulfate, as well as major and trace metal cations,
including Al and Fe which can be responsible for controlling the solubility of
both organic and inorganic phosphorus. In Hysterangium mats, most of the oxalate
was present in the solid phase, presumably as calcium oxalate, while in
Gautieria mats, a relatively larger fraction of oxalate was in solution at
concentrations that approached those used in organic matter extractions of
soils. While long implicated in mineral dissolution, the ligand properties of
oxalate also suggest other significant roles in forest soil processes. Drs.
Griffiths, Caldwell, Baham and Cromack will use these mat communities to
investigate the role of oxalate species and other major organic ligands in
mineral weathering, solution and solid phase soil chemistry, Al and Fe activity,
and the processing of organic nitrogen and phosphorus by soil enzymes in diverse
forest ecotypes. Results from field studies and laboratory experiments will be
used as input to a quasi-steady-state model of soil solution and solid phase
biogeochemistry. This model will provide insight into actual mechanisms
controlling nutrient cycling in forest ecosystems. These researchers are experts
in the area of forest soil biogeochemistry. The facilities available for this
research are outstanding.