* 9106232
* Ship Operations
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Arthur Nowell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Emma R. Dieter
* 08/31/1993
* USD 3,753,160.00

The University of Washington will operate the R/Vs CLIFFORDA. BARNES and THOMAS
G. THOMPSON during 1991 as general purpose oceanographic vessels in support of
NSF-funded research projects. The R/V BARNES is a 65 foot general research
vessel built in 1966, the R/V THOMPSON is a 274 foot general research vessel
built in 1991. The BARNES is owned by the National Science Foundation and
operated by the University of Washington through a charter party agreement with
NSF. The THOMPSON is owned by the Navy and operated by the University of
Washington through a charter party agreement with the Office of Naval Research.
These vessels are part of a fleet used by the National Science Foundation to
support oceanographic research projects. Most oceanographic requires highly
specialized equipment and extensive support from the ship's crew. An increasing
number of research projects require specialized equipment installed on the
vessel and for which the ship has been specially designed. Such equipment
requires highly specialized crew members for operation and maintenance. The
vessels do not operate in the same manner as commercial cargo or fishing
vessels, therefore NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels
specifically dedicated to oceanographic research. These vessels are operated by
universities and research institutions around the country. The R/V BARNES
operates primarily in the coastal waters of the northwest U.S. The R/V THOMPSON
will operated as an all oceans vessel and will be operating out of foreign ports
as required by cruises. These vessels are capable platforms for these
operations, and the University of Washington has maintained an excellent program
at modest costs.