* 9106624
* Numerical Instrumentation for Shape and Shape Change        Analysis via Three-Dimensional Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1991,05/31/1995
* Kenneth Diller, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah A. Joseph
* 05/31/1995
* USD 450,000.00

The investigators will focus their research on fully developing the automated
instrumentation capabilities of microscopic systems that offer the potential for
quantifying the 3-D shape parameters, and changes in shape parameters over time,
of microscopic-scale biological specimens. They plan to continue their program
of studying diversity of complementary imaging modalities, including confocal
microscopy, stereo microscopy, and conventional optical sectioning microscopy.
The program of study will encompass microscopic data acquisition via various
methods. The images obtained will be subjected to appropriate filtering schemes
base on the physical principles of image formation to sharpen and improve image
clarity in individual micrographs and to remove information spurious to that of
the local specimen structure. The filtering techniques, which will require
considerable analytic study in their development, will be specific to each
optical system used. Finally, the aggregate local optical data will be assembled
and analyzed via sophisticated numerical instrumentation techniques to
reconstruct the 3-D structure of a given imaged specimen and to quantify its
size and shape characteristics as it evolves over time. The methods developed
will be implemented and evaluated on a broad range of specimen types, including
stained and unstained single and multiple celled subjects. Several different
tissue preparations will be used to study the time evolution of specimen
morphology over time during various biological processes.