* 9106317
* Design of Sensor Referenced Action Planning and Control for Robotic Systems in Workstations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Tzyh-Jong Tarn, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 07/31/1993
* USD 198,871.00

This award supports investigation of the problem of sensor- referenced action
planning and control for robotic systems in a workstation setting, superimposed
on model-based planning and control which has been the norm for robotic system
control. The paradigm is to model the known and sense the unknown in the task
space and implement the planning and control accordingly. Tasks will be
formulated in terms of events sensed in the task space, which in many cases are
represented by a pattern of fused information from different sensors.
Ultimately, this machine intelligence approach will provide high-level decision
making capability for automation, promote system integration, and lead to more
user-friendly planning and decision/control systems for robotic workstations. To
accomplish this, a number of problems must be addressed. Initially, the research
will address a new type of motion description and efficient algorithmic
formulation of kinematic and dynamic action capabilities of robot arms. The
motion description uses a phase-space approach (velocity vs. position) instead
of the usual state-space (position vs. time) approach. Preliminary results
indicate that motion description and planning in phase-space is more compatible
with sensor referenced control that is time-based planning and control. The
algorithmic formulation of action capabilities used the known parameters, both
of the arms and the task environment in order to provide a model-based
foundation for sensor-referenced intelligent action planning and control.