* 9106268
* RUI: Development of a System for Insertional Mutagenesis in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Molly Mastrangelo, Allegany Community College
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1995
* USD 101,433.00

The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is valuable for studies of gene
expression because of its ease of culture and amenability to classical and
molecular genetic studies. A genetically engineered inducible Ty transposable
element, containing a functional HIS3 gene, it used to obtain insertion
mutations in suitable yeast strains. The insertions are identified in genetic
analysis by the ability of cells to grow without added histidine (the His+
phenotype). Isolated DNA carrying an insertion hybridize to radioactive probes
of the HIS3 sequences. We plan to improve procedures for obtaining mutants with
single Ty insertions and for demonstrating linkage of the His+ phenotype with
the mutant phenotype. Undergraduate research assistants at Allegany Community
College are assisting in developing a method for screening large numbers of
mutants by selection of a random sample of spores. We have obtained 2 types of
mutations: (1) activation of a silent gene which alters the control of mating
type, resulting in sterility, and (2) disruption of an essential gene, resulting
in lethality. I plan to involve students in isolating and characterizing Ty
insertion mutations which disrupt genes essential for growth or for the ability
to synthesize specific nutrients, and for mutations which activate other cryptic
or silent genes.