* 9106235
* Studies of Fronts and Precipitation Bands in the Central    United States
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1997
* Peter Hobbs, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 05/31/1997
* USD 1,641,045.00

The potential economic and safety benefits of improved short-term weather
predictions are well known. Due to the modernization of the national weather
observing system, meteorologist will have access to data of much better spatial
and temporal resolution than previously possible on a day to day basis. This
improvement in the operational weather system provides opportunities for
enhanced research in the area of mesoscale meteorology. Mesoscale meteorological
processes generally control the timing, location and severity of most life
threatening and economically disruptive weather such as flash floods, heavy
snowfalls, tornadoes, etc. The opportunities for fundamental improvements in
short term forecasts (up to two days) has caused several agencies within the US
government to plan a major interagency research program known as the US Weather
Research Program (USWRP). The USWRP consists of several components including a
series of intensive field observational studies. The first of these, know as the
Stormscale Operational and Research Meteorology-Fronts Experiment, Systems Test
(STORM-FEST), has three closely related objectives: focussed investigation of
the structure and evolution of wintertime fronts and associated mesoscale
phenomena with emphasis on precipitation and severe wintertime weather (e.g.
severe icing conditions); a research assessment of the new operational and
research meteorological instrumentation facilities and composite observational
networks; a study to begin to understand mesoscale prediction capabilities and
limitations in active frontal regions. The Principal Investigator will use a
wide variety of research and operational data, including data from the next
generation of operational instruments, to study frontal mesoscale structures.
The data will come from the STORM-FEST and a previously completed experiment
which studied east coast winter storms, know as the Genesis of Atlantic Lows
Experiment (GALE). The principal objectives of the research are to: document the
structure of precipitation in winter cyclones; to determine the mechanisms
responsible for the organization of significant mesoscale precipitation
phenomena; to improve the forecasting of heavy precipitation in winter cyclones.