* 9106627
* Weakly Consistent Memories
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1991,05/31/1994
* Gil Neiger, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 05/31/1994
* USD 189,987.00

Shared memory is a fundamentally important abstraction in parallel systems.
Providing a shared memory abstraction across distributed hardware may prove
equally important because it allows processes to access local and remote
information uniformly. However, implementing consistent shared memory in a
distributed environment is not only costly but also has fundamental problems of
latency and scale. The results of recent research suggest that the principled
weakening of memory consistency can reduce the cost of consistency maintenance
while maintaining a viable model for programming. This project will investigate
both theoretical and practical issues arising from the study of weakly
consistent memories. The theoretical work will include a formal characterization
of both existing and new memories and an investigation of properties of programs
that execute correctly when memory consistency is weakened. The results of this
research will enhance our fundamental understanding of weak memories. To
demonstrate that weak memories can be easily programmed and lead to improved
performance, the practical work will investigate programming and implementation
of weakly consistent memories. Programmers of weakly consistent memories may
write programs "directly" for the weekly consistent model, or programs written
for traditional consistent memory may be transformed to run more efficiently on
a weakly consistent memory. The project will identify application domains
suitable for weak memories, develop idioms that simplify the programming of
these memories, and develop efficient distributed implementations of weakly
consistent memories. Since an application may be programmed differently on
consistent and weak memories, overall performance depends both on the
algorithmic efficiency of the application and the performance of the underlying
weak memory implementation. Therefore, the work includes experimental research
to study the overall performance of a prototype system using measures such as
execution speedup and message overhead. Comprehensive investigation of the
theory and practice of weakly consistent memories will yield substantial
benefits applicable to both distributed systems and large scale multiprocessors.