* 9106223
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Analysis, Probability,   and Finite Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Steven Krantz, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1993
* USD 60,000.00

Six undergraduates will receive support from this Research Experiences for
Undergraduates award. They will work under the direction of several faculty
advisors all of whom have strong research programs under way. This program
continues a successful program of undergraduate research at Washington
University. It will be augmented during the next two years by a series of visits
by leading mathematical researchers. The environment for this activity is
particularly fecund at Washington University which has produced many of the top
finalists and leading teams in the Putnam examinations over the past ten years.
Included among the many topics which will be available for student projects is
the study of the phi-transform. This concept is a very recent variation of the
wavelet transform allowing one to decompose general functions into sums of
simple terms. It has interesting computational characteristics which allow for
simple but important questions to be undertaken early without need for extensive
theoretical training. Work will also be done on the boundary behavior of
conformal mappings and harmonic measure. This work will fit well into the
development of students who have recently completed an undergraduate complex
variables course. Another area of interest includes problems arising in the
theory of several complex variables. Here, researchers can construct numerical
models for automorphism groups and perform calculations of invariants associated
with boundary differential invariants. The work only requires basic algebra and
an understanding of symbol manipulation programs. In the process, students will
develop concrete understanding of geometric structures and the analysis related
to them. A more applied program developing mathematical models of molecular
evolution will also be available. Students will consider questions concerning
the distribution of nucleotides in the coding regions of individuals chosen from
a random-mating population. Connections with algorithms for estimating
phylogenies of creatures whose traits are known in the present will be
investigated.