* 9106881
* REU:  Productivity, Plant Biomass, and Trophic Interactions Rivers
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1991,05/31/1994
* Mary Power, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 05/31/1994
* USD 197,087.00

A debate of general interest to all food web theory has arisen over whether
attack rates of predators should depend on instantaneous prey densities, or
instead on ratios of prey numbers to the numbers of predators sharing them.
Models with attack rates scaled to absolute prey densities predict that trophic
levels will be added stepwise with increasing productivity, and that until links
are added to food chains, biomass of consumers and resources should be
uncorrelated. Ratio-dependent models predict continuous monotonic increases of
biomass at all trophic levels with increasing productivity, so that abundance of
consumers and resources should covary positively. These assumptions and
predictions can be tested with fairly simple field observations. The P.I.
proposes to test assumptions and predictions of both models in rivers using a
mixture of experimental and multi-river comparisons. The investigator will study
effects of productivity on food web structure in a seasonal river where,
following winter floods, community development occurs during the predictable
summer low- flow season and manipulate primary productivity by shading instream
channels, and by fertilizing nutrient-diffusing substance (clay pots). In these
experimental arenas, the P.I. will observe the post-flood assembly of food webs
under various productivity regimes, recording the accrual of individuals and
biomass in producer, primary consumer, and predator guilds; the taxonomic
composition and diversity of these guilds, and the size structures of their
component populations. The P.I. will conduct other, short-term behavioral
experiments to measure attack rates of common predators feeding on dominant prey
under different prey and predator densities, and in the presence and absence of
plant cover. To test the generality of results from experiments at the primary
study site, the investigator will survey several rivers that represent a
gradient of environmental productivity, and examine trophic structures of food
webs that assemble during the summer low-flow season, following winter floods.