* 9106804
* RUI: EAM/Simulation Studies of the Energetics and Kinetics       of Surface Reconstruction
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1995
* Lyle Roelofs, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1995
* USD 107,905.00

This Research at Undergraduate Institution grant is awarded for theoretical
research on surface reconstruction. Surface reconstruction refers to the
spontaneous rearrangement of atoms that occurs in the surface atomic layers of
some materials. These rearrangements are of interest sine they represent
important opportunities to compare theoretical treatments of surface energetics
and experimental probes of the structure of surface layers. Reconstructive
surfaces present much more stringent tests of scientific methods than do static
surfaces. Two specific systems will be investigated. The (110) surface of gold
will be studied where through surface diffusion a reconstructed surface with
missing rows of gold is formed. The Embedded Atom Method and Monte Carlo
techniques will be used to study the energetics. The (001) surface of tungsten
in which each atom is displaced slightly from its equilibrium position in an
alternating pattern will also be studied. In this case the energetics related to
the surface phase diagram will be examined. %%% The collective properties of
atoms on the surfaces of solids are different than those in the bulk due to the
absence of other atoms beyond the surface layer. The energetics of surface atoms
are thus different than those in the bulk. One of the consequences of this
difference in energetics is that the surface atoms can arrange themselves
differently than the bulk. These rearranged atoms can result in the surface
layer having different physical properties than the bulk solid. For instance,
certain surface structures are better than others for catalysis. The proposed
research will study two classes of surface reconstruction in two model systems.
The results will help to understand why specific surface structures are formed
in these materials.