* 9106888
* "U.S.-Czechoslovakia Research on the Theory of              Magnetoconductivity of a Two-Dimensional Electron Gas in a  Periodic Potential"
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Steven Girvin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/1995
* USD 39,028.00

The primary objective of this US-Czechoslovakia Cooperative Science Program
between Dr. Allan MacDonald of Indiana University and Dr. Pavel Streda of the
Physics Institute of the Czechoslovakian Academy of Sciences is to study
magnetoconductivity of artificially structured two-dimensional electron systems
and phase coherence. The case when more than one Landau level forms a trajectory
network at the Fermi energy will be considered in order to understand the role
of edge states in the transport properties at weaker magnetic fields. The
researchers intend to study possible non- linear effects that can appear at high
current densities; what measurable physical quantity is connected with the
integer quantum number s in the quantum case where energy gaps appear at filling
factors determined by integers s and o; and the relationship between the
semiclassical picture of open and closed trajectories and the quantum energy
spectrum. The researchers' efforts are expected to produce insight into
transport properties in a magnetic field and to develop a theory based on the
transmission matrix approach. This project in condensed matter theory fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents
and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.