* 9106431
* Erwinia Pectic Enzyme Out System: A Model for Studying Exoprotein Secretion by Gram-Negative Bacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Alan Collmer, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1994
* USD 210,000.00

The exoprotein secretion ("Out") system of the plant pathogens Erwinia
chrysanthemi and E. carotovora provide a promising experimental model for
studying the translocation of proteins across the two membranes that envelope
gram-negative bacteria. The bacteria selectively secrete a remarkable array of
pectic enzymes and other exoproteins. A cluster of E. chrysanthemi "out" genes
enables Escherichia coli to secrete E. chrysanthemi exoproteins. The E.
chrysanthemi "out" genes are homologous with the pullulanase secretion genes of
Klebsiella pneumoniae, suggesting that the Erwinia model will be broadly
relevant. The two Erwinia "out" systems are conveniently specific for their
respective exoproteins. The objectives of this project are to complete the
characterization of the E. chrysanthemi "out" genes and encoded proteins by DNA
sequence analysis and Tn5tac1 mutagenesis, identify the E. carotovora and E.
chrysanthemi "out" components controlling exoprotein secretion specificity, and
explore the secretion ability of hybrid proteins and deletion derivatives
involving E. chrysanthemi PelE and either E. carotovora Pel1 or beta-lactamase.
An adequate understanding of the "out" pathway could lead to general techniques
for either disrupting the secretion of virulence proteins or enhancing secretion
of beneficial proteins.