* 9106972
* RUI:  Experimental Tests of Microclimate, Substrate         Quality, and Soil Properties on Decomposer Specifity in     Adjacent Lodgepole Pine and Mountain Meadow Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1995
* John Moore, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Clifford N. Dahm
* 12/31/1995
* USD 259,750.00

Ecosystem development and the maintenance of diversity appears to be a function
of the strength of linkages among plants and decomposers and the influence that
the linkages have on nutrient availability. The lodgepole pine forest and
adjacent mountain meadows near Fox Park, WY, are ecosystems that differ in
structure and function, yet share a common climate, similar topography, and have
developed on soils derived from the same parent materials. Recent work at the
sites suggests that the linkages among plants and decomposers are specialized to
the substrates, soils and microclimate of their own ecosystem. Two manipulative
field studies and a series of laboratory studies will be conducted to determine
how specific the plant-decomposer linkages are, and the mechanisms that shape
and preserve them. The "Canopy Manipulation Study" will determine the influences
that canopy structure, litter quality, and soil properties have on decomposer
food web structure and nitrogen dynamics of the lodgepole pine forest and
adjacent meadow. The "Decomposer Deletion Study" will test whether competitive
exclusion among decomposers or habitat alteration are the mechanisms that
maintain the integrity of each system. The Laboratory studies will investigate
the range of substrates that decomposers from the meadow and forest utilize, and
the soil and climatic conditions under which the dominant isolates from each
system optimally grow and reproduce.