* 9106045
* Japan Long Term Visit: A Historical Study of Japan's Famous Slogan "Rich Nation, Strong Army" and its Impact on JapaneseTechnology.
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Richard Samuels, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 07/31/1993
* USD 73,696.00

This award will support a long-term visit by Professor Richard Samuels,
Department of Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology to Japan
to carry out joint research with the Techno-Economics Group of the Mitsubishi
Research Institute (MRI) which is one of Japan's leading think tanks. While at
Mitsubishi he will have complete access and cooperation with researchers from
Government and industry (including the Japan Defense Agency, the Ministry of
International Trade and Industry), as well as defense contractors from within
and from outside the Mitsubishi Group. Professor Samuels study will explore the
intellectual and practical underpinnings of a Japanese technology strategy that,
without regard for artificial differences between military and civilian
applications has positioned Japan on the threshold of global power. It will
explain how Japanese planners made strategic choices that enhance the national
capacity for innovation. The research will provide valuable information on (1)
Japanese politics (2) the Japanese techno-military sphere, and (3) the
relationship between military technology/industry and economic development,
processes and institutions in advanced industrial societies in general. The
relationship between civilian and military technology is extremely relevant to
the future of U.S. and world economic growth. Professor Samuels is one of a very
few American scholars in the area of contemporary Japanese politics and society.
Mitsubishi Research Institute is a first rate institution in the area of techno-
economics studies and thus is the ideal organization for Professional Samuels to
undertake his research. The research should result in a significantly enriched
understanding of the nature and extent of defense techno development in Japan.
It may also provide the groundwork for U.S. reevaluations about the social and
political organization and priorities of both our civilian and military
technologies.