* 9106456
* Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics of Formate Utilization  in Methanogenic Archaebacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* James Ferry, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 02/29/1996
* USD 185,000.00

The enzyme requirements for growth on formate, and expression of the formate
dehydrogenase operon in Methanobacterium formicicum, will be studied. The
specific aim is to identify the factors require for efficient initiation of
transcription of the highly expressed formate dehydrogenase operon using an in
vitro cell-free transcription system. The results are expected to extend the
current view of methanogenesis beyond a biochemical understanding, and reveal
new principles of gene expression in the archaebacteria. The long-term goal is
to utilize in vivo molecular approaches (i.e. site-directed mutagenesis) to
study (i) fundamental principles of transcription in the archaebacteria, and
(ii) the biochemical mechanism of formate dehydrogenase (and other enzymes)
required for formate utilization. The research proposed here, together with work
in progress to develop a transformation system, will lay the foundation for
these long-term goals. %%% The process of biological methanogenesis occurs in a
variety of anaerobic habitats and is a significant component of the global
carbon cycle. Methanogenic organisms are archaebacteria which are
phylogenetically distinct from eubacteria and eukaryotes; thus, the study of
these unusual organisms offer a third perspective to study fundamental cellular
processes. The present understanding of methogenesis is largely based on
microbiological and biochemical studies. This research will combines molecular
genetic and biochemical approaches to investigate the pathway of formate-
dependent CO2 reduction to methane.