* 9106697
* Genetic Analysis of Blue Light Perception and Signal        Transduction Mechanisms in Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Roger Hangarter, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1994
* USD 325,000.00

The long-term objectives of this proposal are to determine at the cellular and
molecular level how blue light is perceived by plants and transduced into growth
responses. This project will investigate the physiological and genetic basis for
blue light responses in higher plants using Arabidopsis as a model system. The
response we will concentrate on is the inhibition of hypocotyl elongation caused
by continuous blue light. Specific goals are to isolate a number of mutant
strains that show altered responses to blue light and to use these mutants to
characterize portions of the signal transduction pathway, perhaps the blue light
receptor itself. Physiological analysis of the mutant plants will be conducted
in order to identify what phases of the response are affected by the mutations.
Interactions between various blue and red light responses share signal
transduction events. Plants containing two or more light-response mutations will
be genetically constructed and used in the investigation of the light-dependent
signal transduction networks. The blue light-response mutants will be
genetically characterized using complementation analysis to determine the
minimum number of steps involved in signal transduction. Finally the mutations
will be mapped to their chromosome locations followed by gene isolation, using
T-DNA insertion mutants or by chromosome walking, in order to identify the
proteins required for blue light signal transduction. Light not only supplies
plants with the energy for photosynthesis, but also regulates nearly all stages
of plant development, independent of photosynthesis. For a seedling to properly
establish itself requires the coordinated action of numerous developmental
pathways. Light, through the action of several photoreceptor systems, triggers
many of the developmental changes essential for seedlings to make the transition
from growing in the darkness of the soil to the light of the sun. The red/far
red light receptor, phytochrome, has been the most intensively studied, whereas
the nature of the blue and ultraviolet receptors is virtually unknown. This
proposal seeks to identify and investigate the mechanisms by which plants
perceive and respond to blue light and, thus, how plants adapt to different
light conditions. The investigation of blue light response systems is likely to
lead to important new insights into the physiological and molecular mechanisms
controlling photomorphogenesis during seedling establishment.***//