* 9106338
* Mecahnism of the Conformational Change in E1E2-Type         Transport Atpases
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Larry Faller, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 01/31/1995
* USD 144,000.00

A variety of life processes, ranging from muscle contraction to nutrient
absorption, are either triggered or driven by the selective transport of ions
across cell membranes. The working hypothesis in virtually all models of
mammalian active ion transport is that the carrier can assume different
conformations in which the ion binding sites are alternately exposed to opposite
sides of the membrane. The mechanism of the conformational change is unknown.
Does the conformational change gate a channel, or is extensive rearrangement of
the protein structure involved? The principal objective of the research proposed
in this application is to obtain physicochemical data on the conformational
transition step in the reaction mechanism to permit discrimination among
alternative proposals for active ion transport. The forward and reverse rates of
the conformational change reported by fluorescent labeling of E1E2-pumps will be
measured as a function of temperature. Analysis of the results by absolute
reaction rate theory places contraints on the types of molecular chemical events
that are occurring by resolving the enery which determines the rate and extent
of reaction into heat changes resulting from formation, or cleavage, of chemical
bonds and into changes in the organization of the system that increase, or
decrease, the number of molecular degrees of freedom. The transport enzyme, the
monovalent cation and the solvent structure will be empirically varied to learn
which reactants are important and how they affect the conformational change in
E1E2-enyzmes.