* 9106316
* The Evolution of Lymphocyte Recognition
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Gregory Warr, Medical University of South Carolina
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1995
* USD 270,000.00

The proposed studies focus on the expression of the immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy
chain gene in the channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus. The specific issues
addressed are: 1) Regulation of the differential expression of B-cell membrane
receptor and secreted forms of the IgM heavy (mu) chain. This laboratory has
found that the pattern of alternate exon splicing involved in the production of
the mRNAs encoding the membrane and secreted forms of the mu chain in the
channel catfish is different from that used by mammals, elasmobranchs and
amphibia. Expression vectors containing relevant regions of the channel catfish
mu chain gene will be transfected into mouse pre-B or plasma cells to
investigate the factors influencing splice-site choice in the catfish mu chain
transcript. 2) Assembly of hybrid catfish/mouse Ig heavy chains in mouse B
cells. This laboratory has observed that the assembly and secretion of Igs in
which the heavy chain consists of a mouse VH domain fused to the channel catfish
mu chain constant region domains is blocked. It is proposed to identify the
sites of this blockage in the biosynthetic pathway. Potential sites of blockade
to be investigated include defects in disulfide bond formation improper
glycosylation, abnormal association of the heavy chain with the immunoglobulin
binding protein (BiP), and failure to associate correctly with the endogenous
mouse light chains. 3) Identification of the putative enhancer driving
expression of the channel catfish Igh locus. Regions of the channel catfish Igh
locus will be put into appropriate expression vectors, and B-cell specific
enhancer activity in heterologous (mouse) B lymphocytes will be sought. These
studies should result in greater understanding of the expression of the antibody
mu chain gene and the function of its encoded protein in the channel catfish. In
addition, they will contribute to our overall understanding of the evolution of
the immunoglobulins and their genes in the vertebrates.