* 9107784
* Geology and Geochemistry of the Maimon Formation and        Associated Massive Sulfide Deposits, Central Dominican      Republic
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* John Lewis, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1994
* USD 16,900.00

This award supports cooperative research in geology and geochemistry between Dr.
John F. Lewis of George Washington University and co-investigators in the
Dominican Republic Ing. Salvador Brouwer of Falconbridge Dominicana and Dr.
Richard Moore of Falconbridge Ltd., Canada. A unique opportunity exists to make
a detailed study of the Maimon Formation, a unit of metamorphosed volcanic and
minor sedimentary rocks of apparent Late Jurassic or Early Cretaceous age
located in the Median Belt of the Dominican Republic. This study will be
directed towards (1) an understanding of the early tectonic position of the
Maimon-Amina Formations in the evolution of Hispaniola, (2) magmatic affinities
of the Maimon-Amina volcanic rocks and studies of their metamorphism and
alteration, (3) the genesis of the exhalative volcanogenic massive sulfides
within the Maimon Formation. The program will involve mapping, detailed
petrographic work, detailed structural analysis, an extensive program of major
and trace element geochemical analyses of rocks, age dating and isotopic
geochemistry of rocks and sulfides. The program provides the stimulus and
opportunity for well- trained Dominican geologists to participate at a level of
scientific work not normally available to them. The work also provides for the
training of U.S. graduate students. Dominican students participate as field
assistants giving them the opportunity to learn and practice good techniques.
This type of research provides for the rapid exchange and dissemination of
knowledge. In these ways, the project will fulfill the goals of the Science in
Developing Countries Program.