* 9107091
* Systematics of Telenominae:  Taxonomic Revision of          Trissolcus and Paratelenomus
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Norman Johnson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1995
* USD 110,000.00

The Telenominae is a group of minute wasps that all parasitize and thereby
destroy the eggs of other insects. Nearly 600 different species have so far been
recognized, but this represents but a minor portion of its total diversity. The
hosts that are attacked and killed include many species of agricultural,
silvicultural, and medical importance. As a result, these wasps are often
proposed as possible biological control agents. Achievement of this potential as
non-chemical methods of affecting pest insect populations has been severely
inhibited by our inability to recognize and distinguish among the many forms.
The overall goal of this project is to address this problem: to establish means
for identifying these wasps and to study their evolution and distribution. This
proposal focuses on the species classified as Trissolcus and Paratelenomus. Both
groups are egg parasites of stink bugs and their allies (including the major
pests, the rice stink bug and the southern green stink bug). Previous studies
have addressed the diversity of species in the Americas, Australia, and tropical
Asia. This project will complete the study of these two groups by incorporating
work on the African and temperate Eurasian faunas. It will culminate in a
worldwide summary of the scientific classification of the species, of the
patterns of their evolutionary relationships, and an analysis of the
biogeographic patterns. This will provide the framework for further studies of
the evolution of their biology.