* 9107246
* REU:  Energetics of Competitive Behavior
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Douglas Mock, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 01/31/1994
* USD 45,000.00

In many organisms, siblings compete actively for limited parental resources,
often with fatal results for some brood members. Sometimes this rivalry is
accentuated by overt aggression and the establishment of dominance hierarchies.
The evolution of self-promoting behavior that sacrifices close kin is believed
to be constrained by two main factors: (i) the genetic relatedness between
survivor and victim and (ii) the energetic costs associated with vigorous
competitive begging and/or fighting. In this study, these energetic costs will
be measured in three-chick broods of cattle egrets (Bubulcus ibis), an abundant
colonial bird that practices siblicide, using "doubly labelled water" (a mixture
of stable isotopes). The behavior of chicks injected with small amounts of this
compound will be monitored closely during all waking hours over a two-day
period, after which analysis of a tiny blood sample will reveal the total energy
spent. This method will be applied to chicks of various activity levels, so that
the unit costs of each focal activity (begging and fighting) can be determined.
This exercise will allow testing and modification of current intra-family
conflict theory, as it directly addresses the premise that begging and fighting
are expensive. It will also provide information about the efficiency of parental
care, by showing how much of parentally supplied food energy is used for growth,
as opposed to self-protection. On a more practical level, this knowledge, and
the approach itself, is likely to be applicable to various rare and endangered
species (e.g., whooping cranes, various eagles, brown pelicans) whose nestlings
compete fatally.