* 9107243
* Tests of the Equiv#aence of Competitors and Asymmetry of    Competition Hypotheses in Multispecies Woody Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Chris Peterson, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 11/30/1993
* USD 131,770.00

Despite the central importance of competition in ecological theory, field tests
of hypotheses about plant competition are rare. Two current major hypotheses are
the Competitive Equivalence Hypothesis and the Asymmetrical Competition
Hypothesis. No attempts have been made to apply these hypotheses to woody plant
communities. The P.I.s propose experiments that will test both the Competitive
Equivalence Hypothesis and the Asymmetrical Competition Hypothesis using
individuals of Betula alleghaniensis and Fagus grandifolia. The proposed
research is based on three working hypotheses: 1) Aboveground competition for
light is of equal or greater importance to the growth and survival of seedlings
than belowground competition for soil resources. This is an underlying
assumption of the remaining two hypotheses. 2) Target seedlings will respond
equally to equal densities of similar-sized neighbors of different species. This
is the Competitive Equivalence Hypothesis. 3) Target seedlings will show
reductions in growth directly proportional to the sizes of equal densities of
different-sized neighbors. This is the null form of the Asymmetrical Competition
Hypothesis. The investigators will create replicated neighborhoods around
central target individuals by thinning existing high-density areas to leave
neighbors of the desired density, species, and size. Response of target
seedlings will be measured as growth in height and stem diameter, and analyzed
as relative growth rate. Responses will be measured over two years from the time
of treatment. Results will determine whether the above hypotheses accurately
describe the competitive interactions among these woody species and how the
species differ in their competitive effects on one another.