* 9107150
* RUI:  Collaborative Research:  Host Expansion and Speciation Phytophagous Insects:  Behavioral, Ecological, and Genetic Factors
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1996
* Warren Abrahamson, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1996
* USD 254,720.00

Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have proposed speciation models for
herbivorous insects that make critical assumptions about genetic, behavior, and
ecological interactions with host plants. Testing these assumptions will lead to
an improved understanding of plant-herbivore interactions. If these assumptions
are tested in populations that have recently diverged, or are in the process of
diverging, these tests can help determine which of several competing models of
speciation are most plausible. Hypotheses about these assumptions will be tested
in two populations of a gall-making herbivore on two closely related host
plants. These populations are of one morphological species and are partially
reproductively isolated due to differences in host preference for mating and
egg-laying. Knowledge of genetic and other mechanisms responsible for these
preferences are crucial to understanding how herbivore speciation occurs. These
questions will be explored with a series of field, experimental garden, and
greenhouse experiments. Results from crosses between the host-associated
populations will be used to determine how host-and mating-site preferences and
the ability to survive on different host plants is inherited. Additional
experiments will be conducted to determine how environment and experience
influence oviposition-and mating-site preference. Studies will also be conducted
to determine how natural selection differs between host plants that could select
for divergence of populations. Finally, whether there is genetic variation
within one host-associated population could preadapt the behavior for a shift to
a new host plants will be investigated. Taken together, these data will provide
insight into the ecology of plant- herbivore interactions, the evolution of host
expansions, speciation, as well as the specialized adaptations of agricultural
pests.