* 9107029
* Base Stable and Composite ZrO2 Ceramic Supports for HPLC
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Michael Flickinger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David J. Curran
* 01/31/1996
* USD 392,000.00

This collaborative award, made under the Materials Chemistry and Chemical
Processing Initiative is supported by the Divisions of Chemistry and Chemical
and Thermal Systems. The goal of the research is the development of a family of
technically advanced monodisperse, wide-pore, high internal surface area,
mechanically and pH-stable, porous zirconia particles for use in separations
science. Novel ceramic materials will be made that conform to the needs of the
current and future downstream processing of biochemical materials. Based on the
required geometric, mechanical and chemical characteristics of the materials,
the particles will be optimized to accomplish a wide variety of separation
tasks. Optimization will include chemical modification of particle surfaces and
high and low temperature processing steps. Following synthesis and surface
treatment, particles will be characterized and evaluated in a variety of end
uses. This will be an iterative process. %%% This research will develop a multi-
faceted family of supports based on porous microspheres of zirconia to be used
in both analytical and preparative-scale chromatography and in fluidized bed
separations. The objective of the research is to overcome the major problems
associated with silica-based supports by replacing silica with zirconia and to
exploit the unique separations chemistry of this substrate.