* 9107538
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamic Bifurcation Phenomena in     Excitable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Steven Baer, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1995
* USD 70,830.00

The modeling and analysis of dynamic bifurcation phenomena is important in
science and engineering because experiments are often performed by dynamically
tuning one or more parameters until destabilization causes a transition to a new
observed state or behavior. Using numerical and computational methods, this
project will investigate accommodation phenomena in spatially-unrestricted axons
and myelinated nerve segments. A primary goal is to establish the
interrelationship between passive loading (both conductive and capacitive) and
accommodation in nerve cells and how it affects signaling. The project requires
computational and analytic bifurcation studies of reaction-diffusion equations
with slowly varying boundary and interface conditions. Another objective is to
classify and explore how different kinds of random fluctuations influence
accommodation in nerve models. Stochastic perturbation methods for exit time
estimates and numerical simulations will be employed. In neuroscience, threshold
and accommodation experiments at the cellular level are performed by slowly
depolarizing an excitable membrane by ramping or stepping up an applied current.
Such experiments to investigate accommodation phenomena in spatially-
unrestricted axons and myelinated nerve segments are important for understanding
why and how conduction failures occur in partially demyelinated nerve;
debilitating diseases such as Multiple Sclerosis can induce lesions that
partially demyelinate the myelin sheath. In addition, many of the tools
developed in this project are useful for studying dynamic bifurcation phenomena,
which occur in many other areas of science and engineering.