* 9107850
* Waveguide-Mode-Enhanced Molecular Fluorescence and Other    Aspects of the Dipole-Surface Problem
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Dennis Hall, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 02/28/1997
* USD 135,420.00

This research program investigates the physical origin of waveguide-mode-
enhanced molecular fluorescence, a phenomenon first reported by the Principal
Investigator and one of his former Ph.D. students (who jointly hold a patent on
this process) in 1985. The patent has attracted the interest of the medical
diagnostics industry. The term enhanced fluorescence refers to the substantial
increase in the fluorescent signal emitted by a layer of molecules deposited
onto a suitably prepared substrate compared to that from the same quantity of
molecules deposited onto an unprepared substrate. In essence, a glass substrate
can be dramatically improved as a substrate for molecular fluorescence by
overcoating it with the proper combination of layers. Both optical scattering
and optical waveguide modes contribute to the observed enhancement. The research
attempts to develop a theoretical model of the enhancement process and to verify
the predictions of the model through additional experiments. A proper
quantitative description of the enhancement process will identify the optical
properties of the sample that achieve the greatest enhancement. The proposed
theoretical work applies to several other aspects of the dipole-surface problem
important for optoelectronics, namely quantum-well vertical- cavity lasers and
suppressed spontaneous emission. these problems are to be examined, but the
primary emphasis of the research is waveguide-mode- enhanced molecular
fluorescence.