* 9107236
* Developmental Components of Respiratory Adaptation to High  Altitude
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1991,09/30/1996
* A. Roberto Frisancho, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 09/30/1996
* USD 235,647.00

The primary objective of this proposal is to improve our understanding of the
respiratory adaptations brought about by life at high altitude. In particular,
people evidence growth plasticity, growing to accommodate the ambient
environmental conditions. Generally, the growth differences at high altitude
appear to be adaptive; ie they help the individual to function under hypoxic
conditions. However, not all growth differences are obviously adaptive. For
instance high altitude natives have a lower ventilation rate when exercising at
high altitude than do lowland natives, yet they have higher work capacities than
sea level natives acclimatized to high altitude. It is thus critical to analyze
the role of development on a variety of physiological parameters of adaptation,
such as ventilation. This project will analyze a number of developmental
components of high altitude adaptation. Parameters such as residual lung volume,
ventilation rate and oxygen consumption under maximal exercise will be assessed
in high altitude Bolivian natives living permanently above 3500 meters,
lowlanders of European descent who are acclimatized to high altitude during
growth, and a group of lowlanders of European descent who were acclimatized to
high altitude during adulthood. The results will help to clarify the mechanisms
by which humans can adapt through growth processes to life at high altitude.