* 9107244
* The Molecular Code for Cooperative Free Energy Transduction in Human Hemoglobin
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Gary Ackers, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1994
* USD 264,000.00

The goal of this research program is to determine the molecular mechanism of
cooperative oxygenation in human hemoglobin. Dr. Ackers is attempting to
decipher the rules and energetic driving forces whereby the ten molecular forms
(each with a structurally-unique combination of ligated and unligatd heme sites)
respond to the interactions with heme-site lignads and small regulatory
molecules including protons, chloride ions, and 2,3-diphosphoglycerate. A
breakthrough was recently achieved in this problem when methods were developed
that resolve the functional energetics of hemoglobin tetramers in all ten states
of hemesite ligation, using non-oxygen ligands. This has opened the door to
obtaining previously inaccessible knowledge regarding properties of the
intermediate species and their roles in the cooperative mechanism. In current
work studies will be extended to mutant hemoglobins in order to map the
structural pathways of free energy transduction and to establish the connections
with oxygen binding. This research will use a combination of techniques,
including quantitative low temperature isoelectric focusing, and high precision
binding of oxygen, protons, and chloride as a function of temperature and
organic phosphates. The binding measurements will be correlated with circular
dichroic studies of quaternary structure. The results from this research will
serve as a model for studying "molecular codes" in other complex regulatory
protein assemblies.