* 9107991
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Craniofacial Form in      Relation to Prehistoric and Modern Populations in Asia
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1991,11/30/1992
* C. Loring Brace, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 11/30/1992
* USD 15,731.00

The objective of the proposed cooperative project is to test the morphological
relationships between the prehistoric and modern populations in the various
parts of China. The intent is to see whether the craniofacial morphology of
regionally identified modern Chinese populations differs to the same -- or to a
greater or lesser -- degree as modern Chinese in a given area differ from their
Neolithic antecedents in the same as well as in other parts of China.
Coordinated with the historical and archaeological record of population
movements from one part of China to another, compared with previously collected
data from past and present European populations, and considered in the
perspective of data to be gathered on Amerindian samples, this should give a
scale for measuring the rate of non-adaptive morphological change through time.
Ultimately this will allow the investigators to say just how long it has taken
for the various differences between the major regional populations of Homo
sapiens to have developed. This project involves collaboration with the Chinese
Institute of Archaeology where the collections are housed. This collaboration is
critical to the success of the project and could yield a longer term
collaborative approach to studying other Chinese collections which have been
largely unavailable to US scientists.