* 9107846
* Wave Interactions with Random Inhomogeneous Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Akira Ishimaru, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 12/31/1995
* USD 229,661.00

Many natural and man-made media vary randomly in space and time, and therefore
electromagnetic, optical, and acoustic waves propagating in these random media
experience random fluctuations in space and time. Examples are microwave,
optical, and acoustic wave scattering by ocean waves, atmospheric turbulence,
solar wind, rain, fog, snow, terrain, vegetation, biological media, composite
and disordered materials, and rough surfaces. These interactions between the
wave and the random media affect a broad range of practical problems such as
communications, identifications and remote sensing of these media, inverse
scattering, and imaging of objects in the medium. For almost 20 years, we have
been conducting extensive basic research on waves in random media, and we have
been successful in making substantial contributions in this field. On the basis
of our background and experience, we propose to conduct extensive theoretical
investigations, numerical studies, and controlled laboratory experiments on
multiple scattering. Our objectives are the understanding of the physical
processes of these multiple scattering phenomena and the development of
mathematical models useful for practical applications. Our proposed work will be
centered on several specific topics including the backscattering enhancement
from scatterers and rough surfaces, pulse scattering in particles and rough
surfaces, lateral and range resolutions, depolarization and degree of
polarization of scattered waves, higher order moments of the scattered wave,
vector radiative transfer for dense spherical and nonspherical particles,
imaging of objects in random media, and application of neural network technique
to inverse scattering problems. We propose to conduct carefully controlled
optical, millimeter wave, and acoustic experiments in order to guide the
development of the theories. We also propose to conduct extensive numerical
Monte Carlo simulations to help construct theoretical models. This combination
of theoretical, numerical, and experimental studies has proved to be most
effective in our research. These studies encompass fundamental research as well
as practical applications and should lead to improved or new statistical wave
theories which will be useful in applications such as atmospheric optics, ocean
acoustics, geophysical remote-sensing, radars,lidars, ultrasound imaging,
optical diffusion in tissues, inverse scattering of random media, and disordered
and composite materials.