* 9107739
* REU:  Competitive Displacement:  The Role of Reproductive   Mode and Parasitism
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Ted Case, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 07/31/1993
* USD 172,451.00

This research concerns the role of sex, parasites, and clonal diversity in
observed competitive displacements among geckos in the tropical Pacific. A wide-
scale biogeographic pattern has been documented which a sexual house gecko,
Hermidactylus frenatus, (Hf) upon introduction to islands in the Pacific,
replaces at least three other species as the common urban gecko. Two of the
three species (H. garnotti (g) and Lepidodactylus lugubris (L1) reproduce
parthenogenetically. In addition, the coral atoll of Takapoto (in the Tuomotus)
is an ideal study site for a competitive displacement of undescribed sexual
Lepidodactylus species by the parthenogen L. lugubris. Experimental results to
date verify the competitive displacement of LI by Hf and suggest possible
mechanisms involved. The principle investigators propose introduction
experiments in bunkers in Hawaii to determine the role of aggression and light
(as it concentrates insect food) on competitive dominance. In Takapoto the
researchers will assess the fine scale distribution of the sexual, asexual and
hybrid Lepidodactylus species and the incidence of parasites across space.
Previously, these researchers have much higher incidence of blood parasites in
asexual gecko species compared to sexuals. The present work will determine how
general this pattern is within the genus Lepidodactylus and if it can be related
to molecular polymorphism, which has been uncovered, in the major
histocompatibility complex.