* 9107083
* Genetic Determinants of the Neurospora crassa Life Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1996
* Chuck Staben, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1996
* USD 290,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms that control
the life cycle of Neurospora crassa. This goal will be approached by testing the
hypothesis that regulated expression of genes at the mating type locus controls
target genes that effect mating type functions. N. crassa is a haploid
eukaryote, the most intensively studied filamentous Ascomycete. The mating type
locus of Neurospora controls heterokaryosis during vegetative growth, and mating
and morphological development during sexual development. During vegetative
growth, the two alleles of mating type, a and A, prevent formation of mixed
mating type heterokaryons. However, only opposite mating types mate and undergo
sexual reproduction, a multistep process in which the mating type genes play
multiple roles. Each allele of mating type contains multiple functional regions
required for distinct steps. One region of a encodes a polypeptide (mt a-1)
critical to vegetative incompatibility and mating. The sequence of mt a-1
suggests that it is a DNA binding protein. The role of a-2 and the functions of
mt a-1 and the identities of genes that interact with it to control the
Neurospora life cycle will be investigated by a combined genetic, biochemical,
and molecular genetic approach.