* 9107623
* U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Research on the Structure of the    Universe on Very Large Scales
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,06/15/1995
* Sandor Szalay, Eotvos Lorand University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/15/1995
* USD 0.00

The primary objective of this US-Hungary research project under the Hungary
Joint Fund between Dr. Sandor Szalay, Eotvos University, and Dr. David C. Koo,
Lick Observatory, is to make major advances in the understanding of the
structure of the universe. Current observations of the large scale structure of
the universe show inhomogeneities on much larger scales than previously thought.
Deep redshift surveys of galaxies with 'pencilbeam' geometry towards the North
and South Galactic Poles indicate strong clustering along the line of sight, on
scales exceeding 100 Mpc, with a provocative regularity. The existence and the
distribution of such superclusters have profound implications for cosmology, but
these observations will only gain a general acceptance after overwhelming
evidence has been presented. These researchers will carry out new observations
to: extract more information from the existing unique data, establish the
statistical errors in more detail, study the effect of the projections, the
transverse extent of the structures, and search for signs of gravitational
infall. This project in cosmology fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence.