* 9107599
* Implementation Of A Very Large Knowledge-Based Domain-      Specific Heuristic Problem Solving Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Herbert Gelernter, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 08/31/1995
* USD 312,203.00

The Synchem systems is a large knowledge-based domain specific heuristic problem
solving program that is able to find valid synthesis routes for organic
molecules of substantial interest and complexity without online guidance on the
part of its user. Synchem requires an extensive knowledge base to make it
routinely useful. However, it is very difficult to engage domain experts to the
long-term dedication and intensity of commitment necessary to create a genuinely
productive knowledge base. In order to deal with the debilitating knowledge-base
bottleneck, machine learning programs will be devised that can use large
computer- readable databases of specific reaction instances to provide training
examples for algorithms designed to extract the underlying reaction schemata
through inductive and deductive generalization. This approach will be augmented
by the methodology that is usually described as explanation-based learning.
Since the individual reaction entries in most databases are often haphazardly
sorted and classified, another machine learning program will partition the input
databases into coherent reaction classes using the methodology of conceptual
clustering. To make it possible for Synchem to deal with the explosion of
reasonable pathways that would be the result of a successful effort to greatly
expand the knowledge base, the inference engine will reformulated for
distributed parallel search of the problem space.