* 9107266
* Bay Area Response to Information About a Future Major       Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Dennis Mileti, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 12/31/1993
* USD 331,249.00

Informing citizens, local governments and business organizations about the
earthquake hazard to increase awareness, mitigation and preparedness activities
is a central element of the national effort to reduce earthquake losses.
Relatively little research has been performed on organizational and public
response to earthquake risk information about a specific likely future event,
since few actual earthquake predictions, advisories, forecasts (they go by many
names) that are scientifically credible have emerged in the United States. This
research is a study of public and organizational response in the complex, urban,
multi-county San Francisco Bay Area to the communication of risk information
about that area's next major earthquake. Qualitative and quantitative research
will be performed. Mail questionnaires will collect relevant data on a
statistically representative sample of households. Interviews will be conducted
with key informants from purposefully selected local and non-local businesses,
government and other health, safety and welfare organizations. The opportunity
to study public and organizational response to scientifically credible risk
information about a future major quake in a complex urban setting is rare. This
research will describe the effects of the dissemination of such information, and
test a set of integrated hypothesized explanations for what is observed.