* 9107580
* Long Tree-Ring Chronologies for the Eastern Mediterranean
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Peter Kuniholm, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 374,608.00

Since 1974 Dr. Kuniholm has worked to devise a dendrochronological sequence for
Southern Europe and the Near East. To date, he has constructed a tree ring
series which extends over approximately 3,000 years and which covers major
portions of Turkey, Greece, Italy and adjacent areas in Southeastern Europe.
With partial support from the National Science Foundation, he will continue this
work. Over the course of three field seasons, together with his colleagues, he
will visit numerous sites in the region to collect old wood. Analysis at
Kuniholm's Cornell laboratory will then permit their incorporation into a master
chronology. The goals of this three year effort are: 1. to fill in the gaps
which remain in the chronology and 2. to extend it's geographic range. Because
the width of a tree ring is determined by environmental factors such as
temperature and precipitation, rings within a single tree vary from year to
year. By working from living specimens back through beams in buildings to
ancient buried wood it is possible to construct a chronology where an absolute
dates can be assigned. With such a master chronology it is then possible to take
wood of unknown age and then determine where, if at all, it fits within the
sequence. This fact is of great archaeological importance because tree ring
analysis provides the most precise dating technique known. It is possible, for
example, to use burned charcoal from hearths for this goal. The more precisely
and more confidently archaeologists can place an event in time, the wider the
range of potential questions which can be answered. Tree ring dating was first
practiced in the U.S. Southwest and it revolutionized archaeology there. Dr.
Kuniholm has worked patiently to develop a chronology in another
archaeologically important part of the world and his results to date have been
impressive. This research is important not only to archaeologists, but also to
paleoecologists, climatologists and others who use data derived from the past.
The tree ring chronology will not only provide a basis to increase our
understanding of past human behavior, but also help to illumine such issues as
the effect of human actions on climate.