* 9107808
* Investigation of Enzyme Catalysis: Mechanism at the Levels  of Subunit Function and the Chemical Transformation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Michael Dunn, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1993
* USD 95,000.00

This project will advance understanding of substrate channeling in metabolism,
allosterism in protein function, and the chemistry of enzyme catalysis. Three
systems will be studied: (1) the bacterial bienzyme tryptophan synthase
complexes, (2) the human liver alcohol dehydrogenases, and (3) the sheep liver
aldehyde dehydrogenase. The tryptophan synthase bienzyme complex catalyzes two
sequential steps in a metabolic pathway; the enzyme exhibits ligand-mediated
allosteric interactions between the . and > sites, which are connected by a 25
A-long tunnel. It is postulated that the common metabolite indole is transferred
between these sites via the tunnel. This proposal will investigate: (a) the
significance of the tunnel in metabolite transfer, (b) the mechanism and
function of the allosteric effects, and (c) the chemical determinants of
substrate specificity. Through genetic engineering, the human liver alcohol
dehydrogenase isozymes are available in large amounts. This proposal will
determine the roles played by protein conformation change and by electrostatic
fields in hydride transfer. The aldehyde dehydrogenase-catalyzed oxidation of
aldehydes occurs via an acyl-enzyme intermediate. How the oxidation state of
bound coenzyme influences the properties of the acyl-enzyme will be studied.
Rapid kinetic techniques, chromophoric substrates or analogues, and 1-H NMR will
be used. Some of the tryptophan synthase and alcohol dehydrogenase work will
involved studies of mutant enzymes prepared by site-directed mutagenesis.