* 9107108
* Studies on Maternal and Epigenetic Selection Models
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,08/31/1996
* William Atchley, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1996
* USD 207,000.00

The proposed research involves production of a generalized model of some
important developmental aspects of mammalian body plans. Most current models
which to are used to understand and predict relationships among complex
morphological and life- history traits are inadequate because they ignore
important developmental processes. Specifically, most current models ignore the
role played by "genetic maternal effects" and so called "epigenetic
interactions" during development. The proposed research will provide heretofore
unavailable experimental data on the impact of genetic maternal effects on
randombred mammalian organisms. In one project, the investigators will use
embryo transfer procedures among several diverse strains of laboratory mice to
provide critical new data about the relative magnitude of genetic variation in
both prenatal and postnatal maternal effects on the development of complex
morphological and reproductive traits. Further, the investigators will determine
the extent of genetic correlation between these prenatal and postnatal effects.
Finally, they will examine the persistence of maternal effects across
generations. The second component of the project involves theoretical
explorations and computer simulations about the phenomenon of epigenetic
interactions. The research will compare evolutionary predictions made under
different models of epigenetic control, and examine the consequences on
epigenetic selection models of major genes and non-additive gene effects.
Finally, new experimental designs will be provided for estimating intrinsic and
epigenetic effects during development.