* 9107004
* Phonetic Structures of Dying Languages
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Peter Ladefoged, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1994
* USD 519,293.00

ABSTRACTS Many languages are dying as the speakers die out or are absorbed into
larger communities. Soon we will no longer know what these languages sounded
like, or what articulatory gestures their speakers used. Their death will result
in a permanent loss of data for future linguistic investigations. This research
will investigate some of the dying languages that are most important from the
linguistic point of view. Another major aspect of this project is that it will
break new ground in providing standardized descriptions in quantified form using
a set of basis phonetic measures, designed to characterize both specific and
universal phonetic features. The final product will also include a fieldwork
manual for those who wish to do similar work. Fieldwork will be conducted in
collaboration with local linguistics. The principal phonetic and phonological
patterns will be identified and illustrated in specially prepared material,
along with supplementary material illustrating coarticulatory and other phonetic
phenomena. The investigators will make both audio and physiological recordings
including aerodynamic records for airstream mechanisms and the timing of
articulatory gestures, and palatographic records for articulatory contacts.
Audio recordings will be further analyzed in the UCLA Phonetics Laboratory.
Fully illustrated and documented accounts of each language will be published so
that knowledge of the sounds and the articulatory gestures involved in these
dying languages will remain available for future researchers and can form part
of the input to the formation of theories of phonetic and phonological
universals.