* 9107389
* Ribosomal Genes and the Phylogeny of Chlorophytes,          Charophytes, and Bryophytes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Russell Chapman, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* B. Jane Harrington
* 02/28/1995
* USD 265,000.00

Modern methods of gathering molecular data and of explicit data analysis will be
combined to examine questions about the phylogenetic relationships among green
algae and lower land plants (i.e., the bryophytes or mosses, liverworts, and
hornworts). Various methods will be used to obtain nucleic acids from the plants
of interest and to sequence various regions of the ribosomal RNA genes. The gene
sequences will then be compared and hypotheses fundamental questions debated for
over a century will be the focus in a study on mosses, liverworts, and
hornworts. In a second component of the project strikingly different, opposing
views about the taxonomy, phylogeny, and biogeography of the charophytes (also
known as the stoneworts, and important group of morphologically advance algae)
will be examined. The evidence provided should resolve the current conflict. The
third component of the project focusses on various lineages of chlorophytes
(green algae) and will complete current studies on such groups as the marine
green algae and the very unusual "conjugating green algae" (i.e., the
Zygnematales). The combination of molecular and morphological data in the data
analyses to be completed will provide an outstanding example of the utility of
combining data sets. The data collected will also complement similar sequence
data available for the vascular land plants.