* 9107247
* Effects of an Abrupt Soil Change on the Structure,          Composition, and Dynamics of a Species-rich Lowland         Tropical Forest in Sarawak, Malaysia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Stephen Hubbell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/28/1994
* USD 127,836.00

Most studies of tropical rain forests have intentionally been conducted on
relatively homogeneous sites. However, sudden changes in forest composition,
structure, and dynamics can occur with abrupt changes in soils in lowland
tropical forests. The importance of such changes and local soil-type
heterogeneity for the maintenance of tree species diversity in tropical forests
is unknown. A spectacular example is Lambir National Park, Sarawak. This forest,
undisturbed by humans, is perhaps the most species- rich tropical forest in
Southeast Asia. Establishment of a permanent 50 ha plot is proposed, to straddle
a major soil discontinuity at Lambir in order to compare and contrast tree
population patterns, and eventually demography and forest dynamics across the
soil ecotone. The "source-sink" hypothesis, namely that rare species in the
forest on one soil type are sustained by immigration from abundant populations
on the other soil type will be also tested initially through comparison of
population structure on contrasting soils of species occurring across this
ecotone. These tests are important for understanding the specialist vs.
generalists strategies of tropical tree species in relation to soils, for the
maintenance of rare species in tropical forests, and for the conservation of
tropical forest biodiversity. This project is co-sponsored by the Sarawak Forest
Department, and by the plant ecology laboratory of Osaka City University. The
project will train a new generation of resident and U.S. experts in one of the
world's richest floras.