* 9107639
* US-Hungary Joint Fund Research on Charcoal Formation from   Biomass at Elevated Pressures in a Stagnant Gas Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,06/15/1994
* Gabor Varhegyi, Hungarian Academy of Sciences Res Lab for Inorganic Chemistry
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/15/1994
* USD 0.00

The primary objective of this US-Hungary research project under the Hungary
Joint Fund between Dr. Gabor Varhegyi, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, and
Michael Antal, University of Hawaii, is to get deeper knowledge about the
fundamental chemical processes of the thermal decomposition of lignocellulosic
materials and in this way to enhance utilization of the biomass materials. The
agriculture and forestry industries produce large amounts of waste and by-
products containing cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, which can be thermally
decomposed into valuable chemicals and/or charcoal. This project aims to find
out how to influence the decomposition process in order to get higher amounts of
the valuable byproducts. This research will identify 1) how the various
components of biomass contribute to the formation of charcoal during pyrolysis
at normal pressure in a flowing gas environment, 2) how the increase of pressure
and the presence of the formed gaseous products influence charcoal yield in a
stagnant gaseous environment, 3) how biomass composition influences charcoal
yield at elevated pressures in a stagnant gaseous environment, 4) what are the
kinetics and the heat demand of the reaction at elevated pressures in a stagnant
gaseous environment. This project in inorganic chemistry fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the
United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool
research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.