* 9107827
* Molecular Systematics of the Lamiales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Richard Olmstead, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 05/31/1995
* USD 276,370.00

The mints, family Lamiaceae, are a large, economically and floristically
important family. They have been conceived to be a "natural" family and have
been recognized since before Linneaus. However, recent evidence from studies of
pollen morphology and floral and fruit morphology suggest that various members
of the family may have evolved independently from ancestors in the family
Verbenaceae and, therefore, the Lamiaceae would be polyphyletic. If this is the
case, then the Lamiaceae represents an unparalleled example of convergent
evolution. The use of morphology to interpret evolutionary relationships is
problematic. The very same phenomenon that has been suggested to account for the
possibly erroneous circumscription of the mint family, convergent evolution,
could also result in erroneous conclusions about relationship. New sources of
data derived from the comparative analysis of the molecular structure of the
chloroplast DNA from both families, Lamiaceae and Verbenaceae, will be assessed
to interpret the pattern of evolutionary relationship among their members.
Molecular data is much less prone to the misleading effects of convergent
evolution and has been shown to be effective for the reconstruction of
evolutionary relationships at this level in plants in several recent studies.
Two methods will be employed: 1) restriction site mapping will be used to
examine a large number (ca. 140) of species and 2) direct sequencing of three
genes coding for proteins differing greatly in function from species
representing the major lineages within the two families. The very large data set
expected to be derived from this research will be analyzed using recently
developed computer programs designed to reconstruct evolutionary history from
molecular data. This research will benefit both the fields of plant taxonomy, by
providing the basis for a revised classification of the families Lamiaceae and
Verbenaceae, and evolutionary biology, through the rigorous study of an
outstanding example of convergent evolution.