* 9107132
* Vapor Compression Heat Pump with Desorber-Absorber Heat     Exchange
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Reinhard Radermacher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 119,990.00

The performance of a vapor compression heat pump with desorber- absorber heat
exchange (DAHX) is being studied experimentally. This cycle is the result of
further development of the two-stage concept currently under investigation with
NSF support. The DAHX- cycle offers surprising features, such as extremely low
pressure ratios and a simple layout compared to its competitors. It is
especially advantageous that the proposed cycle requires less components and
heat exchange area than the two-stage version currently investigated, achieving
an even larger reduction in pressure ratio. However, as a consequence of the
simplification, the operating characteristics show less flexibility. This two-
stage version is most likely to be used in high temperature lift industrial
settings. The DAHX-cycle is useful for almost any heat pumping, refrigeration
and air-conditioning situation, when large temperature glides and small lifts
are encountered. A variation of the DAHX-cycle within a vapor compression
system, as it is proposed here, has never been built before. It is anticipated
that the study of this cycle will reveal interesting features and operational
experience that will allow for more creative and efficient vapor compression and
combined absorption/vapor compression heat pumps in the future. The DAHX- cycle
is expected to be easily tailored and optimized for a given application.