* 9107728
* Qualitative Analysis of Complex Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Anthony Michel, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/1995
* USD 111,500.00

This project will attempt to establish local and global qualitative results for
several classes of artificial feedback neural networks for associative memories.
These results will be used in a systematic way to establish synthesis results.
The P.I. will consider continuous-time and discrete-time neural networks which
may be endowed with linear or (higher order) nonlinear interconnecting
structures and with the usual sigmoidal models or higher order nonlinear models
for the neurons (e.g., staircase nonlinearities). Global qualitative results
will address the distribution of equilibria in the state space, global
stability, and the like. Local qualitative results will address the stability
properties and estimates of the domain of attraction of equilibria, rates of
convergence of trajectories, and so forth, Synthesis results will address
learning and forgetting algorithms, storage capacity, etc. The P.I. will also
use these neural networks results to establish analysis and design techniques
for general dynamical systems (including control systems) endowed with
saturation nonlinearities. Such systems are pervasive in science and technology.
In addition to local and global qualitative characterizations, we seek results
for controllability, observability, stabilizability, etc., in the case of
control system.