* 9107070
* Low Temperature Trapping of Intermediates in Enzyme-        Catalyzed Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Anthony Fink, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 11/30/1994
* USD 238,000.00

The proposed research involves a combination of method development for the
acquisition of structural information about enzyme-substrate or enzyme-inhibitor
complexes, and site-directed mutagenesis studies on B-lactamase to determine the
role of active-site residues in catalysis and inhibition. Fourier Transfer
Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, especially attenuated total reflectance (ATR)
FTIR, will be used to study enzyme-substrate intermediates (stabilized at low
temperatures) and enzyme-inhibitor (e.g. transition state analogs) complexes.
FTIR has the potential to reveal not only new bonds formed in enzyme-ligand
complexes, but also bond deformations and polarization, as well as
conformational changes in the enzyme. These methods will be applied to several
systems to increase our understanding of the molecular basis for enzyme
catalysis and inhibition . Resistance of pathogenic organisms toward B-lactam
antibiotics is a major international health problem. In the majority of cases
the reason for the resistance is the presence of B-lactamases produced by the
infectious agent, which hydrolyze the B-lactam rendering it ineffective as a
antibiotic . This research is aimed at increasing our understanding of the
mechanism of catalysis of B-lactamases.m Site-directed mutagenesis will be used
to determine the role of several residues which have been proposed to be
important in catalysis. The ultimate goal is the design of mechanism- based
inhibitors of the B-lactamases which will also function as antibiotics.