* 9107317
* Electrical and Magnetic Interactions in Clusters and        Large Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Clifford Dykstra, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul S. Bagus
* 11/30/1994
* USD 216,000.00

With this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Dykstra will develop a comprehensive model suitable for the
rapid evaluation of weak interaction potentials between large molecules and
molecular clusters. These potentials will be employed within a molecular
mechanics framework to calculate the effects of these weak interactions on
intrinisic molecular properties, particularly nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
parameters. The goal is to improve the value of certain NMR data and other
spectroscopic data for structure elucidation in complex and extended molecular
systems, including proteins and other biomolecules. The NMR parameters (e.g.,
shielding tensors, spin-spin coupling tensors, etc.) will be calculated
analytically for representitive small molecules using ab-initio techniques
developed by Professor Dykstra. High level electronic structure calculations
will be employed to characterize local polarization response of molecules to
external electrical properties, and then to evaluate the modeling of distributed
electrical responses in spatially extended molecules. The treatment of
polarization will be the key problem in achieving a realistic model of large
systems. Ab-initio calculations will also be employed to benchmark cooperative
effects, since these are important for any model applicable to large clusters.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most valuable tools
available for the elucidation of the structures of molecules, particularly for
molecules in solutions. The results of this project are expected to improve the
utility of NMR and other spectroscopic data in the determination of structures
of large biomolecules.