* 9107262
* RUI: Role of Seasonal Carbon Allocation Pattern in Mediatingthe Response of Ponderosa Pine and its Herbivores to        Environmental Stress
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Michael Wagner, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 06/30/1993
* USD 35,000.00

The Principle Investigator will determine the importance of the timing of water
stress on changing the susceptibility of ponderosa pine >Pinus> >ponderosa> to
an outbreak prone insect herbivore, >Neodiprion> >gillettei>. This research will
test the hypothesis that environmental stress predisposes forests to insect
outbreaks only when stress occurs at a time within the seasonal growth of the
tree that creates a disequilibrium in the ecological balance between root and
shoot growth. The specific hypothesis to be tested is that stress applied during
the shoot growth phase will increase the root:shoot ratio and decrease
susceptibility to insects; while stress applied during the root growth phase
will decrease the root:shoot ratio and increase susceptibility to insects. The
proposed research will test the widely held belief that stress predisposes
forests to insect outbreaks. This research will also examine the fundamental
process of seasonal allocation of carbon between roots and shoots and the
response of herbivores to differences in this allocation pattern. These
processes are strongly affected by variations in climate and likely are under
genetic control. Better understanding of these processes will improve the
predictability of the impact of insect herbivores on ponderosa pine forests
under future unknown global climate conditions.