* 9107434
* Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Analysis of Problems in    Liquid Crystals and Singular Perturbations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Eugene Gartland, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/1994
* USD 47,000.00

This proposal is concerned principally with the mathematical and numerical
analysis of problems related to liquid crystals. Also considered is the
numerical analysis of singularly-perturbed ordinary differential equations. The
analysis of liquid-crystal problems involves interdisciplinary work with the
Glenn H. Brown Liquid Crystal Institute (LCI) at Kent State University; it is
primarily concerned with analyzing and numerically simulating the equilibrium
configurations of liquid crystal molecules in small confinements, as arise in
polymer-dispersed liquid crystals (PDLC's), with special attention to defect
structures and the influence of geometry, boundary conditions, and external
applied fields. These solution fields are modeled, using a continuum
mathematical model, as minimizers of the Landau-de Gennes free energy
functional, which derives from the Landau theory of phase transitions. These
problems, with their large number of degrees of freedom (a tensor order
parameter) and spatial dimensions (three), lead to challenging large-scale
scientific computing problems requiring robust and efficient techniques of
finite element discretization, large-sparse optimization, and numerical
bifurcation in the presence of symmetry breaking. The work in the area of
singular perturbations is concerned with the further development, refinement,
and extension of a general uniform stability theory for linear and nonlinear
differential equations of arbitrary order. The main significance and importance
of these projects derives from the interdisciplinary aspect of the work on
liquid crystals. The investigator will perform numerical simulations on current
problems of interest to the theoretical and experimental physicists in the LCI.
He will bring to bear state-of-the-art techniques from modern numerical analysis
and scientific computing to complement physical theory and experiment.
Investigators in the LCI are at their limits, using sophisticated NMR
techniques, to probe the structure of liquid crystals in the very small
(submicron) size containments in certain display technologies currently under
development. It is hoped that numerical simulations will play an important role
here.