* 9107028
* Life History Cost/Benefit Trade-offs in Cynomys gunnisoni
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1996
* John Hoogland, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 04/30/1996
* USD 97,919.00

Gunnison's prairie dogs (Cynomys gunnisoni) formerly were an important part of
the ecosystem of the western United States, serving as common prey for golden
eagles, peregrine falcons, coyotes, bobcats, badgers, and black-footed ferrets.
Shooting and poisoning brought these animals to the brink of extinction in the
early 1970's. Little is known about their reproductive and population biology.
The proposed research will examine the natural history and population biology of
Gunnison's prairie dogs living under natural conditions at Petrified Forest
National Park in Arizona. Inbreeding usually produces inferior offspring. Like
other animals, Gunnison's prairie dogs avoid extreme inbreeding with relatives
such as parents, offspring, and siblings. Do they also avoid mating with more
distant kin such as first and second cousins? By directly observing copulations
of individuals of known genealogies, the frequency of moderate inbreeding among
Gunnison's prairie dogs and whether such inbreeding yields inferior offspring
will be identified. Communal nursing, the suckling of another female's
offspring, is rare among mammals living under natural conditions. Trying to
understand apparent cases of altruism such as communal nursing poses one of the
greatest challenges to evolutionary and behavioral ecologists. Communal nursing
among Gunnison's prairie dogs occurs in three different contexts, and affects
more than 10% of all juveniles. The proximate and ultimate causes for this high
frequency of communal nursing will also be investigated.