* 9107856
* International Conference on Geography and Empire; Kingston, Ontario, Canada
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1991
* Neil Smith, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/1991
* USD 5,000.00

Recent studies of the history of geography have sought to examine the role of
the discipline beyond its academic core. Geographic concepts and information
have been used in a wide variety of ways for a multitude of purposes, and
geographers as scientists and practitioners have played varying roles in the
development, maintenance, and transformation of public policy. One of the most
intriguing topics on which this attention has begun to focus has been the
establishment, expansion, management, and dissolution of national empires from
the 18th into the 20th centuries. This award will support participation by
American geographers in an international conference to examine
interrelationships between geography and empire. The conference will be held in
Kingston, Ontario, Canada, in April 1991 and will bring together roughly twenty
scholars from around the world. These scholars will present papers and discuss
issues related to the ways that the development of geography as a discipline
contributed to the techniques and ideology of empire in many different forms and
national contexts. Attention also will focus on how the experiences of empire
influence geography's development as a discipline and as a body of knowledge. A
published proceedings will disseminate papers and results of the conference.
Support for the conference also has been provided by Queen's University and the
Canadian Social Science and Humanities Research Council. This conference will
convene historians of geography and science, geographers, and related scientists
to share perspectives and insights about an important aspect of the development
of geography as a discipline. In addition to bringing together scholars from
across the globe who have had relatively little opportunity for focused, face-
to- face discussions, the project also will provide opportunities for
identification of new lines of basic research on this significant topic.