* 9107360
* Beta-Lactamases: Transition State Structures-U.S.-Sri LankaCooperative Science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Rex Pratt, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1992
* USD 20,000.00

Description: Under this project, support will be provided for a scientist from
Sri Lanka, Dr. Srianthie A. Deraniyagala, of the Department of Chemistry,
University of Colombo, Sri Lanka, to work in the laboratory of Dr. Rex Pratt of
Wesleyan University in Middletown, CT. The research, to be carried out jointly,
will seek to study the interaction of bacterial enzymes with antibiotics that
may decrease the latters' effectiveness. Specifically, a combination of
secondary and solvent kinetic deuterium isotope effects will be employed to
determine the structure of Beta-lactamase transition states and the extent of
their stabilization through proton motion. Extension of the experiments to the
bacterial DD-peptidase enzymes, the targets of Beta-lactam antibiotics, are also
planned, to further delineate the differences between the Beta-lactamase and DD-
peptidase active sites. A close comparison of the results with previously
obtained results of the serine proteinases will be made, to clarify the
mechanisms of catalysis employed by these enzymes. Scope: The project brings a
young, bright researcher from Sri Lanka to participate in research with, and
learn new experimental techniques, from a well established and experienced U.S.
researcher who has extensive knowledge in the field. This is likely to benefit
both scientists, and to encourage the expansion of similar work in Sri Lanka in
the future.