* 9107823
* Acquisition of a Time-of-Flight Imaging Ion Microprobe      for Research in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1992
* Barbara Garrison, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 11/30/1992
* USD 427,167.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will allow the
Department of Chemistry at Pennsylvania State University at University Park to
acquire a time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS). The
research studies to be performed include the following: Surface Chemistry with
TOF-SIMS, Applications of Imaging TOF-SIMS to the Study of the Interfaces of
Organic Materials, The Use of Imaging TOF-SIMS to Screen for Catalytic
Antibodies, Synthesis and Characterization of Polymer-Trapped Ceramic
Nanoclusters, Imaging of Neuronal Membranes, Molecular Dynamics Simulations of
the keV Particle Bombardment Process, Studies Involving Scanning Tunneling
Microscopy and Studies of Nanoscale Composites Using Imaging TOF-SIMS. A time-
of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS) can simultaneously
determine the molecular makeup and distribution of a surface sample. It uses a
low-dose pulsed beam of primary ions to eject secondary ions of atoms and
molecules from the sample's surface. These secondary ions are accelerated into a
TOF spectrometer where the ions separate in time according to their kinetic
energies and provide mass dispersion information. The study of surface
contamination of semiconductor devices, surface properties of polymer material,
and organic residues on treated surfaces, as well as studies of biomedical
tissues are just a few application areas that have benefited from the unique
capabilities of the TOF-secondary ion mass spectrometry technique.