* 9107282
* Preservation of Human Skeletal remains from SunWatch        National Historic Landmark
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Christopher Turnbow, Dayton Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1993
* USD 34,000.00

With National Science Foundation support, an accessible burial chamber for
Native American skeletal materials will be constructed at the Sunwatch site in
Ohio. Archaeological excavation at this site yielded a series of human skeletal
remains consisting of 175 individuals which were recovered from a number of
areas within the circular stockaded village. The collection is important because
it appears to date from a 10-20 year period and thus reflects an extremely
limited (in an archaeological sense) slice of time. Therefore, it is of great
interest to biological anthropologists. Given religious sensitivity of many
Native American groups, however, it has been proposed that these (as well as
other) remains be reburied. The Dayton Museum of Natural History which curates
the skeletons has worked with a Native American group and proposed an ingenious
solution. A simple, locked underground crypt will be constructed at the Sunwatch
site itself near a visitors center. The skeletal remains will thus be interred
in what is viewed as their proper context. They will, however, be available for
study by qualified experts including both scientists and Native American
religious leaders. This project is important for two reasons. It will make
access to scientifically important materials available on a continuing basis. It
will also provide an example of how skeletal materials may be treated to accord
with both scientific and religious concerns.