* 9107380
* The Evolution of Virulence of An Insect Virus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Joseph Elkinton, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 12/31/1994
* USD 230,002.00

Over the past ten years, mathematical models of infectious disease have
elucidated the impact of natural selection upon pathogen virulence.
Specifically, whether natural selection will lead to higher or lower virulence
is thought to depend upon the effect of virulence upon disease transmissibility.
The investigators propose to test this hypothesis by using two clones of the
nuclear polythedrosis virus of gypsy moth, Lymantria dispar; these clones are of
very different virulence and can be identified from field samples on the basis
of restriction endonuclease maps. A combination of laboratory measurements and
small-scale field experiments will be used to estimate different aspects of the
transmissibility of the two clones. These estimates will be used to predict
which clone will predominate in the field. This prediction will be tested by
seeding 1 hectare plots with disinfected gypsy moth eggs, and simultaneously
introducing both clones of the virus. Competitive superiority will be indicated
by which clone infects more larvae over the course of an epizootic. Assumptions
about the evolution of pathogen virulence have influenced research on disease
ecology for decades, but have been largely untested. The work that is proposed
here will greatly reduce the gap between theory and reality in the study of the
evolutionary ecology of disease.