* 9107564
* Design, Construction and Implementation of a Submersible    Pulsed Holocamera for Deep#Sea Detection of Particle        Characteristics and Motions
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1997
* Joseph Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 01/31/1997
* USD 808,830.00

The Johns Hopkins University and University of Rhode Island will undertake a
collaborative, multidisciplinary instru- mentation development project to
develop and implement a means of increasing capabilities to resolve interactions
between particles and small scale physical processes in the ocean by
simultaneously measuring particle properties and small scale motions of the
fluid surrounding it. The project involves laser optic holography and fluid
mechanics methods to derive information about plankton dynamics and particle
characterization. A pulsed ruby laser holocamera will be modified for use in the
ocean and will use recent advances in holography and digital image processing.
Design criteria call for in situ measurement of particle number, size,
distribution, type, and orientation and inter-particle distances over a size
range of 10 microns to 5 cm. Instantaneous velocity of all particles within a
sample volume would also be measured by adapting triple- pulse techniques used
for motion sensing within laser sheets. The proposed instrument will be usable
in the laboratory or in the field, when attached to a submersible. The
development of a motion sensing holocamera is driven by a growing recognition
that a new class of instruments is required to address a series of critical
questions in ocean science and marine fluid mechanics. Presently available
instrumentation is inadequate to address and test hypotheses concerning complex
physical-particle interactions of plankton dynamics and boundary layer fluid
dynamics.