* 9107700
* Japan Long Term Visit: Queueing Theory, with Applications to Manufacturing Systems and Communications Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Ronald Wolff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 05/31/1993
* USD 78,066.00

This award will support a long-term visit by Professor Ronald W. Wolff,
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Engineering
Systems Research Center, University of California, Berkeley, to Japan for a
cooperative research project with Professor Masakiyo Miyazawa at the Science
University of Tokyo and Professor Genji Yamazaki at the Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Technology. The researchers will investigate several topics in
queueing theory that have applications to model manufacturing systems and
communications networks as follows: 1) Bounds and Approximations for Queues and
Queueing Networks. Generally performance measure for queueing networks cannot be
determined exactly, but must be approximated. They will investigate the errors
in these approximations in several ways including light-traffic analysis. For
tandem queues they will investigate bounds on the difference in performance
measures for different arrangements of the order of the servers. They will also
look at some unsolved problems about bounds and approximations for simple
single-and multi-server queues. 2) Conditions for Finite Delay Moments. The
formal derivation of approximations and bounds often involve the requirement
that certain terms either cancel or are small. This in turn requires that
certain delay moments be finite. Recent progress has been made in this area and
the researchers believe they can contribute further knowledge to the problem. 3)
Fundamental Properties of Queues. They will investigate applications of attained
waiting time to queues, where one of the objectives is to find new bounds on
performance measures. Finally, they will investigate simplifications to existing
theory that may result from the merger of different approaches, such as the
application of sample-path methods to the marked point processes. There is a
large amount of research currently taking place on queueing theory in Japan.
Thus it is an excellent opportunity for Professor Wolff, who is one of the
outstanding queueing theorists in the world, to collaborate with Professors
Miyazawa and Yamazaki who are also world renown in the field. Each researcher
brings a unique capability to the effort yet each is also experienced in the
work of the others. It is expected that this collaboration should provide some
exciting results as well as continued cooperation between the researchers for
years to come.