* 9107673
* Conference on Data Needs for Study of Human Dimensions of   Environmental Change in the Pacific Basin; Honolulu, Hawaii;May 1991
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1991,12/31/1991
* Richard Berk, Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/1991
* USD 15,000.00

Mounting concerns about accelerating global human and environmental change
highlight the need for creation of new databases to analyze processes of change
and for greater use of extant databases. This award provides partial funding to
enable a group of roughly 20 social and natural scientists from Pacific Rim
nations to meet in Honolulu in May 1991 to address fundamental issues related to
global change data collection, access, and use. The conference will have two
general purposes: (1) to specify data needs and the availability of databases to
address questions relating to human, natural, and physical dimensions of global
change in the Pacific Rim; and (2) to discuss problems dealing with the
scholarly use of these data, with special attention given to issues of national
sensitivities, proprietary rights, systematic biases, longitudinal extensions,
remotely sensed data, and adaptability of data for use in geographic information
systems. The primary findings of the conference will be reported in a special
article in a major scientific journal. The conference will further
understandings of fundamental data needs to examine processes of global change
by comprehensively examining a broad range of data needs and related data-use
issues for a restricted geographic area. The conference should highlight
remaining problems and provide suggestions for future actions by independent
scholars and institutions, including government agencies.