* 9107703
* Fundamentals of Fouling and Flux Decline in Crossflow       Membrane Filtration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Robert Davis, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Edgar A. O'Rear
* 08/31/1994
* USD 131,375.00

This study involves the use of microsporous membranes for the separation of
whole and broken cells from proteins and other soluble molecules present in
fermentation broths and cell homogenates. Its primary objectives are to provide
a predictive understanding of cake and membrane fouling, which lead to a reduced
efficiency of the separations process, and to use this understanding to develop
novel strategies to overcome the detrimental effect of fouling. A new theory,
which includes the mechanism of shear-induced hydrodynamic diffusion, is used to
describe the reductions in permeate flux and protein transmission due to
simultaneous cake buildup on the membrane surface and adsorption fouling within
the membrane structure. When the equations of motion are integrated across the
cake layer and the concentration- polarization boundary layer, this theory takes
the form of an integral model and is solved using the method of characteristics.
In addition to describing the transient and steady-state behavior of crossflow
microfiltration separation processes, the theory predicts desired operating
conditions under which little or no cake layer of rejected cells is expected to
form on the membrane surface. Complementary experimental research has tow
primary thrusts. The first is the development of protocols to measure physical
parameters required in the theory. These parameters include the membrane and
cake permeabilities and selectivities, and a crossflow integral which involves
the concentration dependence of the diffusivity and viscosity of the suspension
being filtered. The second thrust involves testing and improving the theory by
measuring permeate flux, protein transmission, cake buildup, and membrane
fouling. Experiments are performed with rotary and conventional crossflow
microfilters containing polymeric and ceramic membranes, and using model
suspensions for latex beads and complex suspensions of bacterial and yeast
fermentation broths and cells homogenates. The results of this research are
helping to advance the application of membranes for separations in
environmental, chemical, energy, microelectronics food, beverage, and
pharmaceutical industries. Applications to the production of pharmaceuticals are
especially significant, as the knowledge gained may be used to design membrane
separations systems which yield high recoveries of valuable protein products.