* 9107055
* Theoretical Investigation of Information Sharing for        Semantic and Object-Oriented Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Richard Hull, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 08/31/1994
* USD 166,999.00

This research is developing languages and mechanisms for restructuring and
merging information from disparate databases, and is studying the theoretical
foundations of such languages.The research uses the PI's formally defined ILOG
languages, which permit the declarative specification of database restructuring.
Certain technical properties of these languagesprovide a strong connection to
logic programming. The research is also developing extensions to ILOG for data
merging; a central problem here involves determining when object identifiers
(OIDs) in two or more distinct databases refer to the same object "in the
world", and developing appropriate mechanisms for "merging" the OIDs in this
case. Specific theoretical questions under study include: attempting to
characterize when two (restructuring or merging) programs are equivalent;
exploring algebraic properties of programs (e.g., associativity,
distributivity);developing algorithms for the translation of queries against
restructured, merged databases; and for incrementally updating such databases if
they are materialized. Experimental work will be performed to test the
algorithms and view update methodologiesunder realistic conditions. The results
obtained by the researchwill provide a crucial component for all database
applications which involve data sharing.