* 9107078
* The Genetics of Sexual Selection in Nauphoeta Cinerea
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Allen Moore, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1995
* USD 199,000.00

Most population genetic models assume that mating is random with respect to the
character of interest. However mating is often nonrandom with respect to many
characters that influence mating success. There is considerable evidence that
success in male-male competition and/or female mate choice is a fairly common
contributor to nonrandom mating in variety of species. As a result, there has
been a growing attempt to generate genetic models of the process and effects of
such selection. Unfortunately, the number of models has exceeded our empirical
knowledge of this process, resulting in a growing call for studies that begin to
test the predictions and assumptions contained in mathematical models. This
study will begin to address this need by examining the genetics of secondary
sexual characters, courtship pheromones, and sexual behavior in Nauphoeta
cinerea. Empirical studies have been hampered by a lack of suitable model
species. The cockroach N. cinerea has many attributes that facilitate genetic
studies of sexual selection, including short generation time, facultative
parthenogenesis, and well characterized behavior. These qualities permit a
detailed examination of assumptions and predictions derived from theoretical
studies. Variation in female mate choice, male social behavior, male
attractiveness, and related male pheromones will be assessed by behavioral
assays and gas chromatography. Genetic variances and convariances within and
between the sexes will be estimated from a paternal half-sib mating design.
Artificial selection based on male attractiveness to females will be used to
confirm genetic estimates obtained from the breeding experiments. The
information generated from this study will increase our general knowledge of the
phenotypic and genetic structure of pheromones and chemical communication. In
addition, this study will be sufficiently detailed to test several predictions
and assumptions of mathematical models of sexual selection and the evolution of
sexual dimorphism. Finally, these experiments will provide empirical data that
bear on several issues in evolutionary genetics.