* 9107555
* Biogeochemical Processes Governing Production and Emission  of Reduced Sulfur Gases along a Salinity Gradient in Gulf   Coast Wetlands
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1991,11/30/1996
* Ronald DeLaune, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* John R. Gold
* 11/30/1996
* USD 250,000.00

Drs. DeLaune, Patrick, and Lindau propose to conduct a field and laboratory
study of gaseous sulfur production and emissions from Gulf Coast wetlands.
Studies of sulfur gas emissions in coastal wetlands have not been extensive
enough to establish the biogeochemical conditions and magnitude of sulfur gas
production. The site of this study will be Barataria Basin, Louisiana. This
basin encompasses one of the largest and most productive estuaries in the United
States, with wetland types ranging from salt marsh to fresh marsh. This research
will quantify the seasonal and diurnal gaseous fluxes to the atmosphere of H2S
and organic sulfur compounds from the wetland types. Sulfur gases trapped in
soils will be measured and related to the atmospheric emissions. The role of
sediment redox conditions and organic carbon in the formation of gaseous sulfur
forms in fresh, brackish, and salt marshes will also be studied using sediment
redox controlled microcosms in the laboratory. Gaseous sulfur compounds produced
from decomposition of added soil organic matter will be compared to compounds
produced from bacterial sulfate reduction. The role of wetland vegetation in
production of gaseous sulfur will also be investigated. Drs. DeLaune, Patrick
and Lindau are leading researchers in the area of wetland biogeochemistry. The
institutional facilities for this research are excellent.