* 9107653
* Dissertation Research: The Pinto Point Controversy in the   Western United States
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1993
* USD 11,604.00

Under the direction of Dr. Sylvia Broadbent, Ms. Adella Schroth will collect
data for her doctoral thesis. Her research will focus on a tool type known as
the "Pinto Point" which occurs widely in prehistoric sites in the Great Basin
region of the United States. The Pinto Point was originally defined on the basis
of excavations at the Stahl and Pinto Basin sites, both located in Eastern
California. However, at neither site are absolute dates available. Ms Schroth
will conduct further research at both and undertake limited excavations. The
data recovered should clarify the stratigraphy and also provide samples of
radiocarbon dating. In addition to analysis of the lithics recovered at Stahl
and Pinto Basin, Ms Schroth will study similar points from other locations. The
result will be a more detailed description of this type and better understanding
of its chronological placement. Because the Great Basin has an environment which
is both harsh and unpredictable, archaeologists have focussed on this area to
study how humans at a sample technological level of development adapt to such
difficult conditions. A major problem such researchers face is that most
archaeological sites in the region consist of surface lithics. For this reason,
they are difficult to date either by conventional methods such as radiocarbon or
by geological context. In this region, however, tool types - especially spear
and arrow points change over time and archaeologists have used tool typology as
a dating technique. The Pinto Point. although not as extensively studied as one
would like is often used in this way. The significance of Ms Schroth's research
becomes clear in this context since successful completion of this research will
allow more accurate dating of many Great Basin sites. The work will also assist
in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.