* 9107393
* A Novel Combustion Synthesis of Refractory Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Kenneth Brezinsky, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 02/28/1995
* USD 269,890.00

A novel, combustion synthesis approach to the continuous production of
refractory nitride, carbide and other ceramics by the reactions of liquid
sodium/potassium droplets in an atmosphere of gaseous metal halides (i.e. TiCl4,
SiCl4) and nitrogen or carbon containing gases (i.e. N2, CCl4) is the subject of
this proposal. A feasibility study has already led to the production of
crystalline titanium nitride, titanium carbide and silicon carbide powders. The
preliminary results have indicated that further investigation of this approach
is required in order to explore its full synthesis capabilities. The focus will
be on the use of free falling droplet experiments as a means of understanding
the fundamental physical and chemical parameters controlling the synthesis of
the ceramic material. A range of materials will be explored using suspendef
single droplets in appropriate atmospheres. The key question to be answered is
how pure a product can be formed under ideal, well-controlled conditions.
Combustion synthesis has the potential for producing hard, high temperature
resistant, chemically stable nitrides, carbides and other ceramics. This
research will attempt to ascertain whether or not a continuous process using a
liquid metal spray is an attractive alternative to batch methods for producing
ceramic powders.