* 9107675
* The Influence of Chemical Microstructure and Pressure on theMechanisms of Crystallization in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Paul Phillips, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* None
* 10/31/1994
* USD 225,000.00

There are many variables that affect the physical and mechanical properties of
crystalline polymers through the processing and fabrication stages of
manufacture. Four of the most important are temperature, pressure, molecular
weight, and chain microstructure. The long-term objective of this research is to
understand the way in which all four of these variables interact in determining
the details of the crystallization process. Building on past work, the
synergistic effects of these variables will be investigated for several systems.
Several recent important developments in crystallization theory will be
investigated for homopolymers and copolymers based principally on polyethylene,
polypropylene, and some semi-rigid polymers. The research will enable
quantitative analysis to be made of crystallization theories. It will help
unravel the complicated synergisms of the variables referred to above. In
addition it will investigate the dependence on pressure- temperature of the
phase transformations in polypropylene, which may be of significance to the
development of new processing methods. Much of the basic aspects of the research
will involve experimental and theoretical approaches to this essential, but
relatively unexplored, feature of crystallization.