* 9107681
* Topics in Dynamic Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Thomas Sargent, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1995
* USD 140,957.00

This research should make valuable methodological and substantive contributions
to our understanding of dynamics of economic growth, consumption, saving and
other important economic variables. The project pursues research on learning in
economic systems; recursive dynamic models of economic fluctuations; and
monetary history. The two lines of research on learning are artificial
intelligent learning via classifier systems and learning via recursive ARMA
models. Two classes of recursive dynamic models are considered, one with
"signalling " within incomplete markets and another with complete markets. Two
areas of monetary history are examined: the macroeconomics of the periods
preceding, during, and following the French revolution and government switches
from one commodity money standard to another. Models in game theory and
macroeconomics often have multiple equilibria, and there is no self-evident way
for either agents inside the model or economists to select among them. In
monetary economics, there are a variety models that display such multiplicities.
The research by this project on learning algorithms is very important because it
provides means of reducing the number of possible outcomes in some cases to a
single rational equilibrium. The predictions of that model can then be tested
empirically. Dynamic stochastic models are used in macroeconomics and finance to
build theories about how variables like consumption and interest rates covary
over time. But these models are often computationally demanding to analyze or
completely intractable. The research on recursive dynamic models explores ways
that these models can be quickly and inexpensively formulated and solved.
Economic history provides a laboratory within which recent developments in
macroeconomic theory can be tested. The investigator has turned up a number of
documents that show the seriousness with which leaders of France around the time
of the French Revolution were experimenting with a range of arrangements
extending from "real bills" schemes to "optimal tax smoothing" policies. This
project will use dynamic macroeconomic and monetary theories to study these and
other historical episodes.