* 9107481
* Mechanisms of Below-Ground Resource Acquisition in Plants:  Linking Form and Function
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1996
* Kurt Pregitzer, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1996
* USD 374,355.00

The objective of the proposed research is to understand how differences among
plant species in fine root structure and dynamics in response to nutrient
patches affects their ability to acquire soil resources particularly nitrogen.
The overall hypothesis is that differences in fine root morphology (length,
width, production of root hairs) and production (birth, death, and elongation
rate) will determine the rate at which species can encounter and exploit soil
resources that vary in space and time (i.e. their foraging ability). Previous
work suggests there are difference among annuals and perennials in response to
soil nutrients. this has led to the hypothesis that the replacement of annuals
by perennials in successional fields may be partially due to the increased
patchiness in soil resources over time and difference in the abilities of
annuals and perennials to find and exploit these patches. Of particular interest
is the timing of responses to nutrient patches which will be determined by
measuring the demographic response of species. Several specific hypothesis will
be tested in greenhouse and field experiments. By varying the distributions of
nitrogen, and using 15 N as a tracer, the relationship between fine root
morphology and dynamics and resource acquisition will be measured. Fine root
dynamics (branching, growth, birth and mortality) will be measured in situ with
video technology. This technology allows the response of individual roots to
nutrient patches to be followed and related to species differences in below-
ground morphology, growth, and ability to acquire soil resources. The results of
these studies will contribute to the development of a more mechanistic
understanding of soil resource acquisition by plants and to a better
understanding of how competition for resources affects species distributions in
terrestrial plant communities.