* 9107543
* Dispersal, Individuality, and Lifetime Reproductive Success
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Kenneth Armitage, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/1995
* USD 141,000.00

Population dynamics is considered to be the demographic summation of individual
attempts to maximize evolutionary fitness, measured as lifetime reproductive
success (LRS). Many offspring disperse; therefore, reproductive success of
parents cannot be determined without knowing the survivorship and reproductive
output of their dispersing offspring. An animal should not disperse unless
dispersal increases its fitness; therefore, dispersal must be considered from
the fitness viewpoint of dispensers. The contributions of dispersal, social
behavior, individual differences, and social organization to fitness can be
determined from detailed, longitudinal, long-term studies of individuals whose
life-history traits of relatedness, age, and sex are known, whose behavioral
phenotype can be categorized, and whose social interactions can be directly
observed. This project will be the first to incorporate the reproductive success
of offspring into the calculations of the variance in lifetime reproductive
success of individual males and females. The energetic costs of male mating
strategies will be compared with the reproductive costs of females to determine
which sex, if either, has the greatest costs during the active season. Many
rodent populations require control. When population control should be applied to
be cost effective can be determined from the population biology of the species.
Thus, if most animals that disperse die, then it is not effective to apply
control measures to animals that would die anyway. Also, control measures are
ineffective if those animals that are killed or removed are quickly replaced by
immigrants. Because yellow-bellied marmots frequently are agricultural pests,
knowledge of the fate of dispensers will contribute to the preparation of
effective control measures.