* 9107324
* Population Dynamic Consequences of Dispersal and            Between-year Dormancy
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1995
* D. Lawrence Venable, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1995
* USD 212,000.00

Theoretical models have been developed to investigate the consequences that
delayed germination and seed dispersal have for the ecology and evolution of
plants in variable environments. These models suggest that dormancy and
dispersal are important mechanisms for coping with, and exploiting environmental
variation. There has been, however, virtually no experimental calibration of
those models or tests of their predictions in natural populations due to the
difficulty of quantifying the population dynamics of seed dispersal and
dormancy. New research will apply new procedures, which facilitate the
estimation of the magnitudes of dispersal and delayed germination for plant
populations, to determine the relative importance of within- habitat
reproduction, between-year seed bank, and seed dispersal in natural populations
of desert annuals. The study will be performed at the Desert Laboratory of the
University of Arizona, which has the oldest ongoing permanent plot studies of
desert plants, 88 years of accurate weather data, and 9 years of demographic
data collected on the proposed study organisms. Desertification and increasing
levels of human disturbance to natural ecosystems are now commonplace. It is
important to know to what extent our theoretical concepts regarding the
ecological and evolutionary consequences of variation are actually predictive of
what goes on in nature. With specific respect to desert annuals, a large
fraction of the flora of desert regions are annual plants (frequently 30-100%).
Investigations of their life-cycles, ecology and evolution not only provide a
basis for general understanding, but may provide some insights regarding their
conservation and rational exploitation (e.g. in arid land grazing).