* 9107121
* Studies of Reactive Organic Ions in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1994
* Hilkka Kenttamaa, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 10/31/1994
* USD 185,800.00

A new dual-cell Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) device will
be used to obtain detailed mechanistic, kinetic, and thermochemical information
for a number of ions of current interest. Three areas will be investigated: (1)
bimolecular reactions of radical cations, where the charge and radical sites are
separated (distonic ions); (2) the stability and reactivity of solvent-free
reactions of diazonium ions, which are important intermediates in organic
chemistry; and (3) the structure, chemical properties, and stabilities of
dicoordinated phosphorous cations (phosphenium ions). This will also yield heats
of formation for various interesting neutral, electron-deficient phosphorous
compounds. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the
research of Dr. Hilkka I. Kenttamaa at Purdue University. Positively charged
ions will be generated in the gas-phase by bombarding molecules with electrons.
These ions will be trapped for various periods of time in a specially designed
cell, so that their reactions can be examined as a function of time. By this
means, the rate at which these reactions proceed and the energy of these unusual
ions in the gas-phase will be determined. Comparisons will be made between some
of these reactions in the gas-phase and in solution to determine the effect of
solvent molecules.