* 9107102
* Theoretical Models for the Interactions of Polymers and     Surfactants in Solution
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1994
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1994
* USD 84,000.00

The research objective is to isolate the factors that control the self-assembly
of amphiphilic polymers and surfactants. In solution these molecules aggregate
into clusters that alter the macroscopic rheological and phase behavior of the
host fluid. In order to relate microstructure to macroscopic properties, the
factors that control the structure of polymer-surfactant complexes must be
determined. Monte Carlo and analytic techniques will be used to systematically
vary the polymer and surfactant concentration, architecture and interaction
energies and, thus, to determine the size and shape of the resulting clusters.
Scaling laws will then be developed to relate the size of these clusters to the
length and number of chains in the aggregate. The scaling laws will be used to
relate the microstructure and growth of the cluster to the macroscopic
viscosity. Statistical models will be developed to determine the phase behavior
of the polymer/surfactant/solvent mixture. %%% The self-assembly of amphiphilic
polymers and surfactants in solution is of intrinsic scientific interest and
also has many applications. These molecules form comb-like structures and are
difficult to model. This work will be one of the first attempts to fully
describe these systems. Understanding of these novel materials will assist in
the design of macromolecular solutions with prescribed properties. The results
of this study will assist in the development of materials that are useful for
applications in controlled drug release, viscosity modification, enhanced oil
recovery and separation processes.