* 9107172
* Ontogeny and Adaptive Significance of Kin Recognition in a  Model Amphibian System
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Andrew Blaustein, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1994
* USD 89,000.00

Animals of many species can distinguish between kin and unrelated individuals.
Studies of kin recognition have enhanced our knowledge of how behavior develops
and have provided important information about the evolution of sociality.
Unfortunately, the ecological and evolutionary significance of kin recognition
is still poorly understood, as is the significance of the behavior patterns that
are used to assess such recognition. To better understand the evolutionary
significance of kin recognition, Drs. Blaustein and Walls will test predictions
about the functions of this behavior in a model animal system--that of
salamanders, in which kin-recognition behavior can be quantified unambiguously
by acts of aggression. They also will use laboratory experiments to compare the
development of kin recognition in at least two species that differ in key
ecological and behavioral traits. Because many species of amphibians, including
many salamanders, shift from aquatic to terrestrial environments as they grow
and develop, salamanders are an ideal system for examining the development of
animal behavior. By observing behavioral interactions in the laboratory and by
rearing salamanders in an artificial-pond experiment, Drs. Blaustein and Walls
will examine whether or not kinship influences aggression and cannibalism,
growth and survivorship, and aggregation behavior in larval forms. Rearing
individuals to maturity will also permit tests of hypotheses about the possible
function of kin recognition in terrestrial adults. By increasing our knowledge
of the roles of genetic and learned components in the development of behavior,
studies of kin recognition in general are greatly enhancing our understanding of
the development of behavior in a wide variety of organisms, including humans.
Furthermore, kin-recognition studies have become extremely important in captive-
breeding programs for endangered species because many animals recognize their
relatives and will avoid incestuous matings.