* 9107831
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Regulation of Vitellin    Polypeptide Processing During Yolk Utilization by Orthopter-an Embryos:  A Biochemical &amp; Morphological Investigation
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* John Nordin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 09/30/1995
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. John H. Nordin of
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and Professor Franco Giorgi at the
University of Pisa. The objectives of the project are to develop techniques for
dissection and fixation of Blatella germanica eggs/embryos; to establish a
procedure for injecting radiolabeled yolk granules into B. germanica eggs; to
investigate temporal aspects of expression of Vt processing proteinases and the
fate of Vt processing peptides in C. morosus and B. germanica embryos during
early development; and to explore approaches for isolating vitellophages and
characterizing their plasma membrane. The study is significant because it will
increase our understanding of two "universal" constituents of insect eggs, yolk
granules and vitellophages and because it addresses the fate of Vt processing
peptides in the developing embryo. The research goal is to understand how insect
Vt utilization is controlled at the cellular and molecular levels. The PI will
interact directly for an extended period with a leading research group that is
investigating similar aspects in a closely related orthopteran. Dr. Giorgi is an
internationally recognized researcher in the field of insect vitellogenesis and
embryology. Giorgi's group has studied embryo development of orthopteran stick
insects, especially Carausius morosus, which shares a number of characteristics
with B. germanica. Another benefit will accrue from employing electron
microscopy and immunocytochemistry to advance the project. Overall, this project
will provide an excellent opportunity to gain new insights into the principal
investigators' respective experimental systems and for mutually beneficial
scientific interaction.