* 9108507
* Research Initiation:  Economies of Production through       Duplicating Bottleneck Machines and Subcontracting          Bottleneck Parts in Cellular Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Rasaratnam Logendran, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Pius J. Egbelu
* 12/31/1994
* USD 70,234.00

Ideally in cellular manufacturing systems, a family of parts will be processed
in its entirety within a machine cell that consists of one or more machine
types. In most practical problems a non-ideal situation prevails, in that the
individual part and machine groupings are usually connected. A part might
require processing in a cell other than its own (called a bottleneck part).
Similarly, a machine can process a part assigned to a cell other than its own
(called a bottleneck machine). Research investigations have been reported to
attain economies of production, either by duplicating bottleneck machines or by
subcontracting bottleneck parts. The research takes an integrated approach to
develop a linear binary programming model for a cellular manufacturing system
which simultaneously utilizes machine duplication and part subcontracting to
maximize net savings in costs. As the linear model representation has been
proven to be NP-hard, a heuristic solution algorithm will be developed. Suitable
measures of performance have been established to determine the accuracy of the
solution and the effectiveness of the algorithm. Given the budgetary restriction
a parts manufacturing company has to work with, the solution algorithm for the
model, and the subsequent development of hosts of computer programs, will
determine the bottleneck machines that need to be duplicated and the bottleneck
parts that need to be subcontracted.