* 9108368
* Influence of Alloying on the Nature of Passive Films and    Their Breakdown
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Jerome Kruger, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 02/28/1995
* USD 274,155.00

This research examines factors leading to breakdown of protective passive films
on metals. Sophisticated experimental methods are used to follow the effects of
hydrogen and chloride anions in film deterioration. Neutron reflectivity studies
are carried out on mirror-smooth alloy surfaces of iron and iron-chromium alloys
to determine how hydrogen is distributed in the passive films and the manner of
breakdown of passivity in the films. EXAFS (Extended X- ray Absorption Fine
Structure) analysis in conjunction with a photocathode proportional counter
detector is used to determine the presence of damaging anions in the passive
film surface. The effect of chromium content in iron alloys on passive film
properties relevant to film breakdown is studied by anodic polarization in
buffered borate solutions. These data are incorporated into a model of the
passive film breakdown process. %%% The passivity of non-noble metals and their
alloys is the basis for the successful application of metallic materials in
technologies where they are exposed to aqueous environments. The special film
that forms on the surfaces of metals, the passive film, enables them to resist
corrosion failure. Detailed knowledge is needed on how alloying constituents
affect the structure, composition, and electronic properties of passive films to
improve the corrosion resistance of metal alloys.