* 9108417
* Physical Studies of Xanthine Oxidase and Trimethylamine     Dehydrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Charles Hille, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1994
* USD 239,000.00

A study of the biophysical properties of two complex oxidoreductases, xanthine
oxidase and trimethylamine dehydrogenase, is proposed. The goal of this work is
to fully characterize the several redox-active centers in the proteins from a
physical standpoint, with particular regard to their spectroscopic and electron-
transfer properties. Xanthine oxidase catalyzes the oxidative hydroxylation of
xanthine to form uric acid, a reaction that takes place at the molybdenum center
of the enzyme. For a variety of reasons, the enzyme has become the prototypical
molybdenum hydroxylase, a small but extremely important group of enzymes that
utilize oxygen derived from water rather than dioxygen in the hydroxylation of
substrate. Two specific aspects of this enzyme are the focus of the proposed
work: (1) the determination of rates of electron transfer among the four redox-
active centers of the enzyme and the factors that govern the observed rates (as
studied by pulse radiolysis and pH-jump techniques); and (2) the structure of
the molybdenum center in a variety of forms, including catalytic intermediates,
to be examined by circular dichroism and resonance Raman spectroscopy, with the
aim of characterizing the physical and electronic structure of the center.
Trimethylamine dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidative demethylation of
trimethylamine to dimethylamine and formaldehyde. The enzyme possesses a
covalently linked flavin mononucleotide cofactor and a ferredoxin-type center,
and thus represents a useful system to investigate the general applicability of
the principles governing the behavior of xanthine oxidase. The proposed studies
include: (1) studies of the pH-dependence of electron distribution within
partially reduced enzyme, and both pH-jump and pulse radiolysis studies of
electron transfer between the two centers; (2) a determination of the spectral
contributions and reduction potentials of the flavin and iron-sulfur centers:
and (3) rapid and steady-state kinetic studies of the catalytic cycle aimed at
elucidating the role of electron transfer in the catalytic cycle of
trimethylamine dehydrogenase.