* 9108743
* Neuroendocrine Role of Biogenic Amines in the Photoperiodic Control of Pheromone Perception
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Wendell Roelofs, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 226,083.00

Insects destroy inestimable amount of crops each year. Spraying insecticides to
control pests has raised serious concerns because of ancillary effects upon
other species, especially humans. Pheromones are chemical signals that
individuals release into the external environment that affect the behavior
and/or physiological states of other individuals. In insects, pheromones are one
of the major forms of communication. Since these chemical signals provide a non-
invasive method for control of insect populations, the use of pheromones as an
integral part of integrated pest management programs for many lepidopterous pest
species is of considerable importance and interest. One of the prominent
features of this communication in insects is that release of the pheromone by
females and response by males occurs during a species-characteristic time. This
temporal synchrony assures that males and females will be able to locate one
another at a time when environmental conditions ar most favorable for mating.
Drs. Linn and Roelofs' research program is aimed at understanding the mechanisms
by which these chemical signals are used by insects. In this project, they will
determine how male insects can tell time so that they are responsive to the
chemical signals when the females are releasing it. They will focus on the
biogenic amines octopamine, serotonin and melatonin. Octopamine and serotonin
were selected because their previous work indicates that these two amines affect
both the timing and the sensitivity of males to pheromones. Melatonin is an
excellent candidate given the significant role of this hormone in the regulation
of circadian-regulated activates in vertebrates, including humans. Drs Linn and
Roelofs will determine the relationship between these biogenic amines, behavior
and the neural regions associated circadian activity. The results from these
basic biological studies provide fundamental information about invertebrate and
vertebrate neurobiology. Moreover, their research will aid in the continuing
development of pheromone attractants for practical agricultural use.