* 9108132
* REU:  Phenotypic Diversification in Gasterosteus
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1993
* John Baker, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1993
* USD 65,000.00

During the last Pleistocene glacial advance, ice covered much of the modern day
range of the threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus). As the glaciers
began to retreat about 14,000 years ago, a diversity of freshwater habitats were
created and subsequently colonized by the marine threespine stickleback. Today,
the resultant freshwater populations are undergoing rapid evolutionary
diversification throughout northwestern North America, and in some cases
speciation has occurred. This remarkable, recent radiation holds great promise
for providing information on the patterns and mechanisms of evolutionary change.
It also provides a model for adaptive radiations that have new genera and higher
taxa. The proposed research will determine, for the first time, the reproductive
behavior patterns exhibited by marine threespine stickleback, and the extent to
which they vary among sites. This is essential for interpreting the patterns of
change in the radiation because the marine form is thought to have given rise to
the divergent freshwater forms observed today. In addition, the diversity of
reproductive behavior in twenty or more Alaskan freshwater populations will be
documented. These observations will not only provide a first approximation of
the range of behavioral diversification among Alaskan freshwater populations,
but will enable the investigators to select populations for future research on
the evolution of specific behavioral phenotypes.