* 9108875
* Research Initiation Awards:  Enhanced Micellar              Electrokinetic Capillary Chromatography for                 Bioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Cheng Lee, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 12/31/1993
* USD 70,000.00

Micellar Electrokinetic Capillary Chromatography (MECC) is one of the
operational modes of High Performance Capillary Electrophoresis (HPCE)
specifically designed for the separation of neutral compounds or mixtures of
neutral and charged compounds. Neutral compounds are separated based on their
differential partitioning between the aqueous phase and the hydrophobic interior
of the micellar phase. MECC combines the strengths of capillary electrophoresis
with its high separation efficiency and liquid chromatography with its resolving
power of neutral compounds. MECC is an important new separation method for
biological, biochemical, and pharmaceutical applications. A fundamental problem
in MECC is its limited retention window. This obstacle limits the separation
resolution and the number of components capable of being separated by MECC. An
easy way for increasing the range of the retention window involves the direct
control of electroosmosis. The use of an additional electric field applied from
outside of the capillary for directly and dynamically controlling electroosmosis
is proposed. The fundamentals of this approach are studied experimentally and
theoretically with a proposed capacitor model. The separation resolution of
amino acids as model systems are tested and compared to that of previous
methods.