* 9108841
* State/Industry University Cooperative Research Center for   Capsule Pipeline Research
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1991,08/31/2000
* Henry Liu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Win Aung
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,942,729.00

The principle objective of the State Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center for Capsule Pipelines at the University of Missouri-Columbia is to
generate knowledge and know how for the design and operation of these pipelines.
Studies have shown that products can be transported economically to distant
places by capsules (large cylindrical containers or log forms) moving through
pipelines. The technology, called "capsule pipelines" or "freight pipelines,"
has many potential advantages including lower freight costs, less energy
consumption, less pollution and environmental problems, greater safety, and
better reliability. Presently, interest in capsule pipelines is centered around
the "coal log pipeline (CLP)," i.e., the "capsules" are compressed coal
cylinders (coal logs) in direct contact with the water flowing in the pipe. The
center research during the first four years will focus on CLP, and then
gradually shift to other types of capsule pipelines. The Core Program of the
Center includes basic and applied research in hydrodynamics of capsule flow,
theory of capsule pumps, automatic control of capsule pipeline systems,
manufacturing of coal logs, water quality and corrosion of coal log pipelines,
and legal/institutional issues relating to eminent domain and water rights for
coal pipelines. The Core Program will also involve technology transfer
activities such as preparing a detailed design and operations manual and
constructing a small-scale demonstration system of coal log pipeline for
training industry personnel, holding a technology-transfer workshop, etc. The
Non-Core Program will include the following: methods to fabricate coal logs,
determination of the best ways to prevent jamming and to minimize abrasion of
capsules and coal logs in pipelines, optimum design of coal log pipeline
systems, and the economics of coal log pipelines as compared to other competing
transportation modes including train, truck, barge, and slurry pipelines. The
State of Missouri, industry and NSF will provide matching funds totalling
$525,000 in the first year.