* 9108398
* Transition Metal Templated Chemical Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1995
* Tom Livinghouse, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 12/31/1995
* USD 210,000.00

This research will focus on the further development of organo- group IV metal
(Zr and Ti) mediated cyclization and cycloaddition reactions which have been
discovered in the PI's laboratory. Application of this new methodology will be
showcased by the synthesis of selected natural products including securinega
alkaloids via zirconocene promoted heteroannulations, the lycora ring system via
a zirconocene promoted reductive cyclization, 9(0)-methanoprostacyclin and
methano PGI-1 via a zirconium complex and related cyclizations, and pyrrolidine
and piperidine alkaloids via the intramolecular imidotitanium ı2+2!
cycloaddition reaction. These target molecules have been deliberately selected
so that the crucial issues of stereo-, regio-, and chemocontrol associated with
group IV mediated coupling processes can be thoroughly evaluated. In this way,
the utility of these new reactions for performing operationally practical
chemical syntheses will be demonstated. %%% With this award the Synthetic
Organic Program of the Chemistry Division will support the research of Dr. Tom
Livinghouse of the Department of Chemistry at Montana State University. The
research is in the general area of synthetic methodology and its application to
natural products synthesis. The focus will be on the use of organometallic
systems containing titanium or zirconium as templates for the actualization of
chemical reactions which would be otherwise impossible. These new reactions will
be used to synthesize a number of natural products whose structures have been
deliberately selected so that the crucial issues of stereo-, regio-, and
chemocontrol associated with these organometallic mediated processes can be
thoroughly evaluated. In this way, the utility of these new reactions for
performing operationally practical chemical syntheses will be demonstrated.