* 9108927
* Research Initiation Award:  Robust Control for Time         Varying Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Gilead Tadmor, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/1994
* USD 59,996.00

Digital controllers are commonly designed for continuous-time systems. When the
underlying system is significantly time varying, it is expected that so should
be the controller. Often (as is the case with locally linearized models of
nonlinear systems with fast changing operation regimes, or in adaptive
implementations), long term values of the system parameters are not available.
The purpose of the proposed research is to develop a design methodology that
will address these issues: to look for a robust digital design that takes into
account, indeed, that will optimize the continuous-time system behavior. That
will be in contrast to most current designs which focus solely on the sample-
time closed-loop evolution. The design methodology should be suitable for time-
varying systems and require only (temporally) local numerical values of the
system parameters. H-infinity, Graph and Gap control theory will provide the
underlying paradigms. The immediate goals set forth in this proposal touch on
issues at the focal point of current systems research, and are significant in
realistic applications. The objectives will also give rise to several
fundamental technical and conceptual questions: The closed-loop system evolves
in hybrid-time (continuous and discrete). An appropriate framework for hybrid-
time H-infinity analysis and optimization will have to be developed. The
treatment of time-varying systems rules out direct use of transform domain
techniques. This study is thus intended to follow and attempt to further extend
the recent alternative path of a variational/game theoretical time domain
approach to H-infinity design. It will also attempt to bridge the gap between
this time domain approach and the standard operator theoretic/factorization
based transform domain H-infinity analysis. Finally, reliance on temporally
local models will require an adaptation the 1970's LQ "receding horizon"
approach to the H-infinity framework, and the study of appropriate concepts of
"slowly varying systems" that will give criteria to the success of "frozen time"
based on receding horizon design.