* 9108753
* Some Practical Issues in Computational Learning Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Robert Sloan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 12/31/1993
* USD 35,176.00

The objective of this research is to make a large group of machine learning
algorithms more useful in practice. This research focuses on formal models of
machine learning, an area known as computational learning theory. The overall
goal of this field is to give formal, mathematical definitions of learning
problems, and to provide efficient algorithms to solve these problems. The
computational learning theory community has proposed a large number of
algorithms for solving low-level induction problems, but there are certain
properties such learning algorithms must have if they are going to be used in
real-world software. Practitioners, such as builders of large artificial
intelligence systems, have complained that these algorithms require too much
data to reach conclusions, and are too sensitive to noise in the data. This
project will attempt to prove that much less data is necessary for average cases
than the estimates given by theorists for the worst case, and to study how such
algorithms can be modified to resist noise. The proposed project consists of the
design and analysis of algorithms, and is essentially mathematical in nature.
Nevertheless, if successful, this project should allow the practical application
of recently developed machine learning algorithms.