* 9108978
* Endogenous Fertility and the Environment:Dynamics and        Welfare Implications
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* Christopher Delgado, International Food Policy Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1994
* USD 39,887.00

It is widely recognized that population pressure is one of the most important
sources of environmental degradation, especially in developing countries. What
is less fully appreciated is the impact of environmental quality on people's
motives for having children. This project focuses on the implications of
parents' desire for children and concern with the children's future well- being
for the dynamic relation between population and environment. The project also
investigates whether a system of taxes on children and subsidies to parents can
be welfare- improving for members of the present generation and what affects
such tax/subsidy policies may have on the dynamics of demographic/environmental
interactions. The relation between population and the environment in developing
countries is also an important part of the human dimensions of global change
because environmental degradation in developing countries causes global warming
and because continued high rates of population growth in developing countries
will make it increasingly difficult if not impossible to reconcile goals for
economic growth with the protection of the environment. The research is both
theoretical and empirical. Specifically, an agricultural input demand systems
model is derived, specified and estimated. This model includes age- and gender-
specific labor demand equations. The empirical research relies on Burkina Faso
Survey Data and Pakistan Survey Data. The former data set contains very detailed
information on agricultural production in Burkina Faso over the period 1981
through 1985, including the use of household and hired labor, by age and sex,
for a wide variety of agricultural activities. The latter data are
representative of poor households in three distinct agroecological zones in
Pakistan and provide very detailed information on the socioeconomic and
agricultural characteristics of these families.