* 9108721
* Targeting Exchange Rates: Theory and Evidence from the       Recent Managed Float
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Karen Lewis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1993
* USD 34,559.00

Governments frequently target macroeconomic variables such as exchange rates and
interest rates through a mixed policy of occasional interventions affecting
floating rates. Under the recent managed float, for example, monetary
authorities allow exchange rates to be determined by market forces most the
time, only to intervene as rates deviate significantly from target levels.
Accordingly, it has been frequently reported in the financial press that
occasional government intervention appears to influence expectations on the part
of private market traders who face possible capital gains and loses from these
events. If this is the case, asset prices should reflect expected interventions
to target rates. The purpose of this project is to develop a model for analyzing
the effects of government interventions that prevent movements in interest and
exchange rates from targeted levels. The analysis will show how the perceived
threat of occasional capital gains or losses induced by central bank
interventions may influence market trading. The model will also be used to
empirically evaluate the behavior of exchange rates when intervention policies
are used to target rates. This research is important because it will help us
better understand how policies of targeting exchange rates affect the market's
perception of these policies and how these perceptions, in turn, affect rates.