* 9108941
* Perceptual Processes in Search and Detection: Density- and  Frequency-Dependence
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Thomas Getty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1994
* USD 69,360.00

Behavioral ecology addresses questions about how behavior mediates processes
with important ecological and evolutionary consequences. For instance, we would
like to know how foraging behavior is adapted to the distribution of resources
and how these behavioral adjustments influence the relationship between the
distribution of a resource density and the rate at which it is harvested. The
details of this relationship are important for a variety of behavioral,
ecological, and evolutionary problems. Earlier attempts to understand this kind
of relationship have taken a "black box" approach to describing mathematically
the relationship between prey distribution and predation rate. The goal of this
project is to open up the black box and analyze the component parts (processes
and mechanisms), focusing on the role of perception in search and prey
detection. Ecological foraging theory has paid little attention to how
perception influences foraging behavior. Models developed to guide naval search
operations include perceptual processes and constraints that are not explicit in
ecological models. This project will examine whether the approach developed in
operations research helps us to understand the role of perception in animal
foraging behavior. The particular system under study is a native sparrow species
foraging for cryptic weed seeds. During experiments, individuals are video-taped
as they search for seeds scattered on the soil. From detailed analysis of the
location of individual seeds and of search tactics and success, Dr. Getty can
develop alternative models and test their ability to describe and predict
behavioral tactics and predation rates under various conditions. From these
analyses, he can determine the extent to which perceptual processes alter the
relationship between resources, behavior, and resource exploitation.