* 9108116
* U.S.-Bulgaria Research on Boundary Phenomena in Spin-       Polarized Quantum Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Alexander Meyerovich, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/28/1995
* USD 10,880.00

The primary objective of this US-Bulgaria research project between Dr.
Alexander Meyerovich of the University of Rhode Island and Dr. Klara Ivanova of
the Institute for Solid State Physics, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, is to
study boundary phenomena. This project focuses on the physics of spin-polarized
quantum systems to research slip effects and transverse or longitudinal spin
relaxation at the walls in the presence of absorbed boundary layers. Researchers
plan to generalize from the existing theory of slip effects in order to
incorporate spin-polarized quantum systems, to analyze new effects and to
accomplish the technical aspects by the calculation of different slip
coefficient for quantum systems. They will use spin-polarized Fermi liquids and
quantum gases to determine the length, derive proper Onsager relations and
calculate the values of slip coefficients, and to apply to longitudinal spin
diffusion in spin-polarized quantum systems. The results of this project in the
physics of spin-polarized quantum systems are expected to lead to noticeable
corrections for stationary values of several thermo- and hydrodynamic
characteristics such as temperature or magnetization and result in the
reanalyzing of well-established experimental results. The information resulting
from this project is likely to be applicable to the study of any multicomponent
mixtures of quantum liquids or cases. This project in materials theory fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents
and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.