* 9108177
* Investigations in Compositional Models Arising in           Atmospheric Chemistry
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Cidambi Srinivasan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1995
* USD 73,400.00

Compositional data arise naturally in several branches of science, including
analytical chemistry, geology, biology, medicine, ecology, and manufacturing
design. Hence, constrained data are not observed solely in the atmospheric
sciences. However, such data are routinely produced in atmospheric chemistry,
where an adequate understanding of such data is often critically important to
the environment. To optimally extract the information that is in such data,
there is need to go beyond the application of established statistical
techniques. Some attention should be focused on the development of new
statistical methods that are motivated by characteristics that are especially
common in atmospheric chemistry data sets. As was eluded to above, one such
characteristic is the presence of a constant-sum constraint, which may have been
inherent to the data or imposed by the chemist. A collection of statistical
methods for handling such data, based principally on log-normal models, has been
developed. This project will investigate the use of new parametric and
nonparametric approaches to significantly improve this existing methodology. In
the parametric setting, an extension of some recent work by the principal
investigators will be used with a practical regression model to address
problems. In the development of the nonparametric approach, minimum distance
methods, coupled with multivariate bootstrap techniques, will be used to suggest
point and region estimators and other associated problems is proposed.