* 9108232
* RUI: Arabidopsis Genes Related to Brassica Pollination/          Self Incompatibility Genes
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Kathleen Dwyer, University of Scranton
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1995
* USD 201,000.00

The research in this proposal is designed to examine stigma/pollen interactions
in the self-fertile crucifer Arabidopsis thaliana. The molecular work will
initially focus on the members of a multigene family in Arabidopsis that are
homologous to the well characterized S-multigene family in Brassica. In the
self-incompatible crucifer, Brassica, members of the S-multigene family produce
protein products functioning in the stigma/pollen interactions of pollination,
including the cell-cell recognition and rejection of self pollen, which prevents
inbreeding. Since Arabidopsis is self-fertile, it does not have functional self-
incompatibility genes but does carry S- homologous regions that may be
equivalent to the members of the Brassica S-multigene family involved in the
pollination response. Their analysis in Arabidopsis system will elucidate
aspects of the pollination process at the molecular level. Specifically,
Arabidopsis S-homologous genomic clones and a PCR-generated fragment already
isolated using Brassica S-gene sequences are being characterized by restriction
mapping and sequencing to develop Arabidopsis S-homologous and gene-specific
probes. With these probes expression and organization of the S-multigene family
in the Arabidopsis genome will be determined. Expression of an S-related
sequence has already been demonstrated by RNA blot analysis. Additional
S-related transcripts will be isolated from a cDNA library prepared from flower
polyA+ RNA. Their temporal and spatial expression will be analyzed by in situ
hybridization and GUS reporter gene expression regulated by the S-related
gene(s)' promoter. The available molecular genetics of Arabidopsis (RFLP maps
and contiguous cosmid and YAC libraries) will facilitate characterization of the
genomic organization of the S-related multigene family. The ease of Arabidopsis
transformation via Agrobacterium will facilitate study of the function of the
S-related gene(s) by gene inactivation using antisense constructs. Ligand
blotting will be used to determine if the S-related proteins bind specifically
to any pollen proteins.