* 9108758
* ROW:  Distributional Effects of Distortionary Taxation
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Ellen McGrattan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 06/30/1993
* USD 17,978.00

This project plans to study the distributional effects of distortionary tax
policy. In most analyses of tax reform, the question of how tax policy affects
agents with different preferences, endowments or investment opportunities is not
addressed. In the case of dynamic economies, the main reason for this omission
is that the task is computationally formidable. However, preliminary indications
show that numerical methods used in fluid dynamics and structural mechanics for
solving partial differential equations may be applicable. This research
investigates their application to a model with heterogeneous agents and
distortionary taxation. The project requires several planning activities. The
first is to test the methods on cases for which there is a known solution. Such
problems usually involve a distortion-free economy inhabited by identical
agents. The second is to test the methods on models with identical agents and
distortionary taxes. For some models of a distorted economy, there exists a
transformation of parameters or variables which makes it resemble a distortion-
free economy. For both sets of test cases, alternative numerical methods will be
used to validate the results. Preliminary results show that finite difference
techniques perform well and may be sufficiently efficient for maximum likelihood
estimation. Finally, the alternative finite-element and variational methods will
also be explored.