* 9108321
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on the Application of       Non-Destructive Techniques to Investigate Cavitation in     Superplasticity
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Terence Langdon, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1995
* USD 11,090.00

This award provides funds to permit Dr. Terence G. Langdon, Department of
Materials Science, University of Southern California (USC), to pursue with Dr.
Ho Chul Kim, Professor of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST), for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the
application of non- destructive techniques to the investigation of cavitation in
superplasticity. Their research formerly was supported under NSF Grant No.
INT-8803709. These scientists and members of their research groups will continue
their collaboration through the use of destructive superplastic testing, at USC,
with non- destructive ultrasonic velocity and photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS)
at KAIST. They will (1) use metallography, at USC to verify PAS results obtained
at KAIST, (2) extent their procedures to include lower elongations, and (3)
expand their investigations to include materials other than metals.
Superplasticity refers to the ability of some metals to exhibit exceptionally
high, neck-free elongations, often in excess of 1,000%, when pulled in tension
at elevated temperatures. This phenomenon is of considerable commercial interest
because of the many potential applications in sheet-metal forming. A major
problem in superplasticity is the nucleation and growth of internal cavities.
These cavities may lead to a significant degradation of the post-forming
properties of the material. It is important, therefore, to estimate the volume
of cavities, non-destructively, and to verify these estimates using
metallographic techniques. The collaborators are highly respected scientists in
the field of this research. Their past collaboration has resulted in significant
contributions to the literature of this field. The U.S. scientist will benefit
from access to facilities for non-destructive testing, available at KAIST, but
not at USC. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project is supported
by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).