* 9108091
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Development of the Triad Junction inSkeletal Muscle
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1995
* James Kenyon, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1995
* USD 275,000.00

The long-term goals of this research are to understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying the formation and function of the triad junction in striated muscle
cells. The triad junction is a complex structure involving plasma and
sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes and at least seven proteins. This structure is
the site at which electrical excitation is transduced to release intracellular
calcium, and thus has a critical role in coupling electrical excitation to
muscle contraction. Additionally, it may interact with the cellular cytoskeleton
to form muscle-specific morphology. Two key components of the triad junction,
the dihydropyridine (DHPR) and ryanodine receptors (RR), are expressed early
during embryonic chick skeletal muscle differentiation. The aim of this project
is to determine how these proteins are incorporated into the triad junction and
become active in the release of intracellular calcium in developing skeletal
muscle, and whether the calcium release events mediated by the triad junction
influence other aspects of muscle development. The specific aims are to: (1),
define the experimental in detail by establishing the time course of the
expression of the DHPR and RR in developing embryonic chick skeletal muscle; and
(2), investigate whether these proteins influence skeletal muscle development by
testing the hypothesis that DHPR and RR serve as organizers for the assembly of
the triad junction and its integration into mature muscle structure. This will
be done by defining the time course of incorporation of these and other
junctional components into the junction, and assess the significance of
interactions between junctional proteins and cytoskeletal elements. Skeletal
muscle provides the contractile force to move bones and other structures,
effecting organ or whole organism movement. The signal which "tells" the muscle
to contract and ensures synchronous contraction along the length of the muscle
involves an electrical wave generated at the neuromuscular junction, which
travels down the length of the muscle fiber along the plasma membrane. The
conversion of the electrical signal to contraction occurs by transduction of the
electrical signal to a "second messenger" signal, namely release of calcium from
intracellular stores (sarcoplasmic reticulum) into the cytoplasm. At the "triad
junction" of the muscle cell, the membrane of the sarcoplasmic reticulum is
closely apposed to a specialized structure of the plasma membrane known as the
transverse tubule. This highly specialized region contains a set of unique
sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane proteins which interact with the closely apposed
transverse tubule membrane to effect the coupling of the electrical signal to
the opening of a calcium channel which allows the release of calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum to the cytoplasm. Neither the mechanism of this signal
transduction event, nor the cellular development of this intricate subcellular
structure, is well understood. The results of this research will increase our
understanding of both of these very important processes in vertebrate muscle.