* 9108649
* Intelligent Monitoring and Control of Chemical Processes    Using Wavelet and FJ Transforms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Rodolphe Motard, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1994
* USD 196,814.00

Automatic intelligent plant operation and control requires methodology that uses
plant measurements in some optimal manner. The visual and auditory systems in
human beings preprocess information before presenting it to the brain. For
example, large sets of high frequency raw data are analyzed to extract data
trends which are as detailed as necessary for the situation at hand. The purpose
of this research project is to develop procedures to mimic this preprocessing of
data. In chemical plants a number of factors need to be considered the time
constants of various responses are typically different and one is required to
consider each variable at a different scale, there is multirate sampling a
temperature measurement is typically available much more frequently than a
composition measurement, sensor signals vary greatly for each process, etc. This
project is aimed at developing methodology to preprocess raw sensor data and
develop viable automatic control systems for chemical plants. Two functional
analysis methods the Wavelet bases and the Frazier Jawerth bases will be used to
preprocess data which will then be fed into a neural net to yield process trend
analysis used to detect failed sensors and abnormal operating conditions. The
combination of Frazier Jawerth transforms and Wavelet decomposition enables
description of a signal in a single domain which has information about its time
evolution and frequency context. Neural networks capture information from
examples which typically come from the past operational history or online
information.