* 9108712
* New Ozonide Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* William Bunnelle, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* robert miller
* 06/30/1994
* USD 160,000.00

In this project both mechanistic and synthetic aspects of alkene ozonolysis will
be investigated. The mechanistic studies will focus on the determination of the
stereochemistry of the elusive carbonyl oxide intermediate, making use of an
intramolecular trapping protocol which will permit reliable assignment of syn-
anti geometry to carbonyl oxides produced by alkene ozonolysis. The effect of
various substituents in determining carbonyl oxide stereochemistry will also be
studied, as will the influence of ring size in cycloalkenes. These studies will
provide important information for refinement of theoretical models which account
for the overall stereoselectivity of alkene ozonolysis. Another mechanistic
study will investigate the role of dioxirane-like intermediates in ozonide
decomposition through O-labelling experiments. In the synthetic area, the
cationic ring expansion of certain ozonides to the 1,2,4-trioxane system will be
investigated in terms of the scope of the reaction and its application to the
synthesis of the antimalarial artemisinin. %%% With this award the Synthetic
Organic Program of the Chemistry Division will support the research of Dr.
William H. Bunnelle of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Missouri
- Columbia. Both mechanistic and synthetic aspects of reactions of hydrocarbons
containing double bonds (alkenes) with ozone will be investigated. Some of the
proposed intermediates in the ozonolysis process may be significant with regard
to the toxicity of fatty acid ozonides.