* 9108254
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Spectral Problems for Toeplitz  and Other Structured Matrices
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* William Trench, Trinity University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1994
* USD 43,330.00

A family H of square matrices is efficiently structured if the number of
independent parameters required to specify an arbitrary n by n member of H is
approximately proportional to n when n is large. Toeplitz, Hankel, and Toeplitz-
plus-Hankel matrices are examples of efficiently structured matrices, as are
matrices of a given displacement rank, as defined by T. Kailath and his
coauthors. The purposes of the proposed research are (a) to develop fast
algorithms for finding individual eigenvalue-eigenvector pairs for general
classes of efficiently structured Hermitian matrices, analogous to the principal
investigator's algorithms for Toeplitz and Toeplitz-plus-Hankel matrices; (b) to
study spectral properties of Toeplitz matrices (especially, the relationship
between the even and odd spectra of real symmetric Toeplitz matrices); (c) to
investigate the possibility of devising fast algorithms for finding the real
eigenvalues of nonsymmetric Toeplitz matrices; and (d) to consider the spectral
properties of Toeplitz-Sturm matrices. Efficiently structured Hermitian matrices
arise in many important physical and scientific applications, including
statistical problems involving prediction of future values of a random variable
based on observations of its past values, signal processing (the science of
extracting information from transmitted signals), and geophysical applications
including the study of free oscillations of the Earth and seismic phenomena such
as earthquakes. In studying these problems it is often necessary to determine
individual eigenvalues of efficiently structured matrices of very high order (in
the thousands). One of the main objectives of the proposed research is to
develop numerical methods for finding these eigenvalues by methods whose
complexity (computational requirements) is proportional to the second power of
the order of the matrix, rather than to the third power of the order, as it is
for standard computational methods that do not take advantage of the special
structure of the matrix.