* 9108451
* Enforced Proximity in Organic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Fredric Menger, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 12/31/1994
* USD 302,000.00

With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Menger will utilize both
experimental and theoretical approaches to identify the origins of
intramolecular and enzymatic reactivity. The systems chosen for study are
constructed so that two functional groups are held by a rigid molecular scaffold
in a manner such that their mutual geometric relationship is well defined. Three
additional projects will be undertaken: (i) the chemistry of "clumps", an
evolutionary approach to catalysis, (ii) construction of a cyclodextrin-based
system that contains three catalytic entities, and (iii) an attempt to explain
why general base catalyses in organic models, but not in enzymes, display such
small effective molarities (EMs). %%% The long-term goal of Dr. Menger's
research program is to identify the various structural and configurational
factors that determine reactivity in intramolecular and enzymatic reactions. Dr.
Menger has designed several systems that utilize "enforced proximity" in an
effort to learn how two or more functional groups behave when covalent and
noncovalent bonding force them to reside in close mutual proximity. The results
obtained from such studies are expected to be germane not only to chemical
dynamics in solution but also to enzymatic systems, where the binding to the
enzyme forces substrate molecules into close contact with catalytic groups.