* 9108971
* Dynamics of Excimer Laser Ablation in Plasma Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Ronald Gilgenbach, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 01/31/1996
* USD 264,829.00

The proposed research program is a comprehensive experimental investigation of
the dynamics of ultraviolet excimer laser ablation of materials in plasma versus
gas environments. These will be the first experiments to investigate laser
ablation in pre-ionized plasma backgrounds over a wide range of fill gas
pressure, from atmospheric to 1 mTorr. The objective of this research is to
develop a knowledge base on laser ablation processing in plasmas versus gases
which can be usef for engineering applications, such as ablative etching of
microelectronics, micromachining, ablative material synthesis, and combustion.
Research will be performed on two important cases concerning interaction of
laser-ablated matter (plasma, neutral atoms, and particulates) with 1)
background plasmas versus gases which are nonreacting, and 2) plasmas versus
gases which can support oxidation, nitriding, or combustion. Species-resolved
laser probing diagnostic measurements will be performed to characterize excimer
laser ablation plume species dynamics. Laser-ablation-assisted-discharge
experiments will be performed with applicability to rapid-heating, ablation and
ionization of materials. Complete experimental facilities exist for this
research, including: excimer lasers (KrF and XeCl), dye laser, CO2 laser, ruby
lasers, and copper vapor laser, as well as extensive spectroscopic facilities.
The knowledge obtained in this research could lead to breakthroughs in materials
processing and synthesis techniques. Any discoveries will expand the technology
base for fabrication in the micro- electronics, opto-electronics, manufacturing,
and machine tool industries.