* 9108707
* The Integrated Design and Optimization of Spectrometric Techniques
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Edward Voigtman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Karolyn K. Eisenstein
* 01/31/1994
* USD 94,400.00

Professor Voigtman will perform detailed, fully quantitative studies of five
important spectrometric techniques (optical polarimetry, circular dichroism,
thermal lensing, photothermal refraction, and thermal lensing/circular
dichroism) with the goal of synthesizing complete pictures of how these
techniques can be refined and optimized in their design and performance as
ultra-sensitive spectrometric techniques. Detailed computer simulations, using a
custom-programmed set of optical and electronic signal processing blocks, will
be used to mimic and predict the performance of the techniques under a variety
of experimental conditions. The program libraries, used with a commercially
available simulation program engine, will afford a seamless integration of
optics and electronics on a single computer screen worksheet. The research will
make it possible to design a new spectrometric technique from scratch as
experience with the libraries of component blocks grows and as the behavior of
the blocks is refined. %%% With this award the Chemistry Division will support
Dr. Edward G. Voigtman of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Massachusetts,Amherst, for a project in course and curriculum development. The
project will attempt to gain a complete picture as to how five spectroscopic
techniques may be refined and optimized. The resulting optimized techniques will
be of great use to researchers in both academia and industry and will provide a
powerful teaching aid for graduate students in the construction of optical
systems.