* 9108854
* State/Industry University Cooperative Research Center for   Nonwovens
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1991,08/31/2001
* Subhash Batra, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Tapan K. Mukherjee
* 08/31/2001
* USD 2,070,000.00

A State Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Nonwovens will be
established at North Carolina State University. Nonwovens are a class of fabrics
which are bonded fiber webs and which are not woven, knitted or paper
structures. This new industry has spawned new consumer, health care and
industrial products. The value of nonwoven goods exceeds $2.4 B annually. The
base for this Center is an existing Industrial Consortium for Nonwovens
Research. This Center will serve the nonwovens industry in the State of North
Carolina (about 100 small, medium, and large companies) and the U.S. through its
programs of generic fundamental and applied research in the technologies of the
industry, as well as through an active program of technology transfer. The
Center will be supported by funds from NSF, the State of North Carolina, and
from the dues paid by member companies. The Center will be housed in the College
of Textiles. Its faculty will be drawn, primarily, from the departments of the
College, although members from other departments of the university (e.g., wood
and paper science, mechanical engineering, computer science, etc.) will also
play a role as the Center grows in its activities. The structure of the Center
includes an Industrial Advisory Board and special activities to promote
technology transfer to this industry. The State of North Carolina, industry and
NSF will provide matching funds totalling $300,000 in the first year.