* 9108760
* Dissertation Research:  Regulation of Pollen Collection by  Honey Bee Colonies
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Thomas Seeley, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1993
* USD 10,450.00

Colonies of advanced social insects consist of thousands of separate
individuals each acting independently, yet the colony as a whole functions as a
coherent unit. This is clearly seen in such collective activities as group food-
gathering, colony thermoregulation, nest construction, and colony defense. The
subunits of the colony, the individual workers, are somehow coordinated into a
well-organized functional unit, but the integrative mechanisms remain largely a
mystery. Scott Camazine's doctoral dissertation will focus on one example of a
precisely organized colony-level process: the collection of the honey bees'
protein food, pollen. The goal of the research is to understand how the
collection of pollen is regulated. The approach will be to identify which castes
of bees are involved in the pollen-foraging process, and to identify the flow of
information among these bees concerning the colony's need for pollen. These
results will elucidate how the regulation of a colony's foraging emerges from
the collective behaviors and interactions of its constituent members. This
research will both suggest how honey bees' pollen collection could be
manipulated to enhance their value as pollinators of food and seed crops, and
strengthen our understanding of how biological subunits--be they molecules,
cells, or organisms--are tightly integrated into functionally organized wholes.