* 9108790
* A Spatially-explicit, Hierarchical Model of Pattern-process Dynamics of Grassland Landscape (Jianguo Wu)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Simon Levin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 09/30/1993
* USD 40,000.00

The objectives of the proposed research are (1) to develop a systematic,
computerized procedure to detect the structural patterns in the grassland
landscape of Jasper Ridge, California, based primarily on the 2-Dimensional Net
Function Interpolation Theory; (2) to construct and validate a hierarchically
structured, spatially explicit, stochastic simulation model of pattern-process
dynamics, based mainly on data from the Jasper Ridge grassland ecosystem. The
model will take into consideration processes involving small-scale/high
frequency, middle-scale/low frequency, and large-scale/very low frequency
phenomena. Stochasticity in each process will have to be incorporated. Large-
scale phenomena may include weather fluctuations (e.g., precipitation,
temperature), wind/water erosion, prolonged drought, and irregularly timed,
fires. Small- scale phenomena, on the other hand, may involve physical
environmental patchiness and activities of mound-building animals such as
gophers and ants. Overall, the model will incorporate demographics of small-
scaled disturbances in grasslands, monitor the temporal changes of patches, and
trace aging and extinction of the patches at various scales. The spatially
explicit, multiple-scale pattern induction model takes a bottom-up approach,
deriving landscape-level dynamics of the grassland from that of hierarchically
decomposable lower levels. The computational demand in spatial and temporal
statistical analyses of patterns, and the sensitivity anaLysis and Monte Carlo
simulation of the model, will make desirable and imperative the use of the
parallel capabilities of the supercomputer facilities. The completion of the
proposed study will add substantially to understanding of the role of naturally
occurring disturbances at various scales in creating the pattern-process
dynamics, provide a modeling framework for further comparative investigation on
different types o grassland ecosystems, serve as a strong basis for comparing
grasslands with forests, and exemplify the significance of supercomputer
facilities in enhancing ecological understanding.