* 9108034
* Phenotypic Variation, Preference Functions and Fitness      Effects in Pieris Butterflies
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Diane Wiernasz, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 07/31/1995
* USD 144,998.00

The proposed research examines the evolution of wing melanin pattern in two
closely related lepidopteran species, Pieris occidentalis and P. protodice.
Populations of P. occidentalis exhibit considerable latitudinal and elevational
variation in melanin pattern, and both species exhibit seasonal variation.
Melanin pattern functions in the regulation of body temperature and in
courtship. Previous field experiments have demonstrated that P. occidentalis
females prefer males with disproportionately large melanin characters in a
specific region of the wing, and that they use the same characters to recognize
and avoid males of P. protodice. Whether females benefit thereby is unknown. In
P. occidentalis, the characters involved in mate choice are known to affect
temperature regulation in other populations, but selection for thermoregulation
favors reduced character size. In this research, field experiments will be used
to measure female choice in P. occidentalis and P. protodice as a function of
male melanin pattern variation, population density, and female reproductive
status. The interaction between selection for temperature regulation and
selected for reproductive success will be examined by measuring female choice in
populations of P. occidentalis that differ in thermal environment. Whether
females benefit from choosing highly melanized males will be measured in the
laboratory by measuring several components of female reproductive success. Very
little is known about how different kinds of selection interact to produce the
observed variation in any character, because there are relatively few traits
where all of the functions are well-understood. Studying how female choice for
male melanin varies among populations with different thermal environments will
provide such an opportunity. By quantifying the relationship between male wing
color pattern and female mate choice, as well as the consequences for females of
mate choice, the proposed research will address whether P. occidentalis females
benefit from mate choice, and the extent to which female choice determines the
evolution of male wing color pattern in this species. Comparisons of P.
occidentalis with its close relative P. protodice will determine the importance
of female mate choice for the differentiation of male color pattern between
these two species.