* 9108932
* RIA:Analysis of Electrical and Optical Properties of QuantumConfined Structures Using an Alternating Direction Implicit Algorithm
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Marc Cahay, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 12/31/1993
* USD 60,000.00

The scales of electronic devices are approaching the level where quantum
mechanical effects are becoming important. From a practical point of view, the
reduction of device size has a direct impact on switching speed and power
consumption. A general numerical procedure will be developed to solve the multi-
dimensional time-dependent and - independent Schrodinger equation. The former is
solved using an efficient Alternative Direction implicit technique coupled with
a Fourier transform of the quantum mechanical correlation function to solve the
latter. The algorithm is also readily extended to include the presence of an
external magnetic field. The power of the technique will be demonstrated by
applying it to several problems of relevance. First, the resonant tunneling of
wavepacket in two-dimensional structures will be investigated to assess the
dependence of the tunneling time on the angle of incidence, the electron
wavenumber, and the roughness of the interfaces in a typical heterostructure.
Second, the propagation of wavepackets through crossed wires geometries in the
presence of an external magnetic field will be studied to better understand the
origin of the quenching of the quantum Hall effect. Third, the propagation of
wavepacket in Electrostatic Aharanov-Bohm interferometers will be studied to
assess the feasibility of newly proposed Quantum Interferometers Transistors.
The algorithm will also be used to calculate the quantum-confined Stark shifts
for both electrons and holes and the excitonic states in two-dimensional
quantum-confined structures, and important step towards the characterization of
the optical properties of these structures. The proposed algorithm has also
potential applications in the field of optoelectronics. The developed ADI scheme
will also be used as an alternative to the Beam Propagation Method (BPM) to
solve the Fresnel wave equation, and applied to the characterization of light
propagation through various Rib waveguides and graded index optical fibers.