* 9108638
* Selective Recognition Of Linear/Curvilinear Features In     Remote-Sensing Imagery
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Jo Ann Parikh, Southern Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 12/31/1993
* USD 17,991.00

This award is a Planning Grant in the Research Opportunities for Women program.
The primary goal of this research is to develop a pattern recognition system for
detection of desired groups of linear/curvilinear features in remote-sensing
imagery. The experimental portion of the proposed preliminary research will
focus on the detection of lineaments (noncultural linear or curvilinear features
in imagery) which represent zones of structural weakness using Landsat Thematic
Mapper (TM) data sets of the Canadian Shield. The desired set of linear features
must be distinguished from cultural and other non-cultural linear features. For
the proposed preliminary research, a neural network approach will be
investigated. Neural networks can conceivably be used for feature extraction,
for classification, and for grouping extracted linear elements. The proposed
research planning activities are: (1) a comprehensive literature review, (2)
development of image representation schemes, (3) construction of training sets
for neural networks, and (4) design and preliminary assessment of neural
networks for feature extraction, for recognition of desired pattern elements,
and for grouping pattern elements into desired linear/curvilinear features. In
parallel with the literature review, image representation schemes will be
developed to encode information for neural networks. Candidate representation
schemes for neural network classifiers include pixel representations (feature
vectors associated with each pixel), edge/line representations (obtained as a
result of neural network feature extraction (such as boundary contour system
representations). Training sets will be constructed and preliminary experiments
conducted using, as appropriate, computer resources awarded by the Cornell
National Supercomputer Facility (CNSF).