* 9108187
* U.S.-Bulgaria Polymer Research on Properties of Hydrogels   with Hydrophobic Cross-Link
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Johannes Smid, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/1994
* USD 34,489.00

The primary objective of this US-Bulgarian research project between Dr.
Johannes Smid of the State University of New York College of Environmental
Science and Forestry and Dr. Christo Tsvetanov of the Institute of Polymers,
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, is to synthesize and evaluate
hydrophilic/hydrophobic polymer gels based on polyethyleneoxide (PEO). The main
goals of this project are: 1) to synthesize and characterize hydrogel networks
of polyethylene oxide containing hydrophobic sites; 2) to study the swelling
behavior of gels as a function of temperature, salt and surfacant additive; 3)
to establish the binding characteristics of the gels; and 4) to explore
potential applications of the hydrogels. The researchers are concerned with
understanding materials derived from polyethylene oxide. Their efforts should
produce information regarding compounds containing the ethylene oxide moiety.
Such information should be an important contribution to the understanding of
problems related to polyethlene oxide and its many derivatives including linear
and network polymers, and block and graft copolymers. This project in polymers
research fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine
complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.