* 9108329
* Long-term, Intersite Experiments of Leaf and Fine Root      Decomposition
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1997
* Jerry Melillo, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joaquin Martinez Martinez
* 06/30/1997
* USD 550,227.00

Decomposition can be thought of as a continuous process beginning with fresh
plant litter and leading to formation of increasingly refractory organic matter.
This refractory material in turn influences nutrient availability, production,
and carbon sequestration in ecosystems. At present, only early stages of the
decomposition process have been intensively researched. The few long-term data
available indicate the decomposition process begins with an initial rapid loss
of labile litter constituents and becomes progressively slower as more
recalcitrant compounds compose an increasingly large fraction of the remaining
material. This continuum can be divided into two phases: the first phase is
characterized by a relatively rapid loss of mass, immobilization of nutrients,
and a rapidly declining overall decomposition rate; the second phase is
characterized by uniformly slow decomposition rates and is accompanied by
nutrient mineralization. Transition between these two phases appears to occur
when the lignocellulose index reaches 0.5. A team of scientists, LIDET (Long-
term Intersite Decomposition Experiment Team), has started a set of experiments
to test whether these general relationships are consistent across a wide range
of macroclimates and substrate qualities. These long-term experiments involve 17
LTER and 4 other cooperating sites, and a total of 31 types of litter.
Experiments are designed to follow changes in mass, carbon fractions, and total
nitrogen and phosphorus for up to 10 years. This newly funded component of the
study supports the addition of 7 new sites to represent conditions that are not
yet covered. It also supports the chemical characterization of changes in litter
as it decomposes and testing of four decomposition models (CENTURY, GEM, GENDEC,
and VEGIE) to predict long term dynamics across the full suite of 28 sites. The
analysis and modeling exercise will assess the ability of models to predict the
amount of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus during the second phase of litter
decomposition, as well as the timing of transition between the initial phase of
constant mass loss and the final phase of very slow mass loss. The LIDET team of
twenty-eight scientists is coordinated through the electronic mail network
established under LTER to foster intersite communication. This outstanding
research team is coordinated by Drs.Harmon, Melillo, Moorhead, Parton, Rastetter
and Aber.