* 9108513
* Preparatory Work for a Comparative Study of Allocation      in Labor Markets
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Miriam Golden, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1993
* USD 53,899.00

Although faced with massive job losses in recent years, labor unions in
advanced industrial countries only occasionally have responded with strikes or
other industrial actions. Previous research in Political Science suggests that
variations in the responses of organized labor to threats of work force
reduction are linked to the institutional context of labor-management relations.
Specifically, where seniority protects union leaders from layoffs industrial
actions are less common. Research in economics suggests in contrast that unions
are indifferent to layoffs when the average member is protected. This research
attempts to reconcile these disparate perspectives and to develop a
comprehensive and unified political economic theory of industrial action.
Specifically, this award is intended to prepare this talented young investigator
to conduct the innovative research she proposes. Specifically, the award will be
used to allow the investigator to supplement her training in Political Science
with additional training in Economics and econometrics. This additional training
will enable the investigator to further pursue the productive line of research
already begun. When completed this research should increase our understanding of
labor-management relations and provide insights into the causes of strikes and
other industrial actions.