* 9108773
* South Dakota EPSCoR Advanced Development Program:           Infrastructure Improvement Plan
* EDU,ESR
* 03/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Royce Engstrom, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Richard J Anderson
* 12/31/1996
* USD 3,850,000.00

The Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) in the state
of South Dakota EPSCoR consists of an infrastructure improvement plan and two
research clusters. Infrastructure improvements will take place within the
context of cluster projects which are interdisciplinary in scope and inter-
institutional in involvement. EPSCoR improvements will enhance the research
competitiveness of over 30 faculty at three institutions (the University of
South Dakota, South Dakota State University, and the South Dakota School of
Mines and Technology). The research cluster areas are: (1) Surface and
Interfacial Chemistry and (2) Regulation of Biological Processes: The Role of
Membranes. The state's infrastructure improvement plan focuses on the
development of human resources, on providing an environment that is conducive to
competitive research, and on building the visibility of scientific research in
South Dakota. Specific objectives are: to develop science faculty in both
numbers and competitiveness, to strengthen graduate programs through competitive
recruiting efforts, to add research equipment and support personnel, and to
establish an effective system for communication between scientists, between
scientists and policy makers, and between scientists and the South Dakota
citizenry. A Coordinator for Human Resources Development will oversee activities
aimed at students and teachers in elementary, middle and high schools. Non-
federal state and institutional resources of over $6 million will be contributed
to ensure the success of the state's EPSCoR effort over the three year award
period.