* 9108504
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF-CBMS Regional Conference on New  Function Spaces and Geometric Analysis in Several Complex   Variables to be held in Fairfax, VA May 26-31, 1992
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1992
* Daniele Struppa, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 10/31/1992
* USD 22,467.00

In many senses the harmonic analysis of Euclidean space is well developed. The
theories of fractional integration, singular integrals, parametrices for
constant coefficient partial differential operators, and related matters are
well understood. In all of these theories, translation invariance plays a
crucial role. In particular, Fourier analysis is a central tool in all of this
work. Many physical problems - the flow of gas around an obstacle, turbulence,
problems of flux, Dirichlet and Neumann problems, etc. - have as their natural
setting a smoothly bounded domain (where the necessary degree of smoothness may
vary with the application). The canonical setting for many of the basic problems
of harmonic analysis and of complex function theory is also a domain in space.
Thus, it becomes appropriate to develop analytic tools tailored to the geometry
of domains. This leads to reconsidering classical function spaces on these
domains and to studying them with the use of invariant metrics. This project
will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical
Sciences on New Function Spaces and Geometric Analysis in Several Complex
Variables to be held May 26-31, 1992 at George Mason University. Professor
Steven Krantz of Washington University will be the principal lecturer. To
stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the National Science
Foundation each year supports a number of NSF- CBMS Regional Research
Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference features a
distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current
research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences. The lecturer
subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon these lectures, which
is normally published by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical
Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Certain features
differentiate these conferences from typical research conferences. These are:
(1) Focus on a single important and timely area of research by a leading
practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through regional
emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4)
Published monographs for a wider audience.