* 9108287
* CAMEO: Understanding Organic Reactivity to Allow the        Logical Prediction of Reaction Products
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* William Jorgensen, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 06/30/1995
* USD 315,000.00

An interactive computer program, CAMEO, is being developed to predict the
products of organic reactions given the starting materials and conditions. The
program uses mechanistic principles and precedent-based rules for broad classes
of reactions to make its predictions. Consequently, an important aspect of the
project is the search for organizing principles that govern organic reactivity
in addition to the development of a resource to aid in the analysis and design
of synthetic pathways. The program's current capabilities are significant with
sophisticated treatment of several important classes of reactions including base
catalyzed and nucleophilic processes, thermal pericyclic chemistry, acid
catalyzed and electrophilic reactions, free radical chain reactions, and
functional group oxidations. The intentions are to expand and refine the program
in many ways. The most important additions will be for transition metal
organometallic chemistry, photochemistry, catalytic hydrogenations, dissolving
metal reductions, and three-dimensional structure generation and utilization.
Broader distribution of the program is also planned through a version for the
Apple Macintosh II computer. The Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program is
supporting the continuation of the development of this computer based program
CAMEO to predict reactivities of synthetic reagents and their reaction products.
This has the potential to greatly improve the efficiency of the synthetic
procedures used to meet the increasingly complex requirements of our economy.