* 9108221
* Regulation and Function of Genes Expressed in the Accessory Gland of D. Melanogaster Males
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* Mariana Wolfner, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* kevin bennett
* 12/31/1994
* USD 270,000.00

The Drosophila male accessory gland is a model system in which to address
issues of cell type specification and of the fate and function of molecules
delivered to the female during mating. Dr. Wolfner proposes to continue her
developmental and functional studies of genes expressed in the accessory gland.
First, she will investigate cell type specific gene regulation in the tissue.
She will examine promoter sequences for their role in cell type and mating
stimulated gene expression. She will also examine juvenile hormone effects on
the mating stimulated expression of accessory gland genes. Second, using an
accessory gland promoter fused to sequences encoding and intracellular toxin,
she will ablate specific cells of the accessory gland in order to directly
determine the functions of each cell type. Third, she will focus on the fates of
individual accessory gland products, including representative prohormone like
molecules and representative small peptides. She will determine their targets in
the mated female and the processing events important for their function. Fourth,
to define the function of individual accessory gland products, she will use
genetic methods to either introduce or eliminate specific accessory gland
products. She will examine the consequences of these genetic alterations on the
altered flies or on their mates. These studies will correlate specific molecules
with behavioral and reproductive functions. These results will also establish
the basis for production of those molecules in the male and for their processing
and utilization in the female.