* 9108703
* Southeast Regional Developmental Biology Conference         May 6-9, 1991, Chapel Hill, NC
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Brian Kay, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Brady
* 08/31/1992
* USD 2,500.00

The 1991 Southeast Regional Developmental Biology Conference will be held at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill on May 6-9, 1992. The organizers
of the meeting are Dr. Ralph S. quatrano and Brian K Kay. the conference is
composed of five sessions: 1) Gene Expression in Development; 2) Signal Pathways
in Development; 3) Cell Determination and Differentiation; 4) Transgenic
Systems; and 5) Cell-Cell Interactions. In order to advance the participation of
junior members within the region, the sessions will be composed of 20 minute
talks by junior faculty and 10 minute talks by postdoctoral and graduate
students; to draw the interest of those not giving platform talks, we have
invited three nationally prominent developmental biologists to give keynote
addresses. In addition, all participants will have the opportunity to present
posters. This meeting will provide an excellent opportunity for scientists and
their students from Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carboline,
Georgia, and Florida to meet and exchange ideas and information on developmental
biology. Based on the attendance of recent meetings, 1--125 participants are
expected. Partial support is requested from NSF to help defray room expenses for
graduate students and postdocs attending the Conference, travel expenses of
students and keynote lecturers, facility rental and mailing/advertising
expenses.