* 9108022
* Ab Initio Molecular Electronic Structure Computation on     Parallel Computers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* James McIver, Calspan UB Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 02/28/1995
* USD 214,250.00

With support from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program, and of
the New Technologies Program of the Division of Advanced Scientific Computing,
Professor King and Dr. Furlani will implement large scale ab-initio electronic
structure computations on distributed memory MIMD computers. Algorithms will be
designed to achieve efficient interprocessor communications, load balance,
overlapping of message passing with computation, and machine portability. A
direct self-consistent-field program will be developed for very large orbital
basis sets, e.g., N=4000, on machines with a hundred or more processors, with 5
MBytes of local memory and no disk storage. The integral evaluation and matrix
diagonalization computational load as well as the matrix storage memory will be
distributed over the processors. Applications will include large molecules of
biological interest and loosely bound molecular clusters. Short range dynamic
electron correlation in small atoms, molecules, and soluble model systems will
be investigated for the purpose of extrapolating the results of accurate
configuration interaction calculations to the complete orbital basis set limit.
%%% The results of this project will make supercomputers with parallel
architectures much more useful to chemists, making it possible to do theoretical
calculations on much larger chemically interesting systems.