* 9108685
* A Knowledge-based Diagnostic System that Unifies Systems    Theory with Human Decision Making Knowledge
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Zohreh Fathi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1993
* USD 18,000.00

Most industrial accidents occur during transient operations (start-up, shut
down, etc.). During these periods, it is sometimes difficult for operators to
determine abnormal operating conditions, identify causes of process trends
(external load disturbances, degradation due to parametric changes, sensor and
actuator failures, structural faults), and plan and schedule a sequence of
operating steps. This research project will consist of studying a way to unify
systems theory with human decision-making knowledge in the development of a
generic and robust diagnostic methodology for fault diagnosis in chemical
plants. The technique involves integrating experimental knowledge with expert
systems based on dynamic models of the process. The system structure consists of
embedding estimation-based techniques of fault detection and isolation within
the framework of a knowledge-based system. Raw data are fed to a fault detector
(a preprocessor) which performs statistical tests to identify the process
conditions (normal or abnormal). The preprocessor triggers the initiation of the
knowledge- based system. The task of the knowledge-based system is to either
identify the false alarm or to determine the source and extend of the true
fault. Both a state/parameter estimator and a statistical analyzer are included
in the loop of diagnostic reasoning. The design methodology is a layered
knowledge base that houses heuristic knowledge in high levels and process-
general estimation knowledge in the low levels. The diagnostic reasoning
alternates between the two domains of knowledge. The algorithm developed will be
tested on a subsystem of a power plant that includes a deaerator. This is
research planning grant under the Research Opportunities for Women Program.