* 9108502
* Selective Polymers For Protein Separations:  Investigation  of Novel Template Polymerization Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* John Baldeschwieler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 01/31/1995
* USD 508,282.00

The development of cost-effective affinity separations will eventually require
that expensive and labile biological affinity ligands be replaced by small
chemical mimics. The Principal Investigators (PIs) have begun to develop a very
promising new class of synthetic materials that are highly selective for
individual proteins. These new affinity reagents are polymers which contain
arrays of metal ions that bind complementary arrays of functional groups on the
surface of target proteins. The novel feature that determines the selectivity of
recognition of protein separations is to match the spacing of metal ions
(copper) in the polymer to the spacing of metal-coordinating amino acid residues
(histidine) on the protein surface. The goal of this research is to develop
aqueous template polymerization monomers and techniques in order to prepare
affinity polymers for protein separations and to identify the key physical and
chemical properties that dictate the selectivity and strength of protein binding
by the resulting materials. Three types of materials will be investigated: i)
macroporous polymers, ii) thin layers of polymers that are used to coat porous
beads or other surfaces, and iii) lipid vesicles. This research promises to
yield a generic method for synthesizing stable and versatile selective polymers
that are well-suited to cost-effective, large-scale protein purification.