* 9108297
* Thermal Properties of Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting      Diode Lasers and Arrays
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Marek Osinski, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* mary chen
* 08/31/1995
* USD 215,725.00

The objective of the proposed research is to undertake the first comprehensive
thermal studies of vertical-cavity surface-emitting semiconductor lasers and
two-dimensional laser arrays. Although there is a general consensus that thermal
problems are of utmost importance for vertical-cavity surface emitters, they
remain virtually unexplored. The underlying goal of this project is to reach a
good understanding of main factors which govern the thermal behavior of
vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser and to use this knowledge to improve the
device performance. In the initial phase of the project, we will concentrate on
studies of individual surface-emitting lasers. We will develop a thermal-
electrical self-consistent model, with realistic distribution of heat sources
and accounting for two- dimensional current- and heat spreading, and apply it to
several types of state-of-the-art vertical cavity laser structures. We will also
examine impact of thermal effects in individual emitters on their integration
into two-dimensional arrays. The thermal-electrical self-consistency will then
be complemented by inclusion of optical phenomena and fully self- consistent
treatment will be developed to examine effects of heating on optical properties
of individual surface emitters and two-dimensional arrays. The proposed research
is expected to provide important information for advanced design of high-
performance vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers and two- dimensional arrays
for novel applications such as optical processing and optical interconnects.