* 9108775
* Development of Research and Human Resources Infrastructure
* EDU,ESR
* 03/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Manuel Gomez, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* James Hoehn
* 02/29/1996
* USD 3,440,000.00

The Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) in the state
of Puerto Rico will enhance the research competitiveness of approximately 70
faculty working in 7 research clusters. The selected research areas: (1)
Development of a Marine Biotechnology Center: Molecular Regulation of Biotic
Interactions, Response, and Production; (2) Molecular Biology of Parasites
Group; (3) Research in Cellular and Molecular Mechanism of Nervous System
Regeneration Group; (4) Computational Mathematics Group; (5) Development of an
Engineering Infrastructure Research Center; (6) Development of a Materials
Research Center; and (7) Development of an Interdisciplinary Group of Research
on Metal Clusters: Their Structure, Bonding, and Reactivity. Each of the
projects have identified short, intermediate, and long range goals (up to the
year 2000) and devised strategies to: achieve national and international levels
of excellence; strengthen human resources in S&amp;E, including the development
of two new Ph.D.s, and provide for the involvement of four- year institutions
faculty and students in their research project; create advisory councils of
distinguished researchers to guide project development; establish collaborative
agreement with national and international groups and laboratories; and
vigorously seek additional funds to build on the base provided by EPSCoR.
Collaborative agreements have been made with the Industry/University/Research
Center (INDUNIV), the Corporation for the Technological Development of Tropical
Resources (TROPICO), and the Puerto Rico Scientific Community Council (SCC) to
promote and advocate for the strengthening of the S&amp;E community and the
development of R&amp;D in the private and government sectors. Institutional
commitments to EPSCoR include, $4.5 million contributed by UPR from Commonwealth
funds, a waiver of indirect cost amounting to $2.1 million; as well as
commitments to incrementally hire 35 new tenure-track S&amp;E researchers. From
the private sector $900,000 from TROPICO, and $45,00 from INDUNIV were secured
to contribute to EPSCoR efforts.