* 9108662
* Dissertation Research: Medicinal Plant Selection Criteria   of the Tzeltal Maya of Highland Chiapas
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1992
* Brent Berlin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1992
* USD 8,458.00

This research project involves the dissertation research of a graduate student
in ethno-botanical anthropology who will study how members of a Mayan Indian
community in southern Mexico select medicinal plants. The project, based on
participant observation, field surveys for plants, structured interviewing and
lexicographic techniques, represents an in-depth study of the information Mayan
Indians need to identify medicinal plants. The researcher will collect medicinal
plants with expert Mayan Indians, questioning them as they select (and reject)
plants for their pharmacological efficacy. In addition expert Indian plant
collectors will be asked to define the characteristics of an already collected
set of medicinal plants. The end result will be an in-depth analysis of the
cognitive as well as botanical aspects of Mayan Indian medicinal plant use. The
dissertation research is in collaboration with other research on the
ethnomedicine of Indians in this area, and will contribute to and benefit from
this other research. This research is important because understanding how people
with a vibrant natural system of medicinal plant use select plants for specific
illnesses will advance our knowledge of basic human cognition about health care,
and of the medicinal attributes of plants in this area. Recording and preserving
indigenous ethnobotanical and ethnomedical knowledge is an important part of
preserving global biodiversity.