* 9108954
* Key Issues in the Estimation of the Impacts of Greenhouse    Gas Control Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1994
* John Weyant, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1994
* USD 34,920.00

In response to the marked interest in global climate change over the past few
years, the Energy Modeling Forum (EMF) at Stanford University initiated a multi-
year study focusing primarily on the likely energy sector impacts (costs and
fuel mix effects) of initiatives that would constrain greenhouse gas emissions.
Like previous EMF studies, this effort is geared to understanding what the
current set of models can contribute to understanding the nature and costs of
these impacts as well as the comparative strengths and weaknesses of the various
modeling paradigms that are currently being used to help develop policy in this
area. Since the focus of this study is on providing information that can improve
policy making over the next few years, it is largely being funded by applied-
research oriented organizations like the Department of Energy, the Environmental
Protection Agency, the Electric Power Research Institute, and a group of leading
domestic and international companies. The contribution of this project comes in
carefully linking what comes out of this study to basic research needs in the
social sciences. This project will tie the key policy analysis issues identified
during the study directly to the type of basic social science research that NSF
has and will continue to support. The preliminary conclusions regarding the
implications of the EMF study for research priorities will be summarized in a
report and the report will be discussed at a workshop convened by the EMF. More
specifically, the linkages between the more application- oriented main EMF study
and this project would include an assessment of the relevant merits of
additional basic research on such topics as demographics, economic growth
determinants, structural shifts in economic activity, the determinants of energy
demand, technical change, and the private sector R&amp;D response to price
changes and policy implementations to the key policy issues in global
environmental change.