* 9108535
* National Academy of Sciences International Conference:      Emerging Issues in the International Protection of          Intellectual Property Rights; Washington, DC;  January, 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Mitchel Wallerstein, National Research Council
* Standard Grant
* Carole Ganz
* 12/31/1992
* USD 25,000.00

This award will provide support to the Office of International Affairs of the
National Academy of Sciences for a two-day conference- ,"Emerging Issues in the
International Protection of Intellectual Property Rights" to be held January,
1992. A primary purpose of the conference is to recast the current dialogue on
international intellectual property rights (IPR) issues in terms of the role of
science and technology in promoting economic advance. The conference will
involve international paticipants, as well as U.S. academic, industrial, and
government representatives. Papers, commissioned from distinguished national and
international experts on IPR issues, will provide the basis for discussion at
the conference. An advisory committee composed of distinguished economists,
lawyers, and representatives from U.S.industrial and academic organizations will
recommend topics for these papers, as well as qualified authors. The proceedings
of the conference will be published, along with the commissioned papers, and
widely disseminated to U.S. policymakers, the international community, and U.S.
universities and industry. These results will have direct implications for the
IPR aspects of the National Science Foundation's planning and management of
international cooperative programs and for the NSF's role in assessing the
impact of IPR issues on the international exchange of science and engineering
knowledge.