* 9108715
* Mechanistic and Spatial Analyses of Competition in          Grasslands:  The Effects of Compensation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Linda Wallace, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 12/31/1992
* USD 50,000.00

All plants exist in a competitive matrix, with strong and weak interactions
among their neighbors. A simplistic view of plant competition is that the larger
a plant is, the more competitively effective it is. However, grassland
communities indicate that this is not necessarily the case. Grasslands evolved
in the presence of drought, fire and grazing. All of these external factors
influence plant size, growth rate, and physiological activity. The P.I. will
examine the effects of herbivory on the competitive interactions among grasses
in two different grassland types. Species in the tallgrass prairie of central
North America have not been found to compensate for herbivory (sensu Brown and
Allen 1989) while species in the montane grasslands of Yellowstone National Park
have been found to do so. Plants which respond negatively to herbivory should be
at a competitive disadvantage while those which respond positively should be
competitively superior. Testing this hypothesis will require a combination of
field and modeling work. Community patches will be subject to different levels
of simulated herbivory in the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge of Oklahoma and
Yellowstone National Park. Competition for a specific resource will be monitored
by following uptake of stable nitrogen isotopes between pairs of
clipped/unclipped plants. Several species will be involved in the analyses.
Stable isotope use will be used to determine the area that a particular target
plant utilizes so that the number of true competitors can be noted and their
spatial distribution can be determined.