* 9108765
* Louisiana Education Quality Support Fund Advanced           Development Strategy
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Gene D'Amour, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Continuing grant
* James Hoehn
* 08/31/1996
* USD 3,701,305.00

The Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) in the state
of Louisiana will enhance the research competitiveness of approximately 54
scientists working in 5 research clusters at four institutions (University of
Southwestern Louisiana, Tulane University, Louisiana State University, and
Tulane University Medical Center). The research areas to be studied are: (1)
Development of a Interdisciplinary Center in Molecular Evolution; (2) Mechanism
of Action of Lytic Peptides; (3) Synthesis of Properties of Enzymes and Other
Biopolymers; (4) Fault Tolerant Neural Networks: Design Theories and
Applications; and (5) Transport Processes Through Interfaces, Membranes, and
Porous Media. NSF funding through the state's EPSCoR Committee ("LaSER") has
provided a catalyst to structure and target the earnings from the Louisiana
Educational Quality Fund (LEQSF), a $550 million trust fund dedicated to
enhancing education. Since 1987, $56 million has been expended from LEQSF in
carefully targeted science and engineering (S&E) fields to increase research
competitiveness, enhance departments, endow chairs, and provide graduate
traineeships. EPSCoR activities are designed to increase the average federal
expenditure level per S&E in five priority fields by 30 to 45 percentage points
against the national average, and to increase the number of S&E bachelors and
doctoral degrees awarded, particularly among minorities, to approximately 90
percent of the national per capita average. These objectives will be achieved by
continuing successful LEQSF/LaSER programs and building on the strengths
developed in, or emerging from, the projects being supported through stimulation
the formation of strong focused research groups and using such "clusters" to
promote S&E human resource development. The State and institutions will
contribute over $12 million over 3 years.