* 9108493
* Research Initiation Award:  A State-Space Approach for      Multiple Objective Synthesis of Linear Controllers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Mario Rotea, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

Most control system design problems involve making tradeoffs among competing
objectives. In this research we consider a synthesis problem that arises when
the goal is to find a controller such that several design specifications are
jointly feasible. The focus is on linear plants and controllers. We consider
design specifications that may be quantified by norms on the closed loop maps.
The aim is to develop a complete state-space theory for solving several multiple
objective control problems, resulting from combining performance measures and
robustness requirements of practical significance. Our formulation of the
synthesis problem is significant because design specifications such as good
disturbance rejection and tracking, guaranteed stability in the face of plant
uncertainty, etc., can be taken into account simultaneously. Since a
comprehensive theory for these problems does not exist, the potential yields of
this research will enhance the current theoretical understanding of some
fundamental tradeoffs in the design of control systems. Further, since the
synthesis methodologies we may obtain capture better aspects of the design
problem than existing methods (i.e. LQG, H-infinity, etc.), their use will
result in a significant reduction of the time invested by the control engineer
to get an acceptable controller design. The methods we plan to use are based on
linear algebra and finite-dimensional convex optimization. We are motivated by
the possibility of obtaining efficient numerical algorithms for controller
synthesis, implementable in most computer systems.