* 9108813
* Postdoctoral Research Associateship:  Computer Visual       Analysis of Surface Reflection
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Ruzena Bajcsy, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 12/31/1993
* USD 36,758.00

Visual measurement of surface reflectance properties is an important issue both
in basic and in applied computer vision research. Surface reflectance gives a
reliable cue for image segmentation and object recognition. The goal of the
proposed research is to detect and separate specularity from Lambertian
reflectance based on physical models. In order to provide enough information to
extract various properties of reflectance, we generally need more than one frame
of images. One direction is to use color information and another is to use
multiple images with different views. An algorithm for color image segmentation
and detection of specularity and inter-reflection is proposed. In addition to
the use of color, the use of different views to differentiate specularity from
Lamertian reflectance and to obtain object structure is proposed. the proposed
algorithm is based on the fact that the appearance of specularity varies
depending on viewing direction while that of Lambertian does not. In order to
build a more robust and reliable vision system, information by color and
multiple views will be integrated. For efficient processing of a large amount of
spectral (color), temporal (multiple views) and spatial (image) data, parallel
algorithms using a Connection Machine of 4K processors will be designed and
implemented. The high degree of computational parallelism will bring the
algorithms into practical reality.