* 9108658
* Documentation and Collections Management of North American  Ethnographic Basketry Collections at the Denver Museum of   Natural History
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Jane Day, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 69,600.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Denver Museum of Natural History
will curate its collection of native North American basketry. This includes
approximately 1,700 items made by 92 native American tribes. In the first step
of a four part plan, documentation will be updated. Records will be
supplemented, descriptive data checked out and uniform information entered in
catalogs. This will improve the research data and lay the groundwork for a
computerized data base. Secondly, the museum conservator will survey conditions,
perform minor stabilization and produce a basketry conservation plan. In the
third phase of the project, baskets will be rehoused with mounts and supports in
new cabinets. Inventorying, labeling, and recording of storage locations will
take place. Finally, a summary guide to the collection, related records,
research potential, policies and procedures will be published. The collection
constitutes a significant resource because of both its breadth and its depth in
specific areas. It documents an almost 200 year period since some of the baskets
were collected in the early 1800s. Collecting has continued until recent times
and many of the items have detailed supporting documentation. In some cases, the
names of the craftsmen are known. From an anthropological perspective, the
collection provides a strong data base to address a number of questions and not
all of these concern basketry per se. Through the study of such material
objects, insight can be gained into the nature of culture contact and culture
change over time. Because of the imperfect state of the documentation and
storage the basketry collection is difficult to use and therefore not maximally
available for scientific research. This project should remedy the situation.