* 9109617
* Research Initiation Award:  System Identification for       Control Design Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* C. Jacobson, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1994
* USD 30,000.00

This proposal addresses topics in the area of the worst case identification of
dynamical systems. The goals of this research program are to develop methods for
system identification that reduce the uncertainty surrounding a given dynamical
system in a way that is matched to robust control theory. There will be three
areas of concentration. The first area of research will be algorithm development
for linear time invariant systems using a combination of a priori and
experimental information. The error criterion of identification will be chosen
to be compatible with robust control design techniques. A study will be made of
the intrinsic difficulty of identification of each choice of a priori and
experimental information using the techniques of Information Based Complexity
theory. The second research area is the study and the development of worst case
identification methods for the determination of linearized models of nonlinear
systems. The research will develop methods for study intrinsic limits of
identification of locally unstable linearized dynamics of smooth nonlinear
systems when experimental data is obtained from closed loop experiments. The
third research area is the study of offline adaptive control techniques. The
research will study the merging of worst case system identification with robust
control theory with the goal of developing efficient and nonconservative methods
for utilizing tools for the reduction of uncertainty and the consequent design
of feedback controllers in order to meet a given performance goal.