* 9109645
* Topics in Equilibrium Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Andreu Mas-Colell, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 290,204.00

This project extends the investigators' research on the solution theory of
cooperative games in which binding agreements can be implemented with a large
number of players and nontransferable utility games. It consists of four parts.
Part I deals with the Harsanyi non-transferable utility value for which payoffs
to players are both egalitarian and utilitarian. It studies the relation between
these values and Walrasian equilibria in perfectly competitive economies. Part
II investigates the non- cooperative foundations for cooperative solutions. In a
non- cooperative setup, binding agreements are not possible. But this does not
rule out cooperation among the participants if it is in the interest of everyone
to follow the agreement rather than defect. Since non-cooperative behavior is
the more basic and primitive concept and cooperation could arise only if it is
supported by non-cooperative behavior, it is important to understand and look
for non-cooperative foundations to cooperative solutions. Part III deals with
models of incomplete information and cheap talk - communication that is "free."
The research seeks to characterize what is achievable by the simplest form of
communication that requires no external devices such as binding agreements and
mediators. Part IV proposes to study several topics in incomplete markets
theory: the existence problem of equilibria when there is a continuum of states,
the determinacy problem when there are too many equilibria and the efficiency
problem of an incomplete market equilibrium. This project covers a wide spectrum
of important issues in equilibrium analysis. These analyses will lead to a much
better understanding of various solution concepts, and of the interplay of
communication and strategic interaction among agents. It will provide a strong
foundation from which many important questions concerning cooperative and non-
cooperative behavior can be addressed.