* 9109558
* Research Initiation Award:  Robust Stabilization Using      Phase Information
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Wassim Haddad, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/1994
* USD 32,925.00

Phase information has largely been neglected in robust control theory but is
essential for maximizing achievable performance in controlling complex
multivariable systems. Phase information, here, refers to the characterization
of the phase of the modeling uncertainty in the frequency domain. Real parameter
uncertainty modeling in the time domain provides phase information in the
frequency domain. The objective is to develop effective methods for utilizing
phase information in the analysis and design of robust controllers. A proposal
is made to study numerous interrelated ideas that are relevant to phase
properties of dynamical systems in general and feedback control systems in
particular. Although quadratic Lyapunov functions provide the foundation for
much robust control theory, connections with small-gain (H-infinity) theory
illustrate limitations of this approach in the presence of phase information.
Extensions of quadratic Lyapunov functions, such as parameter-dependent Lyapunov
functions, and structured Lyapunov functions are some of the ideas being
proposed to overcome these limitations. Also proposed, is to establish a
theoretical foundation of robust stabilization with positive real uncertainty.
Recent Riccati-based robustness results for positive real uncertainty obtained
by the author form the starting point for these investigations. Finally, it is
proposed to generalize classical frequency-domain stability criteria, such as
the Popov and circle criteria, to state-space controller synthesis using a
Riccati equation approach. This development will provide the necessary tools for
controller synthesis for sector-bounded nonlinearities. This research will
provide a new approach to robust stabilization--one that involves phase
information that can be significantly less conservative than an H-infinity
small-gain approach.