* 9109116
* Resource-Bounded Sensor-Based Decision Making In            Unconstrained Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Gregory Hager, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 02/28/1994
* USD 170,245.00

A central problem in sensor data fusion is the recovery of complex, multi-
component models from various sensory modalities. An essential component of this
process is a description of what decision must be made from the recovered model.
This description is referred to as the sensing task. The goal of this research
project is to develop and analyze techniques for recovering the minimal or least
detailed model required to make a satisfactory decision for a given sensing
task. In particular, the focus is on the task-directed recovery of composite
models (models composed os several components). The model recovery method is
based on the numerical solution os systems of nonlinear constraints using
interval bisection. Previous work, based on making decisions about objects
modeled by a single parametric form, showed that these methods are general,
natural, simple to implement, and computationally effective. In addition, the
investigations were able to incorporate notions of the cost of computation and
the value of information into the recovery process, and to terminate the
recovery process when the model with the highest net value (decision payoff
minus computational cost) was reached. They are now extending the underlying
recovery method by incorporating model refinement and data segmentation in a
manner that also exploits information about the sensing task. The results are
expect to have particular impact in application area where good a priori models
ar not available. Examples of these domains include classification and sorting
of irregular (e.g. naturally occurring) objects, supervisory control, and
ultimately, to sensor-based control of partially or fully autonomous vehicles.