* 9109469
* Framework-Based Software Development Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* David Garlan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 01/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

Current software development environments tend to lie at opposite ends of a
spectrum: at one extreme are specialized application generators; at the other
are general purpose programming environments. The former provide strong support
for system development and reuse, but are costly to build and available only for
limited domains. The latter provide weak support, but are generally available
and universally applicable. This research explores a way to automate the
production of application-specific environments that lie between these two
extremes. The key idea is that a software framework encapsulating the
commonalities in a family of systems can be incorporated into an existing
general purpose programming environment by a process of structured
transformation. Specifically, this project is to develop a system that allows an
environment implementor to specialize existing programming environments to
handle families of applications. The system provides a set of formal operators
for augmenting a formal description of an environment; as operators are applied,
the system semi-automatically builds a set of transformation rules that can be
used to translate application-specific programs into those of the original
environment. The output of the system is an application- specific environment
together with a program transformer that provides execution semantics for
programs written in that environment.