* 9109539
* The Origins of Public Authority in American Cities
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1995
* Allen Steinberg, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 03/31/1995
* USD 39,483.00

Public authority in the United States is at a particularly low ebb. This has not
always been so. Well into the nineteenth century, the United States had a much
more popular and participatory public life than it does now, and public
attitudes toward public authority were more positive. This project seeks to
understand how and why this change has taken place through an examination of the
origins of public authority. The project will examine the shaping of public
authority in one city (Philadelphia) during the nineteenth century since the
local level is where the discussion, debate, and development of public authority
took place. The data for the study includes records from the court and prison
dockets, grand jury presentments, annual reports of municipal agencies, and
record books from various public and social service agencies as well as
newspapers, popular literature, and the papers of jurists and lawyers. The
project will concentrate on how an understanding of public authority was
manifested in the activities of local institutions, including local courts, and
the circumstances of its transformation as manifested in struggles over criminal
law, education, public services, and social services. Although there have been a
number of studies of the formation of the American state, few have illuminated
aspects of public authority below the level of the state and federal
governments. Most historians have explained the peculiarity of public authority
in the United States by emphasizing its weakness relative to the market and
demonstrating how private economic interests have determined public authority
and policy. This research offers a new perspective in concentrating on localism
and non-market authority in the legal, social, institutional, and intellectual
aspects of public life. Results of the research will add substantially to our
understanding of the institutional structure and behavior of American law in the
post World War II era. From a practical standpoint, such an understanding is
becoming increasingly important because of both the pressing problems faced by
public authority in the United States and the democratic revolutions sweeping
through much of the world.