* 9109850
* RUI:  Communication and Predator Defense by Ground-         Transmitted Vibration
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Janet Randall, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 12/31/1993
* USD 94,141.00

Kangaroo rats are nocturnal rodents found only in the deserts of North America.
Although they are part of the rich web of life in the deserts of the
Southwestern United States, little was understood about their communication and
social organization until Dr. Randall began her research on them. She is
continuing to examine how members of one species, the banner-tailed kangaroo
rat, communicate their identity to other species of kangaroo rats and protect
themselves from predators by drumming their hind feet on the ground to create
air-borne and ground-transmitted vibrations. Footdrumming is a unique
communication system that has never been studied in detail in any other animal
besides the banner-tailed kangaroo rat. In this project, Dr. Randall is opening
research into footdrumming as seismic communication by investigating whether or
not banner-tails can communicate underground from territory to territory. She
will also explore the possibility of cultural transmission of footdrumming
signals: Individual footdrumming signatures of mothers are possibly learned by
their offspring and then modified as the young animals establish themselves in
new territories with new neighbors. Finally, Dr. Randall will examine in much
greater detail than before communication between kangaroo rats and snakes,
focusing on whether or not banner-tails footdrum in the presence of snakes to
induce them to leave by informing them that their chances of predation are low.
Because most research on mammalian communication by sound has been done on
highly social species, this study provides important comparative evidence for
the evolution of sound communication in nonsocial mammals. In addition, the
research will contribute to an understanding of fragile desert ecosystems.
Because the banner-tailed kangaroo rat was recently listed as an endangered
species in Arizona, Dr. Randall's research could become very important in
conservation efforts and recovery programs to assure the survival of the banner-
tail and other endangered kangaroo-rat species.