* 9109856
* Conflict Paradigms and the Instance Theory of Automatization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Gordon Logan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 02/28/1995
* USD 255,000.00

This research will investigate the role of attention in controlling and
overcoming conflict engendered by automatic processing of irrelevant
information. Conflict from automatic processing is apparent in real-world
situations in which our current goals run counter to established habits, such as
departing from the usual route home to stop at the store. The Stroop task
provides a laboratory example: People are asked to name the color in which words
are presented and must overcome the automatic reading response when the word
itself names a conflicting color (e.g., RED written in green). Performance on
the Stroop task and its many variations (e.g., deciding whether 3 + 4 = 12 is
true) provides a major data base which theories of attention and automaticity
must explain. This research will apply Logan's instance theory of automaticity,
developed to account for skill acquisition, to conflict paradigms. The instance
theory assumes that novice performance is based on a general algorithm for
performing the task and that, with practice, the algorithm is gradually replaced
by memory for specific solutions. This learning process is modeled in the theory
in a precise mathematical fashion. The instance theory accounts for learning
better than other theories of skill acquisition because it accounts for changes
in the entire distribution of reaction times, not just average performance. As
it stands, the instance theory makes incorrect predictions in conflict
paradigms, predicting no slowing of reaction time and an error rate close to
100%, in contrast to vast numbers of experiments which show a substantial
slowing in reaction time and a slight increase in error rate. This research will
develop the theory to overcome this problem and then test the new developments.
Theory development will involve assuming two different representations, a
perceptual representation and a conceptual representation, that are bound
together by the process of attention. The research will involve three series of
experiments. The first will examine the process that binds perceptual
representations to conceptual representations; the second will separate
perceptual and conceptual representations; and the third will examine long- term
consequences of the binding process by examining learning effects. The research
will investigate the binding process theoretically using computer simulations of
the learning process that compare the instance theory with other current
theories of skill acquisition.