* 9109731
* RIA: Experimental Simulation of Crack Initiation at         Bimaterial Interfaces due to Mechanical and Thermal Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Hareesh Tippur, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jerome Sackman
* 08/31/1994
* USD 69,359.00

Experimental research, dealing with quasi-static and dynamic crack initiation
and growth at material interfaces subjected to mechanical and thermal loading,
will be carried out. The research will contribute to a better understanding of
interfacial failure mechanisms which predominantly control the fracture behavior
of multi-phase materials such as polymer and metal matrix composites, metal
filled composites, and of adhesive bonds and thin films on substrates. The
proposed work is concerned with crack initiation and growth simulations under
controlled loading conditions in bimaterial specimens. Interfacial crack tip
deformations will be optically measured prior to and at fracture initiation. A
newly developed, real time, full field optical technique, 'Coherent Gradient
Sensing' (CGS), will be utilized as an experimental tool for measuring
deformations near interfacial cracks. From these high resolution optical
measurements, local crack tip parameters such as complex stress intensity factor
and crack tip mode mixity will be inferred. The optical measurements will allow
us to seek relationships between the local crack tip parameters and
external/material parameters such as remote loading and material property
mismatch. This will provide valuable data for identifying parameters which
significantly influence crack initiation at interfaces and for establishing
interfacial failure criteria.