* 9109650
* Restructuring Innovation:  Geographical Perspectives on     Technology Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* David Angel, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 06/30/1993
* USD 78,842.00

As with other facets of economic activity, spatial patterns of innovation and
technological development have changed substantially in recent decades. New
forms of developmental activity within individual firms and among groups of
firms include joint ventures, licensing agreements, and research and development
consortiums. Research on these trends has been long on theory and anecdotal
evidence but short on systematic empirical analysis. This project will focus on
two central questions: How have geographic patterns of industrial innovation and
technological development changed as more activities have been conducted through
arrangements outside the framework of individual firms? How have communications
and other interactions among firms changed in response to increased
externalization of innovation and technological development? Answers to these
questions will result from information gathered through detailed surveys of
executives in the industrial chemical, computer, and computer-assisted design
and manufacturing equipment industries. These data will be analyzed
quantitatively and statistically to determine the degree to which geographic
dimensions of innovation and technological development have changed in recent
years. This project will provide new data about the form and magnitude of
developmental linkages among industrial firms for three different industries.
Analyses of these data will provide new insights into changing spatial forms of
innovation and technological development, and they will provide a basis for
comparative evaluation of changing patterns in other industries.