* 9109052
* Postdoctoral Research Associateship:  Computer Simulation ofDynamic Processes in Condensed Phase Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/1991,10/31/1993
* James McCammon, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 10/31/1993
* USD 33,151.00

In molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations, the energy of a many-body
system must be computed repeatedly for millions of configurations. It is
therefore essential to use theories and algorithms that allow for fast
calculations. In quantum chemistry, the extended Huckel method is one of the
most economic theoretical approaches for calculating energies. Although simple,
this method gives sufficiently accurate results in appropriately selected
applications. A combination of molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations
with the extended Huckel method should therefore be useful in studying dynamic
phenomena near surfaces and in the solid state. The proposed research will study
the reconstruction of the Si(111) ( 3 x 3) R30 -B surface structure using the
extended Huckel method and Monte Carlo simulation. Density functional theory is
ideal for extended systems and large molecules. Although computationally
intensive, it tends to give excellent results especially for free-electron
systems. Central in this theory is that the ground state energy is a unique
functional of the electron density. There is no need for any iteration in
density functional calculations. The second focus of the research will be to
continue explorations of the combination of density functional theory and
computer simulation to study dynamic processes in condensed phase systems.