* 9109270
* Genetic and Environmental Factors that Influence            Microgametophytic Variation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* James Winsor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Therese A. Markow
* 06/30/1995
* USD 249,000.00

A large portion of the genetic material in pollen (microgametophytes) is read
off during pollen development, pollen germination and pollen tube growth.
Consequently, the performance of pollen (speed of germination, pollen tube
growth rate and ability to achieve fertilization) can potentially be affected by
its genetic makeup, by its interactions with the material portion of the flower
through which it grows, by environmental conditions such as temperature, and by
the resources (e.g. nitrogen and phosphorus) provided to pollen grains by the
pollen-producing parent. Drs. Stephenson and Winsor will continue their detailed
investigations of the factors that affect pollen performance. They will
determine if these factors result in non-random fertilization, and if non-random
fertilization affects the performance of the progeny. Specifically, they will
use Cucurbita texana to examine the extent to which pollen tube growth can be
selected for by allowing only the fastest growing tubes to achieve
fertilization. Next, they will examine the effects of variation in the amount of
soil phosphorus on pollen production, pollen grain size, the quantity of stored
phosphorus in pollen, and the performance of pollen (ability to sire seeds in
mixtures). Finally, they will separate the effects of temperature during pollen
production from the effects of temperature during pollen germination on pollen
performance. These experiments, when combined with prior and ongoing studies,
will result in a complete picture of the genetic and environmental factors that
influence pollen performance, the non-random transmission of genes from one
generation to the next, and their effects on the resulting progeny. The results
of these studies will address and clarify some of the most actively debated
issues in plant population biology. In addition, this research will have far-
reaching implications for the applied sciences. The possibility of using pollen
to select for agriculturally desirable traits in the pollen represents a
considerable savings of time, money and space over both traditional breeding
programs and the newer biotechnology programs. Finally, it may be possible to
use pollen to monitor environmental degradation, to determine which species are
susceptible to particular forms of pollution, and to develop lines of plants
that are more resistant.