* 9109070
* Research Initiation: Semantics and Logics of Programs
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Scott Smith, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1994
* USD 59,929.00

The most basic purpose of program semantics is to give a rigorous, unambiguous
definition of the meaning of programs, providing a standard for translator
writers and users of the language. Beyond this basic purpose, equality and other
relations on program fragments can be defined, leading to logics for reasoning
about programs and formal justification for program transformations. In the last
twenty-five years, tremendous progress has been made. The most important step
was the development of semantic domains to denotationally model programs, which
have since been extended to model the constructs of modern languages such as
assignments, branches and nondeterminism. Logics for reasoning about programs
have also been defined for simple languages, using semantic domains as models to
guarantee soundness. The difficulty is scaling up these ideas to full-fledged
languages with many features. Operational semantics provides an alternative to
denotational semantics here, because there is always at the bottom an
interpreter, keeping ones feet on the ground, and keeping the mathematics
manageable. This project takes an operational approach to semantics, with the
aim of giving semantics to full-fledged programming languages and to furthermore
define a rich notion of eqivalence of programs so logics can thereupon be
defined. This undertaking is thus a synthesis of many different varieties of
language semantics.