* 9109231
* Investigating Analysis Techniques for Concurrent Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Ugo Buy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 02/28/1994
* USD 55,000.00

The focus of this research is the static analysis of concurrent software
systems. The purpose of this analysis is to determine whether a given program or
program specification satisfies certain correctness requirements, such as
freedom of deadlock or absence of starvation. The goal of this research project
is to define new techniques and automated tools for the analysis of concurrent
programs. The new techniques will be aimed at extending and integrating existing
analysis methods. To date a number of approaches to the analysis of concurrent
programs have been proposed. Some approaches have been implemented and the
resulting analysis tools have been tested on some well-known examples of
concurrent programs. At present, however, little is known about the types and
sizes of programs to which each approach can be usefully applied, and the kinds
of questions about the programs that the approach can effectively answer. Some
approaches which use linear algebra or temporal logic based techniques to
perform portions of the analysis are especially promising. These approaches will
be investigated in an effort to characterize their relative strengths and
weaknesses. The evaluation of the existing approaches will guide the definition
of new analysis techniques. Preliminary investigations in this area have
identified various possibilities for extending and integrating existing
approaches. The new analysis techniques must be amenable to the implementation
of automated analysis tools. Practical experimentations and the evaluation of
performance results will play a crucial role when assessing the relative
strengths of existing and proposed approaches.