* 9109195
* An Investigation Of Cyclic Rule Behavior In Integrity       Maintenance Rules
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Susan Urban, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 02/28/1993
* USD 56,191.00

This research investigates the automated, static analysis of integrity
maintenance rules within an active database environment. An integrity
maintenance rule is a rule that attempts to "resatisfy" a constraint by
initiating corrective, state-altering database operations. Rules that attempt to
maintain conflicting or ill-specified constraints, however, can lead to cyclic
and anomalous rule behavior. This research addresses the theoretical aspects and
implementation details of a system for reasoning about the interaction between
integrity maintenance rules for the purpose of automatically identifying
provably safe, provably inconsistent, and potentially inconsistent rule
behaviors. The investigation is performed in a deductive, object-oriented
framework, using object logics to provide a well-defined syntax and semantics.
The analysis of rule behavior is based on current research on constraint
satisfiability and integrity checking in deductive databases, using the truth
maintenance paradigm to support user interaction in and explanation of the rule
analysis process. The analysis process includes rules triggered by a set of
transaction operations. An important contribution of the research is the
framework it provides for the correct execution of integrity maintenance rules
in an active, object-oriented environment and for further refinement of
execution models and run-time monitoring of active database rules, in general.