* 9109509
* Single Chip Supercomputers
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Tomaso Poggio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 12/31/1993
* USD 38,000.00

The proposed research focuses on building vision systems with supercomputer
capability into fast, small, low-power, analog integrated circuits. Examples
where visual acuity and dexterity would be useful in products include collision
sensors for cars, ground speed detectors for anti-skid lock brakes, navigation
systems for mobile robots, perception sensors for micro robots and image pre-
processors for remote sensing instruments. Current supercomputers are too large,
too general and too complex to be cost-effective for such applications. Vision
algorithms will be implemented directly in silicon through analog networks.
Computation performed this way is the ultimate in parallelism, is inherently low
power and compiles to a very small package size because sensors can be
integrated directly with computational networks. Single chip sensor systems to
be useful in the real world however, must be adaptive and self-calibrating.
Designing adaptive, flexible, smart sensors requires extensive simulation. In
fact, for simulations to complete in any reasonable time frame, computational
assets on the order of supercomputer capability are essential. The research
proposed is to utilize today's general purpose supercomputers to develop the
appropriate algorithms for designing tomorrow's application specific single-
chip supercomputers (analog vision chips). The Connection Machine, a 64,000
processor supercomputer, will be used for algorithm simulation and device design
of these self-calibrating, adaptive vision chips. Standard computer vision
algorithms bog down even the fastest computers in the world. For most vision
applications, commercial supercomputers would not be feasible. For example, an
automobile collision detection system must be small, low-cost, and consume
little power. For such applications, general-purpose supercomputers would not be
satisfactory (even if they were fast enough). The solution is to utilize
special-purpose custom analog VLSI chips. These analog chips are fast, low-
power, cheap and small. I have successfully built and tested more than a dozen
different analog VLSI chips during my Ph.D. work at Caltech. These chips perform
various smoothing, segmentation and interpolation algorithms using input from
on-chip photosensors or scanned-in test data. Recently I am investigating some
simple motion and stereo ideas.