* 9109084
* RIA:  Hypercube-Based Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Sotirios Ziavras, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 12/31/1993
* USD 59,999.00

The main objective of this research is to solve the problem of mapping
application algorithms developed for multilevel architectures, which are more
general than the standard-pyramid architecture, onto hypercube-based systems.
Hypercube-based systems are commercially available and have widely been used by
the scientific community because they are highly flexible, fault-tolerant, and
efficient. Researchers have been trying with success, to solve the problem of
embedding standard pyramids into hypercubes. However, such embeddings do not
guarantee very high performance for all of the multilevel algorithms, because
the performance requirements of particular algorithms are not taken into account
by the embedding process. This project will evolve through five phases. The
first phase will propose algorithms for embedding multilevel structures into
hypercubes. The second phase will be involved in the refinement of the embedding
algorithms proposed in the first phase, in such a way that the exact computation
and communication requirements of the application algorithms should affect the
embeddings. The third phase will attempt modifications of the embedding
algorithms proposed in the second phase, so that they will be taking into
account statistical performance data, in order to become suitable for the
mapping of non-deterministic and data-dependent multilevel algorithms. The
fourth phase of this project will propose a class of "multicube" systems, which,
while providing smaller numbers of communication channels, can yield performance
comparable to that of the hypercube. To conclude techniques for mapping
multilevel algorithms onto hypercube-based and multicube systems will be
developed. Analytical techniques and simulation results will be used to prove
the effectiveness and efficiency of the mapping algorithms.