* 9109215
* Semantic Representations in Reading
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* James McClelland, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 02/28/1994
* USD 36,186.00

Connectionist networks, which compute via the massively parallel cooperative
and competitive interactions many simple neuron-like processing units, provide a
unified framework for studying cognitive processes and their neurological
implementation. The proposed research involve modeling acquired reading
disorders in patients with brain damage by developing and "lesioning" a
connectionist model of normal reading. Based on data from psychology and
neuropsychology, the model has two routes for deriving the pronunciation of a
printed word: a phonological route that maps directly from orthography to
phonology by "sounding-out" the word, and a semantic route that maps indirectly
via semantics by "recognizing" the meaning of the word. Preliminary
connectionist implementations of each of these routes in isolation have
succeeded in reproducing a limited range of normal and abnormal reading
behavior. It is proposed to develop a complete dual-route model capable of
addressing a much wider range of phenomena, relating to the coordination and
relative contribution of each route during reading acquisition, mature skilled
reading, behavior after partial damage, and recovery from damage. The model will
be developed within a more neurophysiologically plausible connectionist
formalism than the one used in the previous work. In addition, a major research
effort will focus on developing an adequately sophisticated semantic system that
overcomes the severe limitations of existing systems. High-performance computing
facilities will be used to meet the extensive computational demands of training
and testing the model.