* 9109830
* RIA:  A New Approach to Microwave/Millimeter-Wave                 Transmitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/1994
* USD 65,000.00

There is a need for compact, high-power sources for radar applications in the
microwave and millimeter- wave range. The output power levels of solid-state
devices in this frequency range are limited. A possible solution to be explored
in this Research Initiation Grant is to coherently combine the outputs of
hundreds of active devices that load a two- dimensional metal grid with a period
equal to a fraction of a free-space wavelength. This active surface is an
antenna as well as source. The devices can be MESFETs arranged in a gate-
feedback configuration. This type of oscillator has a wide frequency tuning
range, as is required in most applications. The oscillating active surface is
backed with a tuning mirror that has an electrically variable reflection
coefficient. This mirror is another metal grid loaded with varactor diodes. The
capacitance of the diodes, and therefore the reflection coefficient of this
tuning surface, is bias dependant. The mirror provides positive feedback to the
oscillator surface, which is necessary for the devices to lock to a single mode.
In a radar, for example, the signal is usually transmitted in pulses. In cases
when the transmitter itself cannot be switched on and off at a high rate, a
switching active surface can be used. This surface consists of a grid loaded
with pin diodes, and it electrically switches the wave transmitted from the
oscillator grid. This system is compact and light weight, since it consists of a
stack of planar dielectrics loaded with solid-state devices that do not require
large power supplies. It is versatile, for example, another active surface of
Schottky diodes placed in parallel with the oscillator could have a variable
phase shift for beam steering or beam forming applications, or can be used as a
multiplier. In addition, the planar structure is suitable for wafer- scale or
modular integration.