* 9109166
* Research Initiation Award:  Metal Additive Effects on Soot  Morphology in Laminar Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1991,10/31/1993
* Constantine Megaridis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 10/31/1993
* USD 77,761.00

This experimental study addresses the influence of iron additives on soot-
particle morphology in laminar, coannular, ethylene/air diffusion flames. The
primary objective of the work is to determine both state and morphology of the
additive species within the combustion environment, as well as their dependence
on flame coordinates. Other fundamental issues to be addressed include whether
the additive intervenes at an early or late combustion stage, to determine if
iron combustion products are occluded in the soot phase, and in case they are,
to examine their incorporation within the carbon matrix as a function of flame
location. The incorporation of iron combustion products within the soot phase
(if present) will be quantified through an elemental analysis of the particulate
phase collected from various flame locations. A recently developed intrusive
sampling technique winl be used in conjunction with transmission electron
microscopy to provide the samples for morphological and elemental
characterization of the particulate phase within the flames. The proposed
fundamental research would contribute to a better understanding of the metal-
additive influence on the basic mechanisms involved in the formation, growth,
oxidation and emission of soot from laboratory, well-defined flames. Our ability
to resolve these issues may define new ways to enhance and optimize fuel-
additive use for soot suppression.