* 9109765
* Mathematical Sciences: The Dynamics of Defects and Patterns in Nematic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Maria-Carme Calderer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 29,500.00

In this project the principal investigator will analyze models of nematic
liquid crystals with variable degrees of orientation as a means of studying
highly nonlinear material behavior such as the formation of structured domains
and patterns. The approach will consist of an analytical part and an
experimental part. On the analytical side the principal investigator will employ
mathematical methods to describe the formation and evolution of banding
structures, singularity lines and disclinations in the solutions of the system
of parabolic partial differential equations that governs the behavior of the
materials. On the experimental side the principal investigator and a graduate
student will conduct actual experiments in the Fluid Dynamics Laboratory in the
Mathematics Department at Penn State in order to discover some qualitative
features of the coarsening processes of domain structures and the nature of the
interaction between singularity lines. The project to be carried out by the
principal investigator and a graduate student is an exciting interplay between
analytical applied mathematics and experimental fluid dynamics. For the past few
years the principal investigator has studied the systems of differential
equations that govern the behavior of liquid crystals using mathematical tools.
She plans now to combine this analytical work with experimental studies of the
phenomena modelled by the equations. The research will have relevance to
improving the industrial processing of anisotropic polymeric materials.