* 9109089
* A Unifying Framework for Parallelizing Transformations
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Mary Lou Soffa, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1995
* USD 283,285.00

To effectively utilize the resources of parallel systems, transformations are
necessarily applied by compilers to increase the degree of parallelism in
program code or to improve the efficiency of exploiting parallelism. However,
the interactions among the transformations as well as the interactions between
transformations and scheduling are not well understood. Guidelines for applying
transformations, ratios of the cost and benefit of the transformations and the
design of tools that operate on the transformed code have yet to be adequately
developed. This research investigates these issues. A unifying framework for
parallelizing transformations and a set of dependencies that is used to specify
the conditions under which a transformation may be safely applied. The framework
will be described on two levels: definitional, and operational. Using the
definitional level of the framework, enabling and disabling interactions among
the transformations and between transformation and scheduling will be studied.
The operational level of the framework will be employed in the development and
prototyping of tools that generate and support transformed code, and in
particular a transformation tool generator, interface tools for the generator
and resulting transformer, and a symbolic bugger. Costs and benefits of
transformations will be investigated using the framework. A set of guidelines
will be developed for the application of transformations base on their
interaction, costs, and benefits, taking into account scheduling strategies,
program structure, architecture, and resources available. These tools will be
designed to operate on any set of transformations expressible in the framework.
The utility of the framework for user defined tranformations will be
investigated. Throughout the work, experimentation will be performed comparing
the framework approach to transformation with the traditional approach of hand-
crafting transformations.