* 9109114
* Runtime Support for Machine-Independent Parallel            Programming: the Chare Kernel Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1991,05/31/1994
* Wei Wennie Shu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 05/31/1994
* USD 59,989.00

A major challenge for parallel computation is to use real hardware with real
software to solve real application problems. This research will extend a runtime
support system, chare kernel, to run real computation problems on real parallel
machines. Experience has shown the feasibility and advantages of a runtime
support system. Such a system can provide a machine-independent programming
environment for parallel computations. More important, it has the function of
dynamic scheduling and communication management, as well as abstraction of
interaction between parallel actions, realizing a powerful virtual machine. The
project will investigate how much benefit can be obtained by using the chare
kernel system, especially for applications with irregular and unpredictable
features. It will implement a number of substantial applications on the chare
kernel for comparison with implementation without runtime support. It will study
the compilation technique to translate high-level languages into the chare
kernel language, and compare this approach to implementation of compiler
directly on parallel machines. It will also investigate an automatic program
partitioning scheme to further relax the burden of users or compilers. The goal
of this research is to make parallel programming powerful (able to handle most
application problems), and able to utilize the parallel system resources
effectively.