* 9109240
* Spatial Dynamics at Individual and Landscape Levels:        Vegetation Cluster Processes in Semi-Arid Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1995
* Edward Rykiel, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Michael Auerbach
* 07/31/1995
* USD 748,113.00

Drs. Rykiel, Wu, Folse, and Archer propose to build and test dynamic, spatially
explicit models of vegetation interactions that permit a mechanistic basis for
(1) understanding local spatial interactions among individual plants, (2)
generating spatial processes in succession, and (3) studying how small scale
processes can produce and regulate large scale patterns. They will use
vegetation clusters as model ecosystems for developing theory and simulation
models explicitly linking plant and landscape levels of organization. The
theoretical component of the proposed research is based on the hypothesis that
local (individual and neighborhood) behavior determines the ecological patterns
observed at larger scales (community and landscape). The modeling component
involves development of (a) object-oriented simulation models representing
spatial interactions between individual plants in clusters, and between clusters
in the landscape, and (b) simplified grid-based (cellular automata) models of
spatial interactions in cluster development. Field data will be collected on
leaf area, transpiration, growth rate, and root extent for savanna and thorn
scrub vegetation for model parameterization and evaluation. They will use the
theory, models, and field data to predict the effects of spatial heterogeneity
in nutrient availability on the formation and growth of vegetation clusters, the
dynamics of individual clusters, and the interactions among clusters that
produce observed and expected landscape patterns of vegetation and resource
distributions. Drs. Rykiel, Wu, Folse and Archer are leaders in the field of
vegetation in cluster development. The facilities available for conducting this
research are outstanding.