* 9109274
* Acquistion of a Field-Emission Analytical Electron          Microscpoe
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Matthew Libera, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1993
* USD 278,000.00

This award provides funds to upgrade a scanning transmission microscope with a
field-emission gun which will be used for materials research. The State of New
Jersey has provided funds to purchase a conventional Scanning Transmission
Electron Microscope. This award allows for the purchase of a substantially
upgraded, newly developed Field Emission Gun-Scanning Transmission Electron
Microscope with advanced capability. %%% The instrument will be located at
Stevens Institute of Technology in a new microscopy facility being developed
with state funds, and available through a consortia of 5 institutions in the New
Jersey area, the Advanced Technology Center for Surface Engineered Materials.
Consortia institutions include: New Jersey Institute of Technology, Princeton
University, Rutgers University, Stevens Institute of Technology, and David
Sarnoff Research Center. The consortia was created to study surface and thin-
film materials problems and is headed by Dr. Bernard Kear, at Rutgers. The
Center at Stevens focusses on materials research problems related to surfaces
and thin films such as: interfaces in nanophase ceramics, ceramic/intermetallic
matrix composites, optoelectronic thin film crystallization, and buffered
superconducting thin films. The instrument will be available to members of the
center and others from local universities and industries.