* 9109970
* REU:  Spatial Position and Fitness:  A Dynamic Optimization Model
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* George Uetz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1995
* USD 105,004.00

In nature, there are advantages of sociality (increased food gathering
potential, protection from predators), yet there are also costs of the social
environment (increased competition for food and/or space, potential for spread
of parasites and diseases, increased visibility to predators). Not all animals
within a colony or social group experience these benefits and/or costs equally.
For example, animals on the edge of colonies may be at greater risk of predation
from their natural enemies, while others in the center may face greater
competition for food. Dr. Uetz's research is directed at understanding how
animals make decisions (live alone or in a group; change location within a
colony, etc.), and how the cumulative effects of those decisions affect survival
and reproductive success. The studies concern spacing behavior, and how location
of spiders within three- dimensional web colonies affects the balance between
feeding success and predation risk. Using this information, Dr. Uetz will
develop a mathematical model to predict the optimal decision-making strategies
yielding the best chance of survival and reproductive success. The evolution of
social behavior has received much attention, and scientists continue to examine
the costs and benefits of group-living in light of natural selection theory.
This topic arouses both interest and controversy, because of the diversity of
social behaviors observed in animals, and because humans as well are social.
This research will contribute to growing knowledge of how costs and benefits of
behavioral strategies shape the evolution of animal societies, and also provide
insight into how social behavior can evolve in typically asocial animals such as
spiders.