* 9109234
* Phonological and Grammatical Bases of Luganda Prosody
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Larry Hyman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1993
* USD 48,470.00

ABSTRACTS The present grant provides funds to allow the PI (Prof. Larry Hyman)
and Dr. Francis Katamba to complete their joint research on the phonological and
grammatical bases of Luganda prosody. Supported by National Science Foundation
researchers have carefully documented and jointly published on a number of
issues concerning the interfacing of phonology and grammar in Luganda. The
project has centered around three areas: 1)the analysis of prosodic features
(quantity, tone, accent, and intonation, which impact, respectively, on theories
of syllabicity, tonal representation, metrical representation and phonetic
implementation); 2)the analysis of prosodic domains required by these features
(the phonological word, clitic group, tone group, tone phrase, and intonational
phrase); and 3)the nature of the syntax-phonology interface (i.e. determining
whether-or under what conditions-the phonology may directly access the syntax,
rather than indirectly accessing the syntax by mediation of the prosodic
domains). As is documented in the proposal, the current project has resulted in
breakthroughs in each of these areas. First, by closely scrutinizing the complex
data of Luganda, the researchers have discovered that the "facts" (which have
been cited by a number of theoretical phonologists) are not always exactly as
the standard references indicate. Second, the discovery of these facts has led
the researchers to theoretical innovations which they have explored and propose
to investigate further in this final phase of the project. These innovations
include a refinement of moraic theory (particularly as it relates to
complensatory lengthening and the question of what is a tone-bearing unit); a
new contour representation of underlying tone in Luganda (and perhaps a subclass
of so-called pitch-accent systems); a cyclic approach to morphology and
phonology that allows affixes to be "infixed" rather than added to the periphery
of their base; extension of overlapping prosodic domains to the lexicon; and
testing of these results against the lexical prosodic domains required by the
segmental phonology (e.g. for vowel height harmony, consonant mutation,
consonant nasalization (the "Ganda (for ?Meinhof's! Law"), etc. Renewed funding
from the N.S.F. will thus allow the PI and Dr. Katamba to complete their
productive collaboration and attend to the discoveries that have arisen thus far
in the project.