* 9109695
* Urbanization and Language Change
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Guy Bailey, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 05/31/1994
* USD 74,140.00

ABSTRACT This project continues and elaborates research begun under NSF grants
BNS 8812552 and BNS 9009232 from September, 1988, through August, 1991. The
research conducted during that period looks at the role of urbanization in
language change. In addition to providing substantive conclusions about
urbanization and language change and the "divergence hypothesis," that work
develops innovative techniques for gathering and linking synchronic and
diachronic data and explores several analytical techniques, such as cluster
analysis and ARCINFO computer mapping, that are new to linguistics. The new work
builds on those techniques, on spectrographic study, and on diffusion models
developed in cultural geography to expand the analysis begun in earlier phases
and to apply the results to some fundamental questions about language change and
the role of social context in variation and change. Specifically, the work
addresses these questions. First, do grammatical changes originate and spread in
ways similar to phonological ones? Second, are there some general principles of
linguistic diffusion that account for the spread of changes? Third, how do
linguistic changes originate? Do they arise through language contact alone, or
can they be internally motivated? Fourth, what is the relationship between
internally (i.e., linguistically) motivated changes (which most of the ones we
have studied seem to be) and the social factors that seem to trigger their
spread? Finally, is there an overall direction to language change in vernacular
dialects?