* 9109453
* RUI:  Effects of Human Use on the Ecology of Upper-ElevationForests
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1994
* John Metz, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/1994
* USD 60,014.00

Growing concerns about the consequences of forest clearance have increased the
need to understand more completely the processes by which human activity affects
the species composition, structure, and dynamics of forests. Some earlier
studies of forest degradation and conversion now have been criticized as having
been short-sighted, superficial, and excessively alarmist, but other studies
have highlighted the significant changes that can result from a variety of human
activities. This project will contribute new insights about the complex dynamics
of change in forests through a lengthy, detailed case study of deforestation in
the upland forests on the southeastern flank of the Dhaulagiri Himal range of
western Nepal. Extensive field work by the investigator and native assistants
will gather data about vegetation characteristics, physical characteristics, and
human use and management practices for roughly 50 forest stands controlled by
native villages in the region. These data will be analyzed through direct and
indirect gradient analyses to assess the impacts of human, physical, and natural
factors on vegetational dynamics. This project will provide valuable new
insights about the complex processes through which people and natural forces
interact within and near upland forests. Because methods used in this analysis
have been used elsewhere, this study will complement other research and add to
general knowledge about these types of processes. This Research in Undergraduate
Institutions award also will support general research and educational activities
at a predominantly undergraduate institution.