* 9109096
* Spectroscopic and Chromatographic Investigations of         Derivatized Cyclodextrins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Apryll Stalcup, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 12/31/1992
* USD 18,000.00

Dr. Stalcup will prepare and characterize regiospecifically derivatized
B-cyclodextrins to serve as models for the derivatized cyclodextrins immobilized
as chiral selectors in normal phase high performance liquid chromatography. She
will use NMR and circular dichroism to probe substitution patterns on the
cyclodextrin as well as to investigate the possibility of chiral discrimination
in the derivatization of the cyclodextrin with a chiral derivatizing agent. In
addition, NMR will be used to study the association complexes formed between the
derivatized cyclodextrin and chiral analytes. In related work, Dr. Stalcup will
explore alternative applica- tions of derivatized beta-cyclodextrins to chiral
separations including their use as chiral mobile phase additives and as
enantioselective precipitation agents. Derivatized alpha- and gamma-cyclodextrin
bonded phases analogous to previously reported derivatized beta-cyclodextrin
phases will be prepared, evaluated chromatographically and compared with the
derivatized beta-cyclodextrin phases. %%% Research Planning Grants enable women
who have not had prior independent Federal research support to develop a
competitive research project. This project involves the preparation and
characterization of new materials for use in the separation, by high performance
liquid chromatography, of molecules which consist of the same atoms linked in
the same way, but which differ in their three-dimensional structures. This
research is of great importance to the chemical industry.