* 9109853
* Southeastern University and College Coalition for           Engineering Education (SUCCEED)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/1992,09/30/1997
* Carl Zorowski, North Carolina State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Win Aung
* 09/30/1997
* USD 15,000,000.00

PI-NAME: Michael A. Littlejohn (NC State) EID-9109853 CO-PI-NAME: Timothy J.
Anderson (U of FL) FY 92 $3,661,632 James F. Marchman (VA Polytech.) FY 92
$3,789,550 William E. Sayle, II (GA I. of Tech) FY 93 $3,629,383 Tildon H.
Glisson (NC State) FY 94 $3,463,147 William B. Barlage (Clemson U) FY 95
$3,390,342 Robert J. Coleman (U of NC) Krishnamurty Karamcheti (FL A&M) Kenneth
H. Murray (NC A&T) SUCCEED has two primary goals: to improve the quality and
relevance of their degree programs; and to impact broadly engineering education
in the 21st-century. In pursuing these goals, they will increase student
retention, engineering enrollments and numbers of SUCCEED graduates, while
recruiting, retaining, and graduating more women, minority, and handicapped
student engineers. SUCCEED's curriculum restructuring plan focuses on:
integration of all subjects with engineering design and practice; elimination of
course and infrastructure barriers to curriculum innovation; and consideration
of engineering as a process and a system. SUCCEED's management plan focuses on:
instilling personal traits of innovation, teamwork, and leadership; and
stimulating organizational traits leading to quality products, customer service,
and an on-going product improvement process. SUCCEED will be organized as an
experimental Engineering Education Management System (EEMS) comprised of four
distributed, multi-institutional centers which will promote inter- and intra-
institutional collaborations and establish an environment for exploring
engineering education. The four distributed centers are: 1) Center for
Curriculum Development (University of Florida); 2) Center for Human Resource
Development (Georgia Institute of Technology); 3) Center for Engineering Design
and Processes (North Carolina State University); and 4) Center for Information
and Technology (Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University). SUCCEED
will achieve: an evaluation of a new engineering curriculum blueprint called
Curriculum-21; an increase in the total numbers of female and minority students
by 50% coalition-wide; an increase in student retention by 50% and in four-year
graduation rates by a proportionate amount; an improvement in the number of
students pursuing graduate degrees; the promotion of math and science education
in K-12; the promotion of basic technology literacy for non-engineering
graduates; and an improvement in the alternative entry interface with community
colleges and 2 and 4-year institutions. In addition, SUCCEED will determine the
prerequisites and guidelines for integrating principles and practices of Total
Quality Management into the engineering curriculum, engineering management, and
engineering processes.