* 9109634
* Processes of Social Referencing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Tedra Walden, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/1995
* USD 190,977.00

Infants and young children are active information processors and they seek
information that they can use in deciding how to behave in a variety of
situations, particularly those that are novel or stressful. One source of
information to which even young children learn to pay attention is the behavior
of other people, particularly emotional reactions to events as they occur. That
is, other people's reactions are an important source of information about
hazards and opportunities in the world. By the end of the first year of life
infants notice and base their behavior partly on reactions communicated to them
by other people. This series of studies will investigate processes of social
referencing and their development in infants and young children. Social
referencing refers to the use of another's interpretation of an event as basis
for forming one's own interpretation of the meaning of that event and as a basis
for subsequent responses to that event. Specifically, this program of research
will follow-up findings obtained in my previous work which indicated that some
children did not show behavior regulation in response to parental affective
communications; and that this effect was associated with parental contingency,
an issue in the timing of information. The effect of contingency is proposed to
operate via infant attention, with noncontingent messages occurring in
nonoptimal state of attention with regard to linking the message with the
intended referent. Projects will 1) investigate the development of infant
attention and link social referencing outcomes with messages received in optimal
and nonoptimal state of attention, 2) experimentally manipulate the occurrence
of parental messages to occur in optimal and nonoptimal state of attention, and
3) investigate the contribution of infant affect prior to and during receipt of
parental messages to social referencing outcomes. These projects will contribute
to our understanding of processes that underlie social referencing and
facilitate or inhibit the transmission of social influence the transmission of
social influence from one person to another. Thus, they will add to our
knowledge of how this significant form of social information is communicated to
and used by very young children in dealing with events.