* 9109425
* RIA:  Spatial Coherence for Determining Mode Structure in   Optoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Betty Lise Anderson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/1993
* USD 66,723.00

Although it is not generally possible to observe directly the optical field
distribution in optical waveguiding devices, one approach to obtaining the
information is to examine the spatial coherence function (SCF) of the emitted
beam. Very little information has been published on the spatial coherence of
optoelectronic devices due to the cumbersome nature of the usual measurement
technique (i.e. Young's double slit), and the relatively low optical powers in
these devices. A new fiber- based interferometric technique has been developed
by the principal investigator, which, for the first time, allows the direct and
repeatable measurement of spatial coherence of low-power light beams. It is
planned in this Research Initiation Award to use the measured SCF to determine
the mode distribution in the cavities of laser diodes. Three possible approaches
are proposed: 1) a non-rigorous first order analysis based on invoking the Van
Cittert- Zernike Theorem (not strictly applicable to coherent sources such as
lasers, but coherence effects can be removed by time-averaging); 2) an approach
following that of Spano, i.e. writing down expressions for the first few modes
in an optical cavity and predicting the SCF, then using the measured SCF to
extract the weight for each mode; and 3) adapting the algorithm of Tervonen et
al, who presents a method for computing the mode distribution from the SCF for
Hermite-Gaussian modes (fiber), to planar waveguides such as those used in laser
diodes and optoelectronic integrated circuits.