* 9109298
* Multiagent Search Algorithms for Learning &amp; Planning in     Colony-Style Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Michael Lemmon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 01/31/1994
* USD 59,970.00

Direct implementation of the sensory-cognitive motor triad for intelligent
robotic systems will generally place severe demands on the computing,
communication, and memory resources of these systems. One solution to this
problem has been to distribute the triad's functionality among various physical
components of the robot. The colony-style robot ı1! and its predecessor ı2!
(subsummation architecture) represent related methods for achieving this
functional distribution. Colony-style robots use a collection(ie., colony) of
hierarchically inhibited agents to control the robot. Existing colony-style
robots suffer several disadvantages limiting their utility as autonomous system.
These disadvantages involve problems in determining the robot's underlying
control hierarchy and the inability of existing systems to save and use prior
experience. This project uses multiagent processing paradigms called multiagent
search strategies of MASS algorithms ı3! to solve the deficiencies of current
colony-style systems. MASS algorithms ar inspired by recent work with
competitively and cooperatively inhibited neural networks ı3!ı4!. It can be
shown, using statistical mechanical arguments, that competitive MASS algorithms
can form minimum entropy representations of density functions. This project uses
that analytical formalism to develop MASS algorithms capable of learning the
components and structure of the colony-style control hierarchy. The research
also explores how "cooperative" MASS can be used to realize fully discretized
solution of Bellman's dynamic programming equation, and uses this capability to
devise a method for implementing long term memory and path planning capabilities
in colony-style robots. The project will fully develop, through simulation and
analysis, the MASS algorithms needed to realize memory, learning, and planning
in colony-style robots. The research will also investigate extensions of this
approach to more complex systems such as flexible manufacturing systems.