* 9109566
* The Use of Computers in Offices:  Impact on Job Stress and  Quality of Working Life
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Pascale Carayon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 70,000.00

This study examines the impact of computers on job stress and quality of working
life. The main characteristic of the conceptual model in this study is that
stress effects are determined by a combination of technology and job
characteristics. The way work is organized and jobs are structured plays an
important role in the relation between computer technology and job stress. The
research model is tested with a population of office work (clerical workers and
professionals) using various computer technology from one public service
organization. The research uses multiple data collection methods (questionnaire,
interviews and log-in's), multiple sources of information (employees,
supervisors, information systems personnel), and multiple times of data-
collection (2 times separated by one year). The longitudinal design will allow
testing of the time-lagged and cumulative effects of computer technology on job
stress, and the study of "natural" changes in computer technology
characteristics. A four-week diary is conducted to measure computer technology
characteristics and mood states and to examine the relationships between these
variables, and job design and other measures of job stress. This focused study
of the use of computers by office workers in one organization can increase our
theoretical knowledge about the impact of computer use on job stress and quality
of working life.