* 9109287
* Parallel Algorithms For Intelligent Imaging And Vision At   Low SNR
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Badrinath Roysam, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 12/31/1993
* USD 60,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop algorithms that will enable
intelligent imaging add vision systems to operate robustly and rapidly with very
noisy sensor data. Current methods perform poorly in this regime due to a lack
of well-defined optimality properties, `brittleness' of the underlying discrete
representations, and a deluge of processing inconsistencies and noise artifacts.
The improved performance is achieved by a cooperative solution of low-level
signal processing and high- level object recognition tasks subject to numeric
and symbolic constraints, instead of the classical sequential processing method.
The overall approach is Bayesian, and is formulated as the minimization of an
energy surface. All the image-processing operations result automatically as by
products of a gradient- based optimization process. This includes the
synergistic interaction of low and high-level variables, satisfaction of pattern
constraints, and feedback of high-level modelling information. From an
architectural standpoint, the proposed method offers a valuable uniform strategy
for parallel computation, which is duly exploited. This work is expected to
fundamentally impact applications that are required to operate with noisy sensor
data in a limited time frame. Encouraging preliminary results have been computed
on a DAP massively- parallel processor.