* 9109009
* The Strategic Role of Debt: Can Leverage Influence           Bargaining Outcomes?
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Kathryn Spier, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 06/30/1993
* USD 21,412.00

This project investigates the strategic role that leverage plays during the
renegotiation of contracts with senior stakeholders. In particular, the
substitution of debt for equity allows shareholders, defined as junior claimants
with discretion over investment decisions, to bargain advantageously with the
union. The notion is that equity withdrawal in combination with high leverage
credibly alters the shareholders' ex post incentives to invest unless the
union's claim on the firm is renegotiated. The first part of the project
considers a model in which the firm's profitability and investment opportunities
are commonly known. Two types of contract renegotiation will be explored; in the
first wages are renegotiated, and in the second both wage and debt contracts are
renegotiated. Preliminary results suggest that high leverage will only be chosen
in less profitable states of nature when future investment opportunities appear
promising. The shareholders' ability to alter the capital structure of the firm
leads to an inefficient allocation of risk. The second part of the project
involes extending the basic model to incorporate incomplete information. It is
reasonable to suppose that the shareholders have better information than the
other stakeholders regarding the firm's future profitability and/or investment
opportunities. Debt may then signal the firm's profitability. Informational
asymmetries will lead to breakdowns in negotiations, and thus an inefficiency
will be generated by suboptimal investment decisions. This research will make a
significant contribution to our understanding of the strategic use of debt and
the capital structure problem.