* 9109416
* RIA:  Brittleness Effects on the Structural Response of     Strain-Softening Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Joseph Labuz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1994
* USD 69,813.00

Strain softening is a characteristic displayed in several materials encountered
in civil engineering. For example, rock, concrete, and dense soil exhibit the
behavior where the tangent modulus decreases from an initial positive value and
becomes negative as strain increases. When softening is involved with a
structural component, however, an internal snap-back instability may occur, with
the softening branch taking on a positive slope. Failures of this type would be
catastrophic even in a displacement-controlled setting and must be prevented.
The objective of this research is to develop and apply a theory of brittleness
in order to predict the global behavior of a structure composed of a strain-
softening material. An elastic-plastic constitutive law will be adoptive for the
local strain components, while the softening behavior will be described in terms
of displacement components through a cohesive-zone model of fracture.
Experiments will be conducted in a closed-loop, servo-hydraulic testing system
to capture the post-failure regime and to evaluate the necessary material
parameters. The softening response of concrete beams in three-point bending will
be studied by varying the geometry, size, and constraint, while recording the
acoustic emissions from the failure process. Acoustic emission testing in
proposed as a viable nondestructive technique to detect the onset of an
instability. This research will provide an analytical explanation and present
experimental evidence of the snap-through versus snap-back behavior of strain-
softening beams.