* 9109492
* The Behavior of Tests for Structural Change in Dynamic      Econometric Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Pierre Perron, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1994
* USD 91,437.00

There is an extensive statistics and econometrics literature on statistical
tests for structural changes at an unknown time. The research on these tests
reflect their important role in getting accurate, unbiased estimates of economic
relationships from time series data. The contribution of this project comes from
providing a better understanding of the properties of existing tests for
structural change and from developing new tests with better properties. These
tests are then used to improve empirical studies in macroeconomics and financial
economics. This project analyzes the behavior of tests for structural change in
a time series context that ultimately allows for series having a general
correlation structure and possible nonstationarity, either of the form of a
polynomial time trend or of a stochastic nature induced by the presence of a
unit root. The components of the investigation consist of the following: 1)
Analysis of the finite sample properties of current available tests for
structural change which allow for the presence of serial correlation, e.g.,
CUSUM, Chow test, LR test, and others; 2) Explanation of the finite sample
behavior using non-standard asymptotic distribution theory, e.g., continuous-
time asymptotic and small-sigma asymptotic; 3) Development of alternative
statistical procedures that have better finite sample properties; 4) Extensions
of currently available procedures to the case where the time series is
characterized by either a deterministic or stochastic trend; 5) Derivation of
the asymptotic distributions and the analysis of the finite sample properties
for tests for structural change with trending; 6) Empirical application to
issues related to macroeconomic variables with special emphasis on testing for a
change in the trend function of a univariate time series.