* 9109200
* Investigation of the Electrochemical Oligomerization of     Methylphenyldichlorosilane
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Judith Durham, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 06/30/1993
* USD 17,908.00

The planning grant involves a study of low molecular weight oligomers formed in
the electrochemical polymerization of methylphenyldichlorosilane. The major
focus will be on the separation and identification of the oligomers which have
degrees of polymerization (DP) of 2, 3 and 4 with particular emphasis on the
diastereomers formed at each stage of the oligomerization. This preliminary
research will be carried out in two stages: 1. Optimization of conditions for
the separation of the low molecular weight oligomers on both an analytical and a
preparative scale. The oligomers will be obtained from the dehydrodimerization
of methylphenylsilane. The optimum conditions for the separation of low
molecular weight oligomers and their diastereomers by HPLC will be determined
along with the use of flash chromatography for preparative scale separation of
the oligomers. 2. Optimization of conditions for the electrochemical
oligomerization of methylphenyldichlorosilane. The electrochemical
polymerization of methylphenyldichlorosilane will be carried out according to
the method of Dunogues with the exception that the production of the low
molecular weight oligomers will be followed by HPLC as the reaction proceeds.
The reaction conditions will be varied in order to maximize the yields of the
oligomers with DP = 2, 3 and 4. Isomers will be separated and characterized. %%%
Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior independent Federal
research support to develop a competitive research project. This project
involves the electrochemical polymerization of organochlorosilanes and their
subsequent characterization by chromatography.