* 9109852
* Monogamy and Aggression
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1991,06/30/1995
* George Barlow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 06/30/1995
* USD 213,931.00

This project explores the relationship between a male and a female in a
monogamous pair of fish, the Midas cichlid of Nicaragua. As is typical of
monogamous species, males and females look alike and have the same behavior
patterns. Pair formation is accompanied by high levels of threat display as each
sex probes to determine that the other has the wherewithal to obtain and protect
a breeding territory, and to defend the eggs and young against predators. When
arbitrarily selected, only about 50% of pairs put together successfully mate;
aggression gets out of control in the others. Some fish lose their dark pigments
and become strikingly gold in color. The gold-colored fish inhibit aggression in
their opponents; thus nature has provided a unique experimental tool for
exploring pair relationships. The experiments are of two types. In the first,
Dr. Barlow will test three alternative hypotheses in aquaria. Each makes
different predictions about the success of pairing depending on the
aggressiveness of the individuals. In the second experiment, Dr. Barlow will
explore the relationship between color, aggressiveness, and sex, using a large
pool situation. In the field, the fish mate predominantly with those of the same
color, but experiments have proved that they have no preferences by color that
would predict such an outcome. The effect of gold color on aggression probably
produces assortative mating in the field; if so, this can tell us something
important about mate compatibility. Dr. Barlow will also make a field trip to
Nicaragua to test conclusions and predictions. This project departs from the
prevailing vogue. Current theory on mating has led to an emphasis on polygynous
species, in which the sexes look strikingly different from one another, mate
quickly, then separate. Mates in monogamous species remain together and have a
greater need to adjust aggressiveness. The Midas cichlid offers the possibility
of being a model species for understanding intersexual aggression in monogamous
species in general. Note that spousal abuse is exceedingly common in humans; in
the USA, a spouse is abused on average every 15 seconds. Finally, the Midas
cichlid is the most important food fish in Nicaragua; information about its
reproductive behavior is useful in managing and culturing this species.