* 9110285
* Research Initiation Awards:  Screening Vs. Hydrogen Bondin  in Chain Molecules
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* J. Richard Elliott, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1994
* USD 74,900.00

This program will convert an extremely complicated problem into two more
tractable problems and provide initial results which point the way for future
developments. The major complexity which develops when considering ways that
associating chains interact with themselves and solvents is the coupling between
the ways that atoms on the same chain screen each other vs. the ways association
sites seek to overcome this screening. Screening by itself is complicated by
considerations of chain length, position on the chain, and flexibility of the
chain. Hydrogen bonding is complicated by its short-range nature, orientational
dependence, the need to match donors with acceptors, and the possibilities of
forming rings or multiple branches. When these phenomena occur together as in
many systems of interest to chemical engineers, polymer scientists, and
molecular biologists, approaches to a molecular-based description can become
either too cumbersome too limited. To resolve this coupling into the two
separate components, molecular dynamics computer simulations of hard chain
molecules with square-well hydrogen bonding sites are proposed in conjunction
with an integral equation theory of chain molecules. Coordinating these two
complementary methods will provide a firm basis for making predictions of
properties like solution viscosity, chain conformation, polymer blending
miscibility, and solubilities of organic contaminants in groundwater.