* 9110019
* US-Poland MSC Joint Fund Research on Quantum-Classical      Dynamics Studies for Proton Transfer Process in             Enzymes
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1992,04/01/1994
* Bogdan Lesyng, Warsaw University of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 04/01/1994
* USD 0.00

In this project, Dr. Bogdan Lesyng of the Warsaw University of Technology, will
cooperate with Dr. Andrew J. McCammon of the University of Houston under the
U.S.-Poland Marie Sklodowska- Curie Joint Fund to research "Quantum-Classical
Dynamics Studies for Proton Transfer Process in Enzymes (MSC)." The researchers
will study phospholipase A2 and either a serine proteinase or carbonic
anhydrase. They will treat the enzymes as mixed quantum-classical dynamical
systems. The time-dependent Schroedinger equation will be used to describe the
proton dynamics. The researchers will describe the dynamics of heavy atoms by
the Newtonian equations of motion with the inclusion of Hellmann-Feynman forces
generated by the quantum particles. They will also simulate other quantum events
in the enzyme active sites, like a nucleophilic substitution at the substrate
carbonyl carbon. They plan to use a well-documented thermodynamic cycle-
perturbation technique to simulate mutations of selected hydrogen bond network
groups into neutral or hydrophobic groups, which they will then analyze. This
project in biophysics fulfills the program objectives of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.