* 9110424
* Symbolic-Numeric Methods and Data Visualization Strategies  for Scientific Concurrent Computation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Richard Peskin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* George K. Lea
* 02/28/1995
* USD 537,770.00

The research project "Scientific User Interface for Parallel Computing" and is
concerned with the design and implementation of user interface systems that
allow engineers and scientists to prototype differential equation based computer
models without the need to undertake computer programming, per se. A system,
called SCENE (Scientific Computation Environment for Numerical Experimentation)
has been developed which allows its users to enter models in mathematical form,
effect interactive solution to those models, examine the output in a variety of
graphical formats, and invoke "computational steering" to alter the models
during run-time. SCENE makes use of a variety of disciplines, including
Computational Engineering, Symbolic - Numeric Computation, and Computational
Mathematics. This research will extend SCENE to a wider class of problems,
larger problems, and problems which normally required a mix of numeric and
symbolic procedures. Following is a overview of the research extension:
Computational Engineering: Interactive user specification of filter functions
(local or non-local) for SCENE graphics and visualization tools Object-oriented
data management with large data sets distributed over numerous resources and
with concurrent access strategies Symbolic - Numeric Computation: Alternate and
more efficient tools for the SCENE ordinary and partial differential equation
solver Symbolic domain algebra for private versus shared memory allocation in
parallel computations Domain algebra methods for use in SCENE's automatic
meshing sub-system Computational Mathematics: Incorporate into SCENE symbolic
computation and mathematics expert system for singular perturbation problems
Generalized Flux Balance methods for parallel partial differential equation
solver Education and Human Resources Development: Implement a summer high school
science/math teacher - student program to complement our present undergraduate
participation program