* 9110901
* Collaborative Research:  Rational Expectations and          Learning:  An Experimental Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Raymond Battalio, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 07/31/1993
* USD 58,367.00

The purpose of this project is to analyze the effects on market prices and
market efficiency of learning on the part of individuals participating in that
market. There is good evidence that suppliers and demanders eventually learn
enough about the market to form rational expectations about the market they
participant in, in the sense that they do not persist in making predictable
errors that reduces market efficiency. The way in which market participants
learn about a market can affect its efficiency; first by affecting how quickly
participants learn about the market, and second by affecting equilibrium prices
and quantities. An important part of learning about a market is learning about
other suppliers and demanders in the market. This project will analyze learning
by the use of experimental markets in which suppliers determine output before
any trades occur. This production before sale situation mimics agricultural
markets as well as many other markets in which supplies' forecasts of market
prices have an important effect on market prices. The most precise learning
models are the statistically-based models of Bayesian learning and regression
learning. In this study the implications of both types of learning are examined.
This research is important because it will give us a better understanding of how
learning affects the efficient functioning of markets.