* 9110254
* Research Initiation Award:  Development of a Systematic     Approach to Uncertainty Modeling for Robust Control Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Gary Balas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/1994
* USD 70,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop a systematic approach to
uncertainty modeling from experimental data for robust control. In the past
decade, theoretical developments in robust control have lead to more rigorous
and applicable design techniques which allow the explicit incorporation of plant
uncertainty into the problem formulation ı1,2,3,4!. These developments provide a
fresh approach that can be exploited to control complex systems and achieve
performance specifications which were unthinkable several years ago. The key
link currently missing between these theoretical developments and their
application in industry is a systematic approach to the generation of
performance and uncertainty descriptions. The importance of accurate
characterizations of uncertainty descriptions was vividly shown in the design of
controllers for an experimental flexible structure ı5!. Controllers synthesized
for "accurate" descriptions of the plant uncertainty yielded significant
improvements in system performance when compared with other less accurate
uncertainty descriptions. The proposed research will develop a methodology for
attributing the error between theoretical system model and experimental data to
uncertainty and noise model in a linear fractional framework which is compatible
with the structure value mu-methodology. These same techniques can also be
employed to develop performance descriptions in for this framework. The mu-
framework will then be used to analyze and synthesize complex system controllers
with these new performance and uncertainty descriptions. The improved modeling
of a physical system for the purpose of control design will provide a two fold
benefit: improved robustness properties and closed-loop system performance of
the controller.