* 9110139
* Knightian Uncertainty, General Equilibrium Theory and       Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Truman Bewley, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1994
* USD 93,471.00

The behavior of labor markets seems extremely puzzling from the point of view
of economic theory and especially the theory of competitive equilibrium. Perhaps
the biggest puzzle is the insensitivity of wages to the unemployment rate. High
unemployment should represent an excess supply of labor, yet the unemployed do
not seem to bid down wages very effectively. If labor markets acted like truly
competitive markets, then wages should plunge in the face of high unemployment,
just as stock and commodity markets sometimes do. Yet wage cuts in recessions
seem to be moderate and infrequent. Another puzzle is that wages do not always
respond immediately and completely to changes in the consumer price index,
whereas most theories of wages determine real, not nominal wages. A third puzzle
is the occurrence of strikes. Strikes seem to cause an unnecessary loss to both
employer and employees, since it should be possible to anticipate the
consequences of a strike and reach an agreement without one. The thesis of this
project is that these and other puzzles in economics can be best explained by a
new theory of decision making under uncertainty that captures the instability or
fragility of expectations. This grant also supports theoretical research on
general equilibrium models which express macroeconomic phenomena. The
distinctive feature of these models is that firms are able to compete
effectively only in the long-run; in the short-run firms have difficulty
invading each others markets. This difficulty would make firms have a low short-
run elasticity of demand for labor. The rivalry among firms would be expressed
by a non- cooperative equilibrium. The conditions under which such an
equilibrium will exist are rigorously defined. Unemployment is shown to exist
and fluctuate. The determinants of the average growth rate of the economy are
analyzed and shown to offer a plausible explanation of the wide variation of
growth rates among countries. The welfare losses resulting from unemployment and
from the monopoly power of businesses are estimated. The project compares the
costs and benefits of wage controls within such a theoretical framework. The
project also analyzes government policies controlling inflation.