* 9110039
* Nonparametric Estimation of Econometric Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Whitney Newey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1995
* USD 173,190.00

Semiparametric estimators are used intensively in applied work as a way of
avoiding detailed assumptions on model specifications and as a way of avoiding
difficult computational problems. The contribution of this project comes from
developing a general asymptotic theory for semiparametric estimators,
investigating methods for nonparametric estimation of structural equation
models, and using nonparametric estimators of consumer surplus for an empirical
analysis of gasoline demand. Knowledge of the asymptotic variance of an
estimator is important for large sample inference, efficiency, and as a guide to
the specification of regularity conditions. This research develops a general
formula with a relatively simple set of regularity conditions for the asymptotic
variance of semiparametric estimators. This is an important contribution because
at present asymptotic variance calculations for semiparametric estimators are
model specific and usually involve a great deal of tedious detail. This project
will make semiparametric estimators much easier to use. Nonparametric estimators
have gained wide attention in the past few years in econometrics because they
impose even fewer restrictions than semiparametric estimators. But nonparametric
models are difficult to interpret and their usefulness in applied research has
been demonstrated in a limited number of cases. This project applies
nonparametric regression models to estimation of demand curves of the types most
often used in applied research. Estimators of exact consumer surplus and
deadweight loss will be derived from the demand curve estimators. The research
includes an application to gasoline demand. This represents an important
contribution because estimators of consumer surplus and deadweight loss are the
most widely used welfare measures in applied areas of economics such as public
finance. The results from the empirical research will provide new insights into
the magnitude of welfare loss from carbon taxes that are currently being
considered as one of the policy tools for reducing emissions of greenhouse
gases.