* 9110280
* RIA: Thermo-Viscoplastic Deformation and Failure of         Crystalline Layered Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Mohammed Zikry, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jerome Sackman
* 06/30/1994
* USD 60,000.00

The primary objective of the proposed research is the development of a thermo-
mechanical framework for the analysis of large plastic deformation and failure
modes in layered metallic crystalline materials on the physical scale required
in the fabrication of microelectronic and opto-electronic devices. Cracks,
voids, and surface flaws have severely limited the synthesis and the processing
of layered structures needed in the fabrication of electronic components. The
proposed thermo-viscoplastic theoretical and computational formulation will
provide realistic predictions of damage accumulation and material instabilities
in artificially structured materials. In the proposed analysis, an investigation
of material failure modes that arise due to non- uniform large plastic
deformation modes, the growth and the coalescence of voids, and the distribution
of stresses, plastic strains, and temperatures near the interfaces of the
layered single crystals will be undertaken. Based on the thermo-mechanical
characterization of failure, methodologies will be suggested for the damage-free
layering of metallic crystalline structures. A successful accomplishment of
these proposed objectives would provide a more fundamental understanding of the
inherent crystalline constraints on the layering of artificially structured
materials.