* 9110945
* Research Initiation: Economic Determination of SpecificationLevels and Delivery Priorities for Semiconductor Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Kyung Min, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pius J. Egbelu
* 05/31/1994
* USD 60,536.00

The objectives of this project are to construct and analyze a new allocation
mechanism for semiconductor products by simultaneously determining specification
levels and delivery priorities and to mathematically characterize and analyze
the impacts on profitability of downgrading, complementarity, and
substitutability of semiconductor products. The essential idea of the model is
that the producer offers a "product line" of priority classes. The producer's
allocation rule is such that higher priority classes are supplied with higher
specification level chips regardless of production outcome. The product line
design and allocation rule allows the producer's profit maximization problem to
be cast as a non-linear programming formulation. In estimating supply quantity
functions from actual production data, the least square fit as well as kernel
estimation method and maximum penalized likelihood method will be employed. For
numerical profit maximization and subsequent sensitivity analysis, a standard
non-linear optimization software will be utilized. The significance of this
research is that it simultaneously aims (1) to establish a systematic method to
determine the optimal specification levels of semiconductor products from an
economic perspective, (2) to improve the performance of semiconductor producers
in on-schedule delivery of chips, (3) to better understand downgrading,
complementarity, and substitutability of semiconductor products with respect to
profitability of products.