* 9110573
* Automated Experimentation and Analysis for Robust Producv   Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1992,01/04/1993
* Susan Sanchez, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 01/04/1993
* USD 41,596.00

Frequency-domain experiments (FDEs) have been considered for experiments when
errors are correlated and time-lagged responses may exist. Although to date the
application of FDEs has been largely restricted to simulation meta-model
identification, this approach is appropriate in many manufacturing settings. In
much industrial experimentation, limited equipment or operator availability may
mandate the use of sequential data collection. Analysis techniques which deal
with correlated errors translate into shorter required data collection times, as
do those which allow for the study of time-lagged responses. This research
effort will combine the philosophy of robust product design with the methodology
of frequency-domain experiments. Selection approaches will then be used to
identify desirable product design configurations. The resulting experimental
design and analysis methodology should be highly suited to the automated
manufacturing environment, where the assumptions required for traditional
experimental design and analysis may not be applicable. Additionally, in order
to ensure the applicability of the work and facilitate the technological
transfer, visits will be conducted to manufacturing firms currently employing
off-line quality design or those with automated data collection capabilities.
These plant visits will allow the investigators to ascertain the issues most
critical to the implementation of this research.