* 9110671
* Four Semiannual Carnegie-Rochester Conferences on Public    Policy: Rochester April 1992, April 1993 - Carnegie Mellon, November 1991, November 1992, in Pittsburgh, PA
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Charles Plosser, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1993
* USD 150,000.00

The Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy is designed to foster
research and discussion of major policy issues by economists from academia and
policy making institutions. Economists in universities are often unfamiliar with
the constraining effect of institutional arrangements in the shaping of policy
issues and policies and economists in government are often less aware of current
research and its implications. A central purpose of the conference is to provide
the interaction between these groups in order to improve the economic analysis
of policy issues and policy. The specific aims of the conference are to: 1)
develop the implications of recent research for policy; 2) bring together
economists with different approaches or conclusions to narrow the differences;
and 3) to uncover the analysis used by institutions that set policies. The
conferences are held semi-annually at the University of Rochester and Carnegie
Mellon University. About 40 participants plus faculty and graduate students from
the host institutions are invited to each conference. Participants from U.S. and
foreign central banks and U.S. and international agencies attend regularly.
Special care is taken to involve promising younger scholars. The paper and
formal discussions are edited and prepared for publication to broaden the impact
of the conference.