* 9110742
* Structure and Conformation of Biopolymer Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Patricia Callahan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 12/31/1992
* USD 18,000.00

The adsorption of proteins to solid surfaces is encountered in many fields of
science and technology. In many cases, protein adsorption is a favorable, if not
a necessary component of the application and yet the exact nature of the
adsorption mechanisms and interfacial structures has not been determined. The
outstanding questions in the area of protein adsorption to solid surfaces
include: 1) the determination of the surface conformation and preferred
orientation of adsorbed molecules, 2) an understanding of competitive adsorption
effects, and 3) the ability to predict surface properties based on the chemical
components of the solid and protein alone. This project will answer several of
these questions by application of the fairly young technique of waveguide Raman
spectroscopy to the study of interfacial protein conformations. The specific
applications are to understand protein adsorption to polymer filtration
membranes encountered in bioprocessing and solid-phase immunoassays. In
conjunction with macroscopic adsorption studies, e.g., adsorption isotherms and
the determination of adsorbed thicknesses, the waveguide Raman studies will
provide detailed molecular structure information concerning the adsorbed states
of proteins on these types of biopolymer surfaces. One of the advantages of
waveguide Raman spectroscopy is that structural information can be obtained from
both the adsorbed protein layers and the underlying polymer substrates. Another
advantage lies in its ability to determine orientational information about
adsorbed layers. By correlating the data obtained in the macroscopic and
molecular level experiments, it will be possible to gain predictive ability in
the understanding of protein-polymer interactions. %%% Research Planning Grants
enable women who have not had prior independent Federal research support to
develop a competitive research project. This project involves the use of
waveguide Raman spectroscopy for the study of interfacial interactions of
proteins with solids. Such interactions occur throughout nature but are not well
understood. This project will lead to a better understanding of these processes.