* 9110721
* Research In Disjunctive Logic Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Arcot Rajasekar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 07/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

This project focuses on research in disjunctive logic programming. There are two
main themes: extend the procedural semantics of disjunctive logic programming to
make it a viable programming language, and build a programming environment
similar to PROLOG based on the above semantics. The work uses the procedural
semantics of disjunctive logic programs using SLO-resolution. It is planned to
extend the definition of SLO-resolution to answer positive and negative queries
from normal disjunctive logic programs and to provide indefinite answer
substitutions for variables in a query. It is planned to study the properties of
disjunctive logic programs and identify classes of programs for which ancestry-
resolution checking can be restricted without compromising completeness. The
study will increase the efficiency of executing disjunctive logic programs. The
intent is to augment SLO-resolution with these techniques. It is intended to
build upon the theoretical studies and implement a programming system, called
DISLOG, using SLO-resolution. DISLOG will be an extension of PROLOG, inheriting
its stack-based environment, control structure and backtracking feature. The
significance of the research will be to extend the use of logic as a programming
language to a larger subset of predicate calculus. Due to its capability to
solve problems with multiple extensions and indefinite information, DISLOG will
provide an enhanced representation and reasoning environment for solving
problems in artificial intelligence.