* 9110764
* Research Initiation Award:  Synthesis of Robust Controllers for Systems with Structured Uncertainty
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Mustafa Khammash, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

This project concerns the development of new theory and techniques dealing with
the analysis and synthesis of control systems in the presence of uncertainty.
The main outcome of this project is a theory that provides a systematic means
for designing controllers which lead to systems possessing optimal stability and
performance properties despite the presence of plant and signal uncertainty.
This theory is based on the structured uncertainty model which allows the
inclusion of information about the sources of modelling uncertainty thus
minimizing conservatism in the analysis and design procedures. In addition, by
adopting the l-infinity signal norm, time domain objectives can be included in
the design in a natural way. The use of this norm distinguishes this approach
from other approaches and provides a novel way for addressing the issues
involved in controlling uncertain systems. The methods employed in the project
will take advantage of recently developed theory which makes possible the
analysis of system stability and performance robustness. Numerical algorithms
implementing the developed controller synthesis techniques will also be
developed and applied to practical examples. In addition, the theory for
robustness analysis will be extended to incorporate a larger class of systems
and to allow a better representation of disturbances and uncertainty.