* 9110394
* Dissertation Research:  Environmental Causes and Behavioral Tactics Determining Variation in Vertical Migration:  Midday Stratification in a Pelagic Zooplankton
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1991,08/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 9,000.00

Diel vertical migration (DVM) is the daily up and down movement of diverse
populations in both freshwater lakes and oceans. These long migrations cause
daily, local fluctuations in zooplankton density, therefore directly affecting
grazing rates on phytoplankton and energy transfer to fish populations. Field
research and numerical simulations have identified both the ecological
conditions under which zooplankton production can be maximized, along with the
constraints on survival, growth and reproduction imposed on alternative DVM
behaviors. Accordingly, it appears that variation in DVM, observed in the field,
is adaptive. However, mechanisms causing such variation in DVM are unknown,
largely because little is known about the importance of genetic variation
relative to environmental change. The objectives of this study are: (1) to
determine whether genetically different individuals in a population have
different DVM distributions in the field (2) the laboratory, determine whether
genetically different individuals respond in the same way to experimental
environments designed to simulate field conditions, and whether those responses
are similar in different environments. The study objectives will provide an
understanding of the causes of variability in stratification behavior of the
zooplankter Daphnia galeata mendotae. Since stratification behavior largely
determines habitat range, this study offers insight into not only mechanisms of
DVM but also data on basic zooplankton ecology, determinants of habitat choice,
along with maintenance of polymorphisms. Finally, understanding mechanisms of
zooplankton DVM means a better understanding of behaviors influencing food
availability for fish and grazing rates on phytoplankton.