* 9110149
* U.S.-Kenya Cooperative Research:  An Atlas Of Recent AfricanClimate (1979-1990) (Science in Developing Countries)
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1991,11/30/1993
* T. Krishnamurti, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1993
* USD 20,000.00

Technical Narrative This U.S.-Kenyan collaborative research project involving
Florida State University and University of Nairobi, is in the general area of
climatology and numerical weather prediction. Project funding will enable travel
and a four-month site visit at Florida State for the co-investigators, Dr. T.N.
Krishnamurti (Forida State) and L.J. Ogallo (University of Nairobi), to prepare
an Atlas of Recent African Climate, covering the period 1979-1990. This effort
will expand and update an Atlas recently published by the co-PIs that covered
the climate of the continent over the five-year period 1980-1984. The data for
each of the 144 months for the following variables will be processed:
tropospheric winds, temperature, humidity, geopotential heights, sea level
pressure, sea surface temperature, vegetation index, rainfall distribution and
the field of the outgoing longwave radiation. The Atlas will include sections on
data quality, data validation, data analysis and detailed sections on the
interpretation of the monthly mean fields, anomalies and intra-seasonal and
inter- annual variability. Once completed, the data sets will all reside on
diskettes and tapes and will become available to young scientists at the
University of Nairobi. This project in climate modeling fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
States and Kenya to combine their expertise and pool research resources to
improve the ability to predict severe droughts and to monitor climate change.