* 9110703
* Support for the SSRC Committee for Research on Global       Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* David Featherman, Social Science Research Council
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Holly
* 01/31/1994
* USD 207,529.00

Increased concern about global environmental change in recent years has
highlighted the need for social scientific research on the human dimensions of
global environmental change in addition to analyses by natural and physical
scientists. A number of organizations have addressed issues related to research
needs and opportunities with respect to this topic; foremost among those groups
has been the Social Science Research Council (SSRC). Since its establishment in
1989, the SSRC's Committee for Research on Global Environmental Change has
organized interdisciplinary consortiums to conduct research on critical
problems, sponsored workshops and conferences to bring together scientists,
developed plans for dissertation, fellowship, and summer study programs, and
coordinated U.S. research activities with those of other organizations,
including the International Social Science Council (ISSC), the International
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP), the International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis (IIASA), and the Consortium for International Earth Science
Information Network (CIESIN). This award will continue core support for the SSRC
Committee for Research on Global Environmental Change for two additional years.
The committee expects to continue establishment of interdisciplinary research
consortiums. Among the research topics under current consideration are
comparative examinations of landed property rights and the adoption of
technological innovations. The committee also will continue to develop plans for
and to implement innovative new forms of support for education, including
doctoral dissertation and post-doctoral fellowship programs. These and other
specific efforts of the committee will be supported with funds raised from other
sources. Through its ongoing work, the SSRC Committee for Research on Global
Environmental Change will continue to identify important research problems
related to the human dimensions of global environmental change that require
analyses by social scientists. It will help bring together scientists from many
different disciplines to address important conceptual and methodological issues,
and it will help organize interdisciplinary collaboratives to conduct research.
Through workshops, conferences, and other forums, the committee will continue to
attract attention to these important issues, and through new educational
programs, it will enable more social scientists to develop necessary research
skills and expertise.