* 9110714
* Research Initiation: Controlled Synthesis of Multi-ComponentUltrafine Ceramic Powders
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Uri Vandsburger, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/1994
* USD 70,000.00

Advances in ceramic materials hinge in a critical fashion on the initial powder
characteristics. Specifically, the requirements are: small particle size
(nanometer range), narrow size distribution and high purity. For
practical/economical reasons a continuous, as opposed to batch, generation
process, is preferable. To fulfill the required powder characteristics maximum
control over the fundamental physical and chemical processes during particle
formation is needed. The work addresses all these requirements, and offers a
system for continuous and controlled generation of fine multi-component ceramic
powders. The generation of the particles is done in the vapor phase from gaseous
and liquid reactants. The reactor is a multi-stream inverted H2/O2/invert
diffusion flame. Electric fields are used to control particle size via control
of coagulation and residence time. The powder characteristics will be measured
in-situ with optical (non-intrusive) techniques. The work will include:
demonstration of principle; mapping the domain of the controlling parameters;
comparing results with theoretical models and their modification; and
examination of closed loop process control strategies based on the in-situ
powder measurements.