* 9110747
* Research Initiation: Computer Generated Computer NumericallyControlled Machining Feedrates with In-Process Tuning
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Barry Fussell, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 12/31/1993
* USD 64,991.00

This research effort is focused on a computer system for automatic generation
of feedrates for improving the efficiency of Computer Numerically Controlled
(CNC) machining. Reliability is also improved by in-process adjustment of the
feedrates to handle material property and cutter geometry changes. The goals are
to be accomplished through: (1) integration of geometric and mechanistic end
milling models for volume calculations and automatic selection of feedrate for
milling sculptured surfaces; (2) in-process adjustment of the programmed
feedrate by comparing the actual cutting force (power) to the predicted force
(power). A program to automatically select the feedrates for complex sculptured
end milling cuts is to be developed from experimentally verified mechanistic and
geometric models of the end milling process. The program will be experimentally
tested using Numerically Controlled (NC) programs supplied to the research team
by an industrial partner. The programs are used for machining stamping dies for
complex sculptured surfaces. The results in terms of cutting time, tolerances,
and surface finish will be compared to industry results, where feeds and speeds
are set manually. On-line adjustment capability of the programed feedrates will
be added to the University of New Hampshire CNC machine to provide a method to
adapt the feedrates to different workpiece materials and cutter wear. This
project should lead to four advances in the state-of-the- art: (1) an improved
mechanistic model of the end milling process; (2) integration of mechanistic and
geometric models into one system; (3) method to calculate the necessary end
milling cutting feedrates based on geometric tolerance information; (4) an
experimentally proven on-line feedrate adjustment method.