* 9110900
* RIA: Dynamic Behavior and Response of Truss Structures Afterthe Onset of Progressive Collapse
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Ramesh Malla, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1994
* USD 69,920.00

The proposed research deals with investigating the dynamic characteristics and
response of truss structures during progressive collapse initiated by a sudden
failure of a member of a portion of the structures. In particular, it aims at
studying the following: i) changes in characteristics of the structure (e.g.,
natural frequencies and mode shapes) as the collapse of the structure
progresses, ii) response of the structure (e.g., displacements, stresses, etc.)
during the collapse, and iii) vibration transmission through the structure. The
sudden rupture or failure of members during the collapse of the structure will
be adequately represented by initial conditions, and then appropriate analytical
and numerical techniques will be employed/developed to solve the dynamic
problem. Results from this study are expected to contribute to understand (i)
the extent or role of dynamic effects due to sudden failure of members on total
collapsing of a truss- like structure, (ii) the probable path along which the
collapse progresses, (iii) the probable modes of member failures in the process,
and (iv) ways to prevent or minimize any potential collapsing if the structure.
The proposed investigation should be useful in practical applications of design
of truss-like structures, and in general, to fundamental research on
"progressive collapse" of structures on earth as well as in space.