* 9110614
* Molecular Fragmentation Studies Utilizing Ion-Ion Coincidence Techniques and Synchrotron Radiation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Tricia Ferrett, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 06/30/1993
* USD 18,000.00

Small halogenated methane, ethylene, and phosphorous compounds in the gas-phase
will be illuminated with tunable vacuum ultraviolet radiation and X-rays at
several synchrotron radiation facilities. X-ray absorption excites and/or
ionizes core electrons, eventually producing unstable doubly charged ions which
readily fragment into ion pairs. Ion-ion coincidence experiments will detect ion
pairs resulting from single and multiple bond rupture of the doubly charged
species. Results will help elucidate variations in molecular fragment- ation
patterns induced by site-selective core electron excita- tion as a function of
molecule size, halogen substitution, and excitation wavelength. This planning
grant will provide funds for equipment, faculty and undergraduate research
salaries, travel to synchrotron radiation facilities for collaborative
experiments, and publication costs. During the grant period, setup and
construction of the experimental apparatus at Carleton College will be nearly
completed and will involve undergraduate research students. An in-lab electron
gun used to simulate x-rays will be purchased and utilized to assemble and test
the time-of-flight ion mass spectrometer. Collabo- ration with a colleague on
experiments similar to those listed above will keep Dr. Ferrett involved with
new experiments in her field while providing needed expertise in ion coincidence
techniques. %%% Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior
independent Federal research support to develop a competitive research project.
This project involves the simultaneous detection of ions resulting from
decomposition of larger doubly charged ions thus providing critical information
about the nature of events taking place after site selective core electron
excitation.