* 9110125
* An Intelligent System for Automated Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Frank Settle, Virginia Military Institute
* Continuing grant
* David J. Curran
* 06/30/1995
* USD 123,600.00

In research supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the
Analytical Division, Prof. Settle, his co-workers, and students continue the
development of robotic systems for automation of the analytical chemistry
laboratory. Combining an expert system shell, statistical analysis routines, and
robots, they will strive to package classical wet chemistry analysis techniques
in a flexible, transferable manner so that any robot-equipped laboratory can
employ identical procedures and good laboratory practices. This promises to do
for titrimetric, spectrophotometric, and gravimetric methods what has already
occurred for more automated elemental analysis and mass spectrometric methods:
standardize procedures and quality control methods between laboratories. %%%
Settle and coworkers will continue their efforts to employ laboratory robots and
expert systems software to automate the analytical chemistry laboratory. By
taking the tedium out of measurements and putting repeatability in, they will
develop analytical methods with improved reliability and transferability between
laboratories. This will reduce the amount of repetitious method development that
will be needed in different laboratories attempting the same measurements. In
the long run, it will also reduce the cost of performing wet chemical
determinations while improving precision.