* 9110353
* Vibrational Spectra and Structure of Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1996
* Samuel Krimm, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1996
* USD 525,100.00

Infrared and Raman spectroscopy, when combined with normal mode analysis,
provides a powerful tool for studying structure and morphology of
macromolecules. Rigorous methods of analysis and their applications. The present
proposal extends in several new directions. (1) The recent analysis of the
longitudinal acoustic mode (LAM) of low-molecular-weight poly(ethylene oxide)
will be extended to higher-molecular-weight samples, whose LAM spectra indicate
the presence of complex folded-chain morphologies. (2) The recently refined
comprehensive vibrational force field for multiply-chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Will be used to analyze the conformational structure in chlorinated poly(vinyl
chloride) and to determine the chain conformation of poly(vinylidene chloride).
(3) Ab initio studies of force fields will be extended to two problems: the
determination of the force field of hydrogen-bonded amide groups, and the
development of molecular mechanics energy functions that, following their
recently demonstrated mathematical transformation, permit the accurate
reproduction of spectroscopic frequencies. These studies will advance their
capabilities in using vibrational spectra to study structure in macromolecules,
as well as enhance their understanding of specific polymeric systems.