* 9110110
* Research Initiation Awards:   Characterization of           Interdiffusion Between Layers of Langmuir-Blodgett          Multilayers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Mark Foster, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1993
* USD 69,740.00

The objective of this program is a quantitative characterization of the degree
of interdiffusion between layers of a Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) multilayer as well
as an understanding of the interdiffusion mechanism and identification of
important parameters. The study will focus on a model system containing two well
characterized materials, cadmium arachidate (CdA) and a substituted
polyglutamate (PG). The polyglutamate material has a demonstrated low mode loss
when used as an optical medium, and the system is chosen to suggest certain
characteristics of a potential organic optical device. Interdiffusion between
CdA layers separated by a PG bilayer barrier will be followed using neutron
reflectometry (NR) complemented with x-ray reflectometry (XR). Interface
profiles before and after diffusion will be inferred by reconciling experimental
reflectivities with simulated curves calculated using an established matrix
formalism. Potential ambiguities in interpretation will be minimized by the
combination of two complementary experimental probes, variation of contrast with
deuteration, and the use of system components which are well characterized. The
expected results will add greatly to the meager existing data on interdiffusion
between two-dimensional ordered layers. New insight into the mechanism and
controlling parameters of interdiffusion will potentially impact the design of
molecular scale organic devices and the study of transport in model biological
membranes. Specifically it will be shown if a novel liquid-crystalline-like
polymer acts as an effective diffusion barrier.