* 9110674
* Research Initiation Award:  A Fundamental Investigation of  the Freezing Process in Food Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1991,09/01/1992
* Elaine Scott, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 09/01/1992
* USD 35,138.00

The objectives of this project are to develop expressions for the thermal
properties of protein, fat, and carbohydrate food components during freezing.
These food components are considered to be the building blocks of food
materials. The specific objectives are to: 1) to identify standard materials for
use in food freezing studies which represent the basic food components; 2) to
construct phase diagrams for these materials; 3) to develop relationships
between temperature and unfrozen moisture content for each test material; and,
4) to develop thermal property relationships for these materials during
freezing. The first task is to identify protein, fat, and carbohydrate based
test materials which represent the basic components of foods. Then, phase
diagrams will be formulated from phase transition temperatures determined for
different concentrations of these materials from differential scanning
calorimetry experiments. The expressions for the thermal properties will be
based on thermodynamic relationships between temperature and moisture content
formulated from these phase diagrams. The building block concept represents a
novel approach to the investigation of the freezing process, and it has great
future potential for the expanded practical use of mathematical food freezing
models which require knowledge of the thermal properties. First of all, use of
this concept eliminates the need for freezing point depression data to be
available for different food products, and secondly, it could result in
simplified thermal property relationships which would facilitate the use of
complex multi-dimensional freezing models.