* 9110185
* Research Initiation:  Dynamic Dielectric Monitoring of      In-situ Consolidation of Thermoplastic Filament Winding
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Steven Liang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/1994
* USD 68,923.00

The project will study the fundamentals of monitoring in-situ consolidation of
thermoplastic composites in filament winding based on dynamic dielectric
analysis. In spite of its demonstrated advantages in production rate, cost, and
process flexibility, thermoplastic filament winding with in-situ consolidation
has not been widely accepted for industrial applications because of the high
void content of the wound part resulting from the variation of consolidation at
the filament lay down point. The investigation aims at identifying the degree of
thermoplastic resin consolidation at the lay down point through analyzing its
resin rheology properties by frequency-dependent electromagnetic sensing
methodology. The uniqueness of the research is the concept of imbedding dynamic
dielectric measurement in the compaction process to provide a near-field, non-
destructive, and non-intrusive sensing technique which enables the in-process
assessment of the critical material properties that directly contribute to the
part quality and productivity. The work will formulate the analytical basis of
the technique, establish the fundamental understanding of the relationship
between dynamic dielectric parameters (namely the permittivity, loss factor and
conductivity) and the in-situ consolidation process, demonstrate the concept
feasibility through simulation testings, and explore the advantages and
limitations of the methodology through prototype system implementation on a
filament winding station. The successful completion of this research is expected
to remove a major obstacle in the advancement of filament winding technology by
the establishment of a much needed in-process monitoring methodology. The
investigation will also open up new opportunities for feedback control and
optimization research in the critical area of intelligent processing of advanced
composites.