* 9110211
* Informational Imperfections and Economic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Douglas Bernheim, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1993
* USD 160,558.00

This project attempts to expand our understanding of social and economic
behavior in environments with imperfect information. The project consists of two
main parts. The first part of the project examines clustering, while the second
studies incomplete contracting. "Clustering" refers to situations in which
people act similarly, even though their preferences are different. Examples
include herd behavior (for example, the formation of cultural or sub-cultural
standards of behavior), the common practice of dividing estates equally among
heirs, and the proliferation of "me too" political candidates. This project
explores a theory of clustering based on two key assumptions: decision-makers
desire popularity or esteem, and actions are observable but true characteristics
are not. In a class of mathematical models, these assumptions produce clustering
of choices, even when true characteristics are not clustered. This part of the
study will lead to novel predictions about consumption behavior in various
markets. "Incomplete contracting" refers to the fact that contracts often fail
to cover many contingencies. This project explores a theory of incomplete
contracts based on two assumptions: certain actions are not observable by those
who enforce contracts (for example, courts or arbitrators), and parties to a
contract will interact again in the future. In a class of mathematical models,
these assumptions imply that parties to an explicit contract may leave some
provisions ambiguous in order to improve the implicit aspects of their
agreement. This part of the study will provide insights concerning why contracts
leave out certain contingencies even when including them does not seem very
costly.