* 9110907
* RIA:  Investigating the Exact Behavior of Helmholtz Equationin a Collinear Degenerate Four-Wave Mixing Arrangement
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Demetrios Christodoulides, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/1994
* USD 60,000.00

The one-dimensional vectorial Helmholtz equation in nonlinear isotropic Kerr
media is one of the most fundamental equations in nonlinear optics. By nature,
this equation is capable of describing any one- dimensional optical field
configuration in X(3) materials. As a result, it plays a central role in a
number of very important and potentially useful nonlinear interactions, such as
that of collinear degenerate four-wave mixing and that of optical bistability.
However so far, the nonlinear Helmholtz equation in such configurations has been
treated approximately. At this stage, it is by no means clear that these
approximate techniques provide an accurate enough picture (or even the whole
picture) associated with this problem. The exact solution of this problem is
very important, first as a matter of principle, then as a way to test already
existing theories and finally it may lead to new significant results. It is the
purpose of this research proposal to investigate the exact behavior of Helmholtz
equation in isotropic nonlinear Kerr media in a comprehensive program, that will
involve both analytical and computer simulations. Specific goals in this
Research Initiation Award are: a) to identify integrable cases of this equation
using Hamiltonian techniques and in turn use them to test previously obtained
approximate results. b) to discover totally new phenomena, such as spatial chaos
in isotropic Kerr media that may have been overlooked by previous approximate
procedures. c) to improve our understanding of wave propagation in X(3) media,
which will in turn benefit other associated areas of research.