* 9110568
* RIA: Development of a Low-Cost, Near-Optimal Detector for   Magnetic Data Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Jaekyun Moon, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Aubrey M. Bush
* 12/31/1993
* USD 69,843.00

The use of advanced signal processing techniques is becoming increasingly
important as a cost-effective means to achieve high storage density in data
storage systems. The Principal Investigator's research on pragmatic sequence
detection algorithms for magnetic data storage channels has resulted in the
successful development of a computationally efficient detection algorithm, which
achieves a near-optimum performance under modulation code constraints that are
important in magnetic recording. In this project, the Principal Investigator
addresses several important issues related to the application of the proposed
detection algorithm to practical recording systems. These are the issues related
to: 1) the inherent error propagation problem associated with the proposed
detection scheme, 2) code and detector sensitivity against the types of
disturbances often encountered in real magnetic recording channels, 3) different
options available for hardware implementation, and 4) adaptive formulation of
the algorithm and the development of an advanced timing recovery scheme
necessary for time-varying channel environments. The goal of this project is to
carefully examine these issues, determine favorable hardware design options
under real time-varying channel environments and provide solutions whenever
potential problems exist. Potential benefits and limitations of the proposed
method in comparison with conventional approaches will be thoroughly understood.
In addition to providing information that is directly related to hardware
implementation, the results of the proposed research help us understand code and
detector behaviors under different types of channel disturbances. This will
provide a basis for pursuing the challenging problem of designing codes and
detectors which are immune to a selected type of channel disturbance.