* 9110117
* Investigations in Supernovae Physics, Award in U.S.and      Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* David Schramm, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1993
* USD 39,372.00

Technical Narrative: This proposal will continue the joint India-U.S. research
program in theoretical astrophysics begun in 1987 between the Tata Institute and
the University of Chicago. Dr. S. M. Chitre of the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research, Bombay, India and Dr. David Schramm of the University of Chicago are
the co-principal inves- tigators. The main focus of the program is nuclear
astrophysics with a fitting emphasis in the past three years on the supernova
that occurred on February 23, 1987 (SN1987A). For a field that has been
theoretically dominated in the past, this event has added a new dimension
through the observations that have occurred, especially in the Large Magellanic
Cloud. The proposed studies of the supernova are expected to address the
following issues: 1) How does a type II supernova explode? 2) What are the
number, orbital period distribution and mass ratios of binary stars in the Large
Magellanic Cloud? 3) How many pulsars are there in the galactic globular cluster
systems and what is their evolutionary origin? The proposed research will
address also the recent interest in the role of the quark-hadron phase
transition in the early universe, and ultra-high energy cosmic ray interactions.
Scope: The two scientists who are eminent in the field in their respective
countries plan to continue their collaboration in theoretical astrophysics
studying nuclear structure in the early universe and in a contemporary high
energy environment, the massive stars that explode as supernovae. Specifically,
the focus is nuclear astrophysics, supernovae, and the quark-hadron transition
in the early universe. The results of advances in this field are wide- ranging
in the understanding of the physics of matter, astronomy and astrophysics.