* 9110595
* Research Initiation Award:  Techniques for Modeling of      Electromagnetic Systems with Hysteresis on a Digital        Computer
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Gennady Friedman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 12/31/1994
* USD 70,000.00

There are many materials which posses a certain degree of intelligence allowing
them to adjust their behavior on the basis of their history. This property is
sometimes referred to as hysteresis. Design of devices and systems is often
complicated by the presence of hysteresis because no adequate analytical or
computer tools are available to predict various physical parameters and
properties in this case. It is the objective of this project to develop
computational methods for modeling of electromagnetic systems with hysteresis.
The research will focus on the following two problems. One is the development
and selection of mathematical models of hysteresis which can accurately
represent constitutive laws. The other is the development of computational
methods which can be used to determine electromagnetic fields on the basis of
Maxwell's equations and constitutive laws. Computational methods for
electromagnetic field problems with hysteresis have been addressed previously in
the context of static magnetic fields only. It is the goal here to improve the
existing methods of field computation in media with hysteresis and extend them
to problems involving electric fields and eddy currents. To this end, a new,
more general hysteresis model will be used. Finite element techniques are also
suggested for these computations because powerful tools for modeling of
different geometries in the context of the finite element method are readily
available.