* 9110276
* RIA: Optically Interconnected Wafer Scale Synchronous       Processor Arrays
* CSE,MIP
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Timothy Drabik, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul T. Hulina
* 01/31/1994
* USD 69,960.00

This research studies the feasibility of using free-space optics to interconnect
large, monolithic arrays of electronic processing elements (PEs), fabricated at
or near the wafer scale, into topologies that are commonly characterized as
having "high wire area". Two long-standing problems are addressed in this
project. (1) Conventional approaches to wafer-scale integration must forfeit
considerable area to provide defect tolerance in the form of redundant or
programmable interconnects and a sufficient density of spare PEs. (2) The poor
performance of cross-wafer electrical interconnects and the dominance of wire
area in the 2-D layout of highly connected topologies strongly favor mesh-like,
essentially two-dimensional, locally connected networks. In this research,
electronic PEs are provided with optical inputs for all signals entering or
leaving the PE. Light signals emitted perpendicularly from the substrate
constitute the input to an imaging system which, by virtue of specifically
designed diffractive elements, realizes a mapping from the optical source
locations to the detector locations that implements the desired interconnect.
Because inter-PE connection are optical, the additional complexity required to
support defect tolerance is absorbed into the imaging system instead of the
circuitry. Areas of investigation include systems and architectural aspects of
optically interconnected parallel machines, optimal design procedures and
fabrication technology for diffractive elements, technology for light modulators
on silicon, and imaging system engineering. A prototype system comprising a
butterfly machine for computing fast transforms will serve as an experimental
vehicle for investigation of technological and systems aspect of optically
interconnected wafer-scale processor arrays.