* 9110697
* Development of GaInP/GaAs and A1GaInP/GaAs HEMT, Quantum-   Well and MIS/MISFET Structures for High-Frequency and       Optoelectronic Device Applications (Research Planning Grant)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1993
* Jennifer Hwu-Sadwick, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1993
* USD 18,000.00

Increased interest in the millimeter region has stimulated the development of
receiver technology for a wide range of applications including radio astronomy,
atmospheric radiometry, plasma diagnostics, millimeter wave imaging,
nondestructive testing, radar, and high- density, high-directivity
communications and data transmission. To date, most of the flight- qualified
production III-V compound semiconductor high-speed electronics have used GaAs-
or AlGaAs/GaAs-based devices. Recently high electron mobility (HEMT) and
heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) systems based on AlGaAs/InGaAs/GaAs,
AllnAs/InGaAs, and InGaAs/InP have demonstrated excellent device performance at
frequencies far exceeding those possible with the AlGaAs/GaAs system. In this
Research Planning Grant award, both two- and three-terminal GaInP/GaAs and
AlGaInP/GaAs devices will be fabricated and tested. The material will be grown
by organo- metallic vapor phase epitaxy at the University of Utah and complete
device characterization (dc to 60 GHz) will be carried out under this research.
Device concepts to be implemented in this work will include discrete HEMT,
insulated gate field effect transistors, and quantum well devices along with
prototype varactor frequency multipliers and converters. After the completion of
the planning research, optical control of microwave and millimeter wave devices
of GaInP/GaAs and AlGaInP/GaAs heterosystems will also be investigated. The
device concepts for high- frequency electronic and optoelectronic circuit
applications will then be used for designing and fabricating a monolithic
millimeter wave integrated circuit. In addition, two-dimensional array of high
frequency devices of GaInP/GaAs and AlGaInP/GaAs will be fabricated to produce
high output power (i.e., Watt level) at frequencies in the range of 94 to 147
GHz.