* 9110536
* TOGA: Determination and Impacts of Surface Radiative Fluxes       for TOGA COARE
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1993
* Peter Webster, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 02/28/1993
* USD 176,574.00

In support of the TOGA COARE objectives, this project is a study of the surface
radiative processes in the western Pacific warm pool region. The objective of
the program is to provide analyses of: sea-surface "skin" temperature,
precipitable water, cloud properties, and components of the surface longwave and
shortwave radiative fluxes, with spatial resolution of 30 km and temporal
resolution of 3 hours for the entire TOGA COARE primary domain. The data for the
analyses will be obtained principally by satellite remote sensing, with the
ISCCP data set and algorithms playing a substantial role. Available surface and
aircraft data will be utilized to validate the remote sensing algorithms and
will also be blended with the satellite retrievals for the final analysis
products. An aircraft sub-program is proposed specifically to investigate cloud-
radiative properties, and to validate the satellite-derived surface fluxes. The
proposed research will be accomplished in three stages: i) remote sensing pilot
study to develop and compare satellite algorithms; ii) validation of remote
sensing algorithms using TOGA COARE IOP surface and aircraft observations and
preparation of high-resolution analyses for the IOP; and iii) diagnostic and
modelling studies utilizing the analyzed fields. Diagnostic studies of the
modulation of the analyzed surface radiative fluxes by synoptic and mesoscale
atmospheric forcing will be conducted. The temporal response of the ocean mixed
layer to fluctuations in the surface radiative fluxes will be examined using an
ocean mixed- layer model. The ocean mixed-layer model will be coupled to an
atmospheric radiative-convective model to assess the radiative and cloud
feedbacks occurring between the atmospheric and oceanic boundary layers. This
research is important because it serves as one of the principal TOGA/COARE
studies of the processes responsible for the coupling of the ocean-atmosphere in
an especially climate sensitive region of the world, the western Pacific Ocean,
the field site of TOGA/COARE.