* 9110984
* Research Initiation Award:  Adaptive Control System Redesignfor Improving Transient Performance
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Jing Sun, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/1994
* USD 65,000.00

Motivated by the observation that most existing results on adaptive control are
qualitative in nature and address only asymptotic performance (such as stability
and robustness), the main focus of the proposed project is to develop
constructive design approaches for adaptive systems which take into account both
the transient response and the steady-state response. A standard adaptive
control system is designed by incorporating an identification scheme into the
control system and replacing the unknown parameters with their estimates. Such
design methodology is referred to as the "certainty equivalence principle"(CEP)
in adaptive literature. It does not guarantee good transient performance of the
resulting system since it passes on the error of identification to the design
stage. In this project, we will redesign adaptive control systems to overcome
the inherent constraint due to CEP design, and thus improve performance. A new
design technique -- modeling error compensation (MEC) -- is proposed to achieve
this goal. To accommodate the error due to misidentification and CEP design, we
will use the information about the quality of the identification to introduce an
additional control signal on top of the CEP design. This strategy provides a
compensation mechanism that cannot be obtained via CEP design -- it compensates
the effects of misidentification. We propose to study both theoretical and
design aspects of the proposed adaptive scheme. We will also study the
application of MEC to a class of nonadaptive designs, to find answers for the
question whether and when an adaptive system will outperform a nonadaptive
system.