* 9110757
* Research Initiation Award:  Protein Separation Utilizing    Utilizing Temperature-Sensitive Mecroemulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* John Wiencek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edgar A. O'Rear
* 12/31/1993
* USD 90,000.00

The proposal research is directed at developing an extraction technique to
recover proteins from an aqueous solution utilizing a temperature-sensitive
microemulsion phase. The technique may be utilized as a primary recovery step
for large-scale bioseparations. By utilizing liquid phase mass transfer,
residence times for primary isolation can be minimized and protease action
eliminated. Microemulsions possess several processing advantages over two-phase
aqueous systems for such and extraction technique, including ease of phase
disengagement (eliminating the need for capital- intensive centrifuges) and low
viscosity materials (allowing for faster mass transfer). By utilizing a nonionic
surfactant, an mild temperature increase can be utilized to recover the protein
in a concentrated form instead of utilizing chemical addition as currently
practiced for ionic surfactant reverse micellar systems. Nonionic temperature-
sensitive microemulsions require the incorporation of an affinity ligand to
obtain the high degree of specificity desired. A reversible inhibitor of a model
enzyme, >- galactosidase, will be chemically attached to the ethylene oxide
adduct of the nonionic surfactant employed to form the temperature-sensitive
microemulsion. The partitioning of >- galactosidase into the formulated
microemulsion will be investigated as a function of temperature. Solubilization
of the enzyme is expected to occur at a low temperature (4>C), while
demulsification and enzyme recovery will occur at a higher temperature (35>C)
which is well below the denaturation temperature for >-galactosidase (50%
denaturation occurs at 57>C). This microemulsion system will then be utilized to
study the processing advantages of a temperature-sensitive microemulsion on a
bench-scale continuous separation unit.