* 9110462
* Architecture of Hybrid Decision Support Sytem for Risk      Management of Offshore Platforms
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Jean-Claude Latombe, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 01/31/1994
* USD 91,646.00

Risk management on offshore platforms requires real-time adaptation of
procedures to existing conditions. These conditions can be caused either by
environmental factors(e.g., storms or ice), on-board incidents(e.g., a fire),
boat collisions, or degradation of the platform or its capacity(e.g., by
corrosion.) In situations of risk, the operators generally follow procedures
that have been predesigned, but some specific circumstances may not have been
foreseen in the design of the procedures. An experienced operator can generally
estimate the severity of a situation similar to one he has experienced
previously and take appropriate measures. In some instances, however, more
information is needed about the current risk situation, potential deterioration
of this condition, applicable procedures, and alternative options before
appropriate actions can be taken. The object of this research is to combine the
powers of analytical methods (probabilistic risk assessment based on systems
analysis) and artificial intelligence (expert systems based on recommendations
of experienced operators and on operating/emergency procedures) in a hybrid
real-time decision support system for risk management on board platforms. A key
theoretical issue is the aggregation of these two types of information. A
prototype will be developed. One possible option for this prototype is to
address the problem of safety management for a redundant platform when the
weather conditions make both delayed and immediate maintenance hazardous.