* 9110375
* The Molecular Systematics of the Tribe Anthemidae           (Asteraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Linda Watson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1994
* USD 17,870.00

The evolutionary and systematic relationships of the Tribe Anthemideae
(Asteraceae, sunflower family) will be examined with molecular techniques. Using
representative species, variation in the chloroplast genome will be assessed
using : 1) comparative restriction site mapping, and 2) sequencing of the gene
ORFk (open reading frame k). The data will be analyzed phylogenetically using
available software packages (including PAUP, Phylogenetic Analyses Using
Parsimony; PHYLIP, Phylogenetic Inference Package; among others). This research
will test hypotheses of evolutionary relationships, and will provide an
independent assessment of character evolution (including morphology, breeding
systems, and chromosome numbers) in an important group of flowering plants. The
Anthemideae is an important tribe in the Asteraceae, being the fifth largest
tribe in terms of number of genera, and the seventh largest in terms of number
of species. It is important economically with numerous species used for sources
of insecticides, malaria medicines, cultivated plants, and herbs. And it is
important ecologically with sagebrush a dominant species in the Great Basin of
North America. Evolutionary relationships of this important tribe remain
obscure, with extensive diversity and convergence being contributing factors.
Additionally, the sunflower family is one of the largest, most diverse, and
successful families of flowering plants, and has long provided a model for
systematic studies at all taxonomic levels. This tradition has continued with
pioneering studies of molecular systematics using this family. This study will
provide a greater understanding of the evolutionary and systematic relationships
in an important family and tribe of flowering plants.