* 9110158
* Categorical Aspects of Motor Timing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Russell Church, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 01/31/1994
* USD 84,906.00

A voluntary movement can be made rapidly or slowly, and it appears to the
person making a movement that it can be made about equally accurately at any
intermediate speed. However, if the mechanism responsible for timing the
movement has one or more characteristic frequencies of oscillation, the actual
speed of movement would be expected to depart from the intended value in the
direction of one of these frequencies. That is, each intended speed would be
subject to its own degree and direction of bias. Collyer, Broadbent, and Church
have recently demonstrated a pattern of biases across a wide range of movement
speeds which confirms the existence of characteristic frequencies in motor
timing and allows them to be measured. This finding shows that motor timing is
categorical rather than continuously adjustable, and this is an important step
toward an adequate theory of the timing of voluntary acts. However, much remains
to be learned about this categorical timing mechanism. This research is designed
to examine some basic properties of this type of motor timing. The basic task
involves repetitive manual tapping at target rates set by a series of computer-
generated sounds. It will involve three types of experiments: (1) Manipulation
of the relative contribution of external and internal bases for motor timing,
with the expectation that the biases introduced by characteristic frequencies
will be greatest when internal (cognitive) factors predominate; (2) Study of the
role of the characteristic frequencies in controlling fast and slow speeds of
movement and transitions between speeds; and (3) Examination of correlations
between characteristic frequencies and other behavior such as preferred rates of
movement and perceived durations of signals. The research will advance our
understanding of normal motor timing processes and provide information about a
potentially important link between time perception and time production.