* 9110584
* Query Optimization for Parallel Relational Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Jaideep Srivastava, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 01/31/1994
* USD 69,975.00

This research address the problem of relational query optimization for general
purpose parallel machines. The principle objective of this project to develop
query optimizer that will generate efficient query plans for parallel machines.
The three main components of a database query optimizer are its query plan
representation, its cost model, and its search algorithm. This project addresses
the issue of developing a plan representation that incorporates intra- and
inter-operator parallelism, as well as pipelining. Furthermore, cost models will
be developed which distinguish between the total work done, i.e. the
(sequential) time it would take on a uni-processor and total (parallel) time
taken on a multi-processor. The cost model depends on the query and database
parameters, as well as architecture parameters. A cost-based search algorithm
selects efficient (low cost) query plans. Since the search space is much larger
than that found in uni-processor query optimization, this research will develop
new heuristics to prune the search space. Furthermore, since a multiprocessor is
available, the research will also investigate applicability of parallel
processing to the optimization process itself. The results of this research will
have an impact on efficient query processing in parallel relational databases.