* 9110909
* RIA: A Theoretical Inve#sigation of Electrorheological      Materials and Their Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* John Coulter, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/1994
* USD 70,001.00

An interdisciplinary research program in the area of intelligent materials
systems and adaptive structures will be developed, with the primary focus being
the development of the fundamental science base necessary for the implementation
of this technology in U.S. applications. During the initial program period,
electrorheological (ER) materials and their usage in applications will be
studied. Theoretical efforts in the areas of ER material rheology, ER material
pre-yield adaptive structures, and ER material post-yield adaptive devices will
be performed. All initial efforts will be extensions of research by the present
investigator while the previously employed at Lord Corporation. Further
development of a microscopic model of ER material behavior will be completed,
and the rheological response of state-of-the-art ER formulations will be
simulated. Knowledge of pre-yield behavior will be utilized in a study of ER
material adaptive structures, during which a structural response theory will be
further developed. Rheological information related to post-yield response will
be coupled to the development of an improved theory for ER material controllable
device performance. The overall impact of the investigation will be possible,
the improvement of the fundamental theoretical understanding of ER materials and
their usage in applications.