* 9110011
* National Workshop on Mathematics and Engineering Education  Reform to be held at the University of Maryland, College    Park, Maryland on June 5 and 6, 1991.
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Marilyn Berman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 09/30/1992
* USD 39,998.00

It is generally believed that by the year 2000, less than a decade away, the
United States will face a serious shortfall of engineers and scientists. Many
believe that the problem lies not only in the demographics which project
decreasing numbers of 18 to 22 year-olds entering the nation's colleges, but
also a serious problem in the way in which engineering, mathematics and science
are taught in our schools. National reports have been written, conferences held,
and some very successful models of educational reform and innovation have been
implemented at individual institutions. The University of Maryland, College Park
is sponsoring a workshop to bring together national leaders who have been at the
forefront of these activities to develop an action model to transfer, where
appropriate, some of these innovations in mathematics and engineering education.
The workshop will be held at the Center of Adult Education at the University of
Maryland, College Park, Maryland on April 11-12, 1991. The objectives of the
workshop are: o to bring together a small but select group of national leaders
in mathematics and engineering education reform; o to provide a forum for the
exchange of the best of the national projects in mathematics and engineering
education; and o to develop an action agenda for national implementation of the
best of these projects in mathematics and engineering education.