* 9110640
* Bio-Imaging Analyzer (Phosphorimager)
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Paul Matsudaira, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 11/30/1994
* USD 55,000.00

This proposal involves a request to purchase the Fuji Bio-Imaging Analyzer
(Phosphorimager), a new device for the detection and quantitation of
radioactivity used in a variety of biochemical experiments. The quantitative
capabilities of this instrument will allow biochemical experiments not currently
possible. The primary advantages of this technology over conventional
autoradiography using x-ray film are an increased linear response, dynamic
range, and sensitivity, as well as reduced exposure time. The instrument
provides quantitative data from experiments involving the use of this
radioisotopes such as 32P, 35S, 14C, and 125I. An instrument of this type is not
currently available at the Whitehead Institute. The quantitation of radioactive
samples will be carried out by the user groups in a variety of biochemical and
molecular biology experiment detailed in Section 8. The technology involves the
use of storage phosphor screens which store energy form sample beta particle
emission. This emission is detected by the instrument and stored on a computer
hard disk. The data can then be accessed and analyzed using a software package
provided with the instrument. A number of quantitative biochemical experiments
not currently possible will be feasible because the Phosphorimager is vastly
superior to X-ray film autoradiography.