* 9110991
* Heterogeneous Agents Economies with Capital:  Model         Development and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 01/31/1994
* USD 63,195.00

Previously developed methods to compute equilibria for stochastic overlapping
generations economies where agents live a large number of periods will be
applied to address several questions. Among them are the behavior of asset
prices and the distribution of risks across agents in these type of economies.
Another application is to investigate the implications of changes in the age
structure of the population on intertemporal prices, and on the rate of capital
accumulation. Finally, a quantitative assessment of the patterns of
international borrowing and lending due to differences in the demographic
structure of nations will allow an evaluation of the nature of the external
deficit. The study will also develop a method suitable to quantitatively address
heterogeneous, infinitely lived agents economies with capital, ideosyncratic and
economy-wide shocks to productivity, and liquidity constraints. The development
of this method will allow explicit consideration of many issues. Among them are:
checking the robustness of the findings of real business cycle research to
environments with pervasive liquidity constraints, and studying the behavior of
different wealth and income groups during the business cycle, and the
differential volatility of hours worked across skill groups. This project
addresses many important issues regarding computable general equilibrium models
that need to be better understood. The methods developed can be used to explore
issues related to aging and savings, and the distribution of workers. This work
will provide the crucial base upon which important policy issues can be
addressed in the future.