* 9110131
* Estimating Conditional Variances and Covariances:           Measurement Accuracy and Implications for Asset             Pricing and Portfolio Choice
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Daniel Nelson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1993
* USD 149,897.00

Most asset pricing theories relate expected returns on assets to their
conditional variances and covariances. An enormous literature in empirical
finance has documented that these conditional moments change over time.
Practical experience as in the 1929 and 1987 stock market crashes reinforces
this conclusion. Unfortunately, conditional covariances are not directly
observable. In tests of asset pricing theories, researchers must use estimates
of conditional second moments. Similarly, market participants use estimates of
conditional variances and covariances in hedging, option pricing, and in many
other aspects of portfolio selection. This projects addresses the following
important questions: How accurate are the estimated variances and covariances?
How can they be estimated more accurately? How severely do the inevitable
measurement errors affect portfolio selection and tests of asset pricing
theories? Researchers doing empirical work in finance have adopted many
strategies for accommodating changes in conditional variances and covariances.
Among the popular strategies are: (1) chopping the available data into short
blocks of time and assuming homoskedasticity within the blocks, (b) one-sided
rolling regressions, in which only data from, say, the preceding five year
period is used to estimate the conditional covariance of returns at a given
date, (c) two-sided rolling regressions, in which covariances are estimated for
each date using, say, five years of lags and five years of leads, and (d)
Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedatic (ARCH) models. The choice between
these methods has traditionally been ad hoc, since no theory has been available
to compare their relative efficiency in settings. This project addresses this
problem by developing continuous record asymptotic approximations for the
measurement errors when methods (a) through (d) are used.