* 9110905
* Estimation of the Memory Requirements of Programs by a           Pre-Processor
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Hossein Hosseini, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 11/30/1993
* USD 57,420.00

The proposal involves estimating the memory requirements of a program by a pre-
processor at compile time. The information obtained about the memory
requirements is used for designing better memory management schemes in
conventional uniprocessor virtual memory systems, CVM, for efficient page
distribution in a distributed virtual memory system, DVM, and for load
characterization necessary for load balancing operations. The pre-processor
analyzes the source code to identify the locality constructs exhibited by the
program. Then it estimates the virtual sizes of the localities and the position
or the level of a locality construct within a structure of nested localities.
For CVM, the size and the level of a locality are passed to the operating system
through memory directives. At execution time, the operating system allocates
memory to the running process guided by memory directives. For DVM, the
directives are used to distribute the pages of a program over distinct sets and
to distribute the sets of pages over various nodes in the system. A quantitative
characterization of the load through estimation of the memory requirements of a
program will provide a solution to the synchronization problem encountered in
load balancing. As a side effect, this will give more precise definition of
balanced system.