* 9110000
* Nuclear Mechanisms of the Regulation of Tyrosine HydroxylaseGene in Adrenal Medullary Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Michal Stachowiak, Barrow Neurological Institute
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1993
* USD 98,926.00

A primary function of the nervous system is to help organisms adapt to external
and internal conditions, by generating the appropriate adaptive response. A
major cause for adaptation, in the nervous system, is due to changes in the
biosynthesis of neurotransmitters, chemicals responsible for communication
between nerve cells. These effects are accomplished through alterations in gene
activity which are expressed specifically in neurons controlling the
biosynthesis of neurotransmitters. This research project will focus on the
regulation of the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene, the gene responsible for the
synthesis of catecholaminergic neurotransmitters. The mechanisms through which
environmental and internal signals induce adaptive changes in the expression of
neural genes are unknown. Previous studies conducted by the PI indicate that
signals may be conveyed to the TH gene through the stimulation of two types of
receptors, the acetylcholine receptor and the hormone, angiotensin II. The PI
will determine whether neural and hormonal signals activate and regulate later
stages of gene expression such as processing and maturation of gene products.
Regions of the TH gene that are stimulated by neural and hormonal signals will
be identified. This gene has been linked to many fundamental functions of the
nervous system including learning, regulation, mood control and motivation. This
research offers a model to explore how these functions are controlled at the
molecular level.