* 9110236
* Optimal Macroeconomic Policy in General Equilibrium Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Lawrence Christiano, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1994
* USD 83,565.00

A fundamental question in macroeconomics is how should fiscal and monetary
policy be set, both on average, and in response to business cycle shocks. This
question is addressed in quantitative, general equilibrium models of business
fluctuations. This project studies models with shocks to technology and
government consumption, models of nominal wage contracting and models with
heterogeneous agents. Models are also analyzed in which the government cannot
commit to its future policies. The optimal policies in these models provide
quantitative guidance on how fiscal and monetary policy should be conducted over
the business cycle. For example, the results will indicate how big the
government deficit should be and how stimulative monetary policy should be in a
recession. Economic growth rates are substantially affected by the rate of
adoption of new technologies and the rate of displacement of old ones.
Typically, there is a long lag between the availability of a new technology and
the time when its use becomes widespread. This phenomenon is known as diffusion.
This project examines some of the principal factors determining the rates of
diffusion of technology. The research provides a deeper understanding of the
forces determining growth, the diffusion of new technologies and the decay of
old ones. The properties of models of the monetary transmission mechanism are
also investigated. This part of the project should improve our understanding of
the key features of the interest rate, output and employment effects of monetary
shocks.