* 9110746
* RUI:  Surface Roughness Studies Using the Scanning Tunnel   Microscope
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Patricia Allen, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 01/31/1994
* USD 70,000.00

This project is to establish a Scanning Tunnel/Atomic Force Microscopy (STM/AFM)
program at Appalachian State University. This program will be used as a teaching
tool for undergraduates and will provide research opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students in Applied Physics. The research projects
will focus on the surface characterization of materials provided by Dr. Phil
Russell as a collaborative effort between ASU and the Precision Engineering
Center at North Carolina State University. The STM will be used to study three
specific areas: surface roughness of metal overlayers, optical component
quality, and nanometer metallization. The STM is a surface analysis tool which
is limited to the study of conducting samples. The surface roughness of thin
metal overlayers on insulators will be examined in an attempt to find materials
which: form a uniform overlayer; can be studied with the STM; and preserve the
insulator surface topography. Surface roughness studies can also be used to
provide insight into the processing of high quality optical insight into the
processing of high quality optical components, which often requires surface
features to be less than a few atomic units. Lastly, nanometer metallization of
silicon will be explored by using a low energy (-10eV) beam from the STM to
dissociate PD from Pd-Ac thin films.