* 9110020
* Mathematical Sciences: A US - Soviet Exchange for High      School Students of High Mathematical Ability
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1992
* Mark Saul, American Regions Mathematics League
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1992
* USD 63,500.00

American and Soviet experiences with developing talent in young mathematicians
contrast with and complement each other. American competitions usually emphasize
speedy response to many short-answer questions. Soviet competitions call for
more carefully written longer answers to fewer problems. American extra-
curricular programs most frequently provide advanced training in mathematical
subject matter, taught by university staff. Soviet experiences outside the
classroom are often led by high school teachers or by the students themselves,
and more frequently involve deeper exploration of problems which need no
background beyond the students' own. American students need practice in
developing mathematical proofs and discussions. Because of this, they do not
compete well on Olympiad-style questions. This grant will support 25 high school
students and 5 high school teachers to travel to the Soviet Union in July, 1991,
in order to participate in an international summer camp for high school students
of high mathematical ability in the USSR. It is important for Americans to learn
what has been done in the Soviet Union, especially since in the rapidly changing
Soviet society, some of the traditions that have produced their excellent young
mathematicians may disappear. A plan for permitting Americans to learn about
these traditions and borrow what can be easily transported is very timely.