* 9111669
* U.S.-Australia Joint Seminar:  Electron and Ion Swarms and  Low-Energy Electron Scattering; Gold Coast, Australia;      July 18-20, 1991
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1991,07/01/1992
* Vincent McKoy, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alan Milsap
* 07/01/1992
* USD 0.00

This travel services work order (CTS-91-AUS-05) supports the transportation of
eleven U.S. scientists to participate in the Joint Symposium on Electron and Ion
Swarms and Low-Energy Electron Scattering, to be held in Gold Coast, Australia,
July 18-20, 1991. The meeting takes place under the auspices of the
U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program, and brings together two related
symposia, one focusing on basic collisional processes and the other emphasizing
applications of such processes to other fields of science, such as aeronomy, and
to working technological devices. The U.S. co-organizers are Professor Vincent
McKoy and Dr. Sandor Trajmar, of the California Institute of Technology. The
Australian co-organizer is Dr. S. J. Buckman, Australian National University,
Canberra. Australian participation is being supported by the Australian
Department of Industry, Technology, and Commerce. There will be additional
participation from third countries. The interdisciplinary research to be
discussed at the symposium is relevant to several areas of plasma physics. One
aim of the meeting is to achieve a better understanding of the fundamental
processes occurring in such applications of plasmas as electrical discharge
devices (e.g. lamps and lasers), plasma processing of materials, flue gas clean-
up, and magnetohydrodynamic power generation, among others. To date, many
successful applications of plasmas have been developed empirically, because of
the lack of such a basic understanding of the processes involved. Further
advances in the technology may be expected from enhancing the interaction
between pure and applied science in this field, an important goal of the
symposium.