* 9111763
* Minority Research Initiation Planning Grant:                Gender and African Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Mary Osirim, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 01/31/1993
* USD 11,982.00

During the 1980s, the majority of sub-Saharan African nations were engulfed in
an economic crisis. Growth in poverty and unemployment escalated with the
greatest increases occurring among women heading households. A small, strong
informal sector might assist in alleviating these problems. This Minority
Research Initiation Planning Grant examines entrepreneurship in small and
informal sector firms in two cities in Zimbabwe seeking to identify the personal
attributes of those who begin such firms, their educational and employment
histories, the successes and problems they have encountered in operating their
businesses, and the existence of governmental or nongovernmental agencies to
support their endeavors to enhance our understanding of the composition,
contributions and articulation of the informal sector to formal activities and
to the larger national and global economies. In- depth interviews with
entrepreneurs who began small and informal businesses in these cities and with
civil serves and others involved in governmental and nongovernmental agencies
providing support for these firms will be conducted and analyzed. This
preliminary research will provide valuable information about the role the
informal sector might play in generating employment, particularly for women, in
Sub-Saharan Africa. This project also provides an excellent opportunity for a
promising young scholar to lay the foundation for more extensive research on
gender and entrepreneurship.