* 9111924
* The Variation of Markups Over the Business Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Julio Rotemberg, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1993
* USD 97,338.00

This project studies models where variations in the markup of price over
marginal cost is a central component of the explanation of business cycles. The
theoretical rigor and the empirical validity of imperfect competition models of
business cycles will be determined. This research should provide valuable
insights into the relationship between macroeconomic activity and microeconomic
industry structure. More specifically, time series for markup variation will be
constructed for both the private sector as a whole and for 4- digit
manufacturing industries. Various procedures are proposed to check the
plausibility of the theoretical models. For instance, if markup variations as a
result of imperfect competition explain business cycles, such markup variation
should be more pronounced in relatively concentrated sectors. In addition,
different models of markup variation have different implications for how the
current level of sales and the expected future level of profits affect markups.
Both aggregate and disaggregated data contain information about the way these
variables affect markups. The extent to which aggregate demand influences output
through the variables that determine markups in the models (current sales and
the present value of future profitability) will also be ascertained. Finally,
the output volatility that changes in these variables induce through changes in
the markup will be measured.