* 9111790
* Macro-Micro Links in Offending Careers from Adolescence     to Young Adulthood
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1991,09/30/1996
* Ora Simcha-Fagan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/1996
* USD 82,022.00

This study analyzes what accounts for offending careers from adolescence to
young adulthood. The research takes advantage of a longitudinal data base
collected from a sample of approximately 500 adolescent males who were initially
interviewed in 1982-83 when their ages ranged from 11 to 17 and reinterviewed in
1990-91 when they were ages 19 to 25. Sampling for the study was carried out in
two stages: First, 12 urban neighborhoods representing a crossed array in terms
of levels of family disorganization, neighborhood, social rank, and predominant
race group (black or white) were selected. In the second stage, households in
each of the areas were listed and screened. Eligible households were then
grouped into single vs. two-parent households and stratified random samples were
drawn. The purpose of this study is to (1) identify contextual and individual-
level risk factors associated with patterns of onset and suspension of
offending; (2) delineate the relationship among type of community context,
characteristics of interpersonal networks, and offending behavior in young
adulthood; and (3) develop a model of change and stability in offending which
incorporates individual level risk factors and the conditional effects of social
context. Substantively, the research builds on extant longitudinal studies in
postulating the effects of early behavior and of later role transitions on the
dynamics of change over time. Distinctively, it also examines the conditional
effects of macrosocial factors on these individual-level processes. The
importance of cross-level theorizing and related empirical study cannot be
overemphasized. Linking neighborhood characteristics and individual factors is a
long overdue research strategy in this arena of work. By focusing specifically
on these macro-micro linkages, this study promises to advance our most basic
understandings about delinquency and crime.