* 9111873
* Collaborative Research Updating Ambiguous Beliefs: Bayesian and Non-Bayesian Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1992
* David Schmeidler, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 15,273.00

The Bayesian approach to decision making under uncertainty prescribes that a
decision maker have a unique prior probability and a utility function such that
decisions are made so as to maximize the expected utility. This paradigm was
justified by axiomatic treatments but challenged by several classes of evidence:
experimental results incompatible with the consistency condition implied by the
Bayesian approach, difficulties people have in specifying a prior probability,
and economic phenomena contradictory to the theoretical results. Among many
models suggested to generalize the Bayesian approach are the nonadditive
probabilities model and the multiple priors model. These models have passed an
important test: they have been axiomatized. However, these one-shot decision
models shed little light on the problem of dynamically updating probabilities as
new information is gathered. The natural question then is: what are the
reasonable ways for economic agents to update beliefs over time? This study will
deal with this problem axiomatically and suggest plausible updating rules which
satisfy some basic requirements. A family of pseudo-Bayesian rules, each of
which may be considered a generalization of Bayes' rule for a unique additive
prior, will be presented and studied. A family of classical updating rules, each
of which starts out with a given set of priors, possibly rules some of them out
in the face of new information, and continues with the Bayesian updates of the
remaining ones, will also be studied. The assumption of a unique given prior
probability is clearly unrealistic. New political circumstances, technological
advances, new firms, and new products are all counter-examples in which the
assumption of a unique prior is unreasonable. Consequently, this study will
provide important theoretical foundation upon which we build our understanding
of the adjustment of economic agents to new phenomena or new information.