* 9111666
* Significance and Consequences of Avian Vocal Development
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Donald Kroodsma, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1995
* USD 146,000.00

Much current literature, covering a variety of sensory modes and animal groups,
focuses on identifying cues that individuals use to assess one another and on
the evolution of those cues. Such cues may be used during either interactions
between animals of the same sex or interactions between animals of opposite sex.
How animals perceive one another during these interactions has important
implications for evolution of traits. Understanding how animals may use vocal
cues has been hampered, however, by the difficulty of establishing cause and
effect, rather than just correlation, between the vocal behavior and its
possible consequences. By taking advantage of the vocal learning abilities of
songbirds, Dr. Kroodsma will be able to experimentally "assign" different vocal
behaviors to different individuals. With cues assigned at random and therefore
irrespective of other male qualities, hypothesis testing can proceed. Initial
studies will focus on song repertoire size in marsh wrens, and study of other
vocal behaviors in other species will follow. Individuals with "assigned
behaviors" become invaluable in other experiments that test for cause-and-effect
relationships between behavior and brain characteristics; correlations have been
discovered between song repertoire size and the volume of song control centers
in the avian forebrain, for example, but until either the behavior (as in Dr.
Kroodsma's experiments) or the brain is manipulated experimentally, one cannot
determine the direction of causation.