* 9111424
* Mapping the Innovation Process:  An Integration of          Cognitive and Social Approaches to the Invention of the     Telephone
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* W. Carlson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 08/31/1994
* USD 84,146.00

In technology studies, nothing is more mysterious yet more central than the act
of invention. Technological historians, however, have yet to develop a precise
interpretation of how an inventor identifies an opportunity, develops a new
idea, and manifests it in a physical device. In response to this conceptual
lacuna, Drs. Carlson and Gorman are studying invention as a mental or cognitive
process. To do so, they are comparing how Alexander Graham Bell, Thomas A.
Edison, and Elisha Gray developed the telephone from 1870 to 1880. They have
chosen these inventors because their work is well documented by notebooks,
sketches, and artifacts and because their efforts to perfect this invention have
received limited scholarly attention. To analyze and compare the work of these
inventors, they are drawing on recent work in cognitive science. In particular,
they are considering three elements of the cognitive process of invention: how
an inventor conceptualizes an invention (mental model); the strategies he or she
uses to develop an invention (heuristics); and the specific technical devices he
or she uses to construct an invention (mechanical representations). To study
these three elements, they have created computer mapping techniques which allow
them to use the inventors' original sketches in branching-tree diagrams. In
addition, they intend to investigate how an inventor's cognitive practices are
influenced by his or her social context. Through this research, they expect to
enrich the history of technology with a new conceptual framework and a detailed
study of a major invention, suggest to cognitive scientists how technological
creativity may be effectively studied, and help interested laymen see inventors
not as mysterious geniuses but as individuals with specific talents and skills.