* 9111201
* Publicly Assisted Housing and Neighborhood Dynamics:        A Preliminary Investigation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1991,10/31/1993
* Ayse Can, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 10/31/1993
* USD 17,980.00

Following termination in 1973 of federal programs aimed at large- scale urban
housing construction, local governments have assumed greater responsibility for
policy development and implementation to meet neighborhood housing needs.
Different jurisdictions have responded in different ways, but many have sought
to target investments in areas where they hoped that public assistance would
spur private redevelopment efforts, thereby leading to neighborhood
revitalization. The selection of sites where public investments are made are
crucial decisions in the implementation of policies like these. Despite
considerable monitoring, relatively little scientific attention has focused on
the impacts of these investments on the neighborhood quality and on the
demographic composition of neighborhood residents. This project, which is
supported by a Research-Planning Grant for Women Scientists and Engineers, will
refine conceptual frameworks for exploration of these and related questions, and
it will provide an opportunity for identification and preliminary analyses of
data with which to address these issues. Preliminary work will focus on one or
more cities in New York state. Among data sources to be explored at the Census
of Population and Housing, data from various public agencies documenting public
services and publicly assisted housing, and other geographic information
available from the New York State Data Center. This project will provide new
insights into the general knowledge of the ways that public housing investments
and policies, and it will establish a sound base for future empirical analyses
of the impacts of public housing decisions on neighborhood dynamics. In
addition, the project will provide a superb opportunity for a young female
scholar with an excellent background to further improve her basic research
skills.