* 9111419
* Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Harish Sunak, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 01/31/1995
* USD 166,657.00

This award will investigate erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs), already
recognized as having changed the course of fiber optics research recently. EDFAs
have emerged as the undisputed champion lightwave communications, and many
experts believe that EDFAs will revolutionize long-distance optical
communications, from video distribution to broadband networking. A new era has
indeed dawned upon the fiber optics community. The work done will consolidate,
and develop further, the work already done under a NSF- SGER award, in which a
comprehensive theoretical computer model was developed. the model can predict
the performance of any type of EDFA very accurately, as evidenced by the
excellent agreement with published experimental results. Both theoretical and
experimental research work will be done and shall concentrate on pumping in the
800 nm region. This is aimed at the eventual realization of low cost, very
reliable, performance optimized and compact EDFA modules for use as power
amplifiers, line repeaters and preamplifiers in a variety of application in
lightwave technology. EDFAs offer the exciting possibility of developing
completely transparent networks. The shall also investigate theoretically
amplifiers for the 1300 nm region with neodymium doped fluoride glass, by
considering optimized fiber design and different pumping configurations.