* 9111680
* Residential Mobility in the Late Prehistoric Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1994
* James Burton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1994
* USD 76,738.00

Dr. Douglas Price and his colleagues will analyze strontium isotope ratios from
the teeth and bones of prehistoric inhabitants of the Grasshopper. Point of
Pines, Turkey Creek and Kinishba archaeological sites, all located in the
Mogollon rim region of Arizona. All date to ca. 14th century AD and mark a
highpoint in the development of Southwestern Aboriginal American culture. The
goal of the research is to determine the individual migration patterns of
residents over their lifetime. The strontium isotope technique takes advantage
of the fact that permanent dentition is formed early in life. The strontium
incorporated into the tooth enamel is not replaced over time. Bone strontium,
however, is constantly replaced over the lifetime of an individual. Because the
strontium taken into the human body is derived, via plants, animals and water,
from the local soil, comparison between tooth and bone enamel from the same
person can provide evidence on lifetime movement. Luckily, in the Southwestern
U.S., different geographical regions have distinct strontium isotopic
signatures. The 14th century AD marks a high point in cultural development in
the Southwest. Large ceremonial centers were constructed and extensive trade
networks existed to minimize short-term geographical differences in production.
This implies the development of complex forms of social control and interaction.
Anthropologists want to know how large sites such as Grasshopper developed and
were maintained and several theories have been proposed. One places a major
emphasis on migration and the consolidation of groups from different regions
while others focus on in situ processes. The work undertaken by Dr. Price will
provide direct evidence against which to evaluate these theories. This research
is important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of how
complex societies develop and are maintained. It will shed new light on the
prehistory of the U.S. Southwest and finally it will assist in the development
of an extremely promising analytic technique. It is the first instance in which
strontium isotope analysis is applied to an anthropological question.