* 9111994
* Dissertation Research: Causes of Geographic Variation in Flower Size in Nemophila menziesii H. & A. (Hydrophyllaceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1993
* USD 8,000.00

This study is an investigation of the potential biological processes which may
maintain differences in the sizes of flowers among populations of an annual
wildflower native to California. The species under study, Nemophila menziesii,
exhibits extensive variation in flower size among populations, and shows a
striking pattern in which those populations native to the interior mountain
ranges surrounding California's central valley are the largest flowered;
populations on the cost are intermediate, and those from southern California
produce flowers. Essentially, this study seeks to determine why this pattern
exists. The study is evaluating whether 1) deterministic, or 2) random
biological processes (or both) are important in maintaining these population
differences in flower size, and 3) whether or not the variation in flower size
among populations is adaptive. Using a large data set collected from herbarium
specimens, this study directly tests for geographic patterns in flower size that
would be expected to be generated by natural selection, and patterns that would
be expected if random processes were more important in generating the population
differences in flower size. To augment the study of natural selection using
herbarium specimens, reproductive fitness of plants which differ in flower size
are being monitored to determine whether or not natural selection for flower
size currently occurs. This possibility of differences in flower size being due
to inbreeding is being tested by determining the level of inbreeding (using
electrophoresis) in two populations which differ in the average size of their
flowers, and also by experimentally determining the effects of inbreeding by
comparing plants from outcrossed and inbred matings in these same two
populations.