* 9111455
* The Economics and Econometrics of Self-Selection with       Applications to the Evaluation of Government Training       Programs and to Understanding Sectoral Wage Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* James Heckman, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 392,016.00

The purpose of this research is to evaluate the effects of government training
program on trainees and to analyze the determinants of income inequality .
Special attention is paid to selection bias in this analysis, and the study will
develop a theoretical foundation for developing estimating models that take into
account this bias. The research will include three empirical studies utilizing
these models. The first will use recently available experimental and non-
experimental data to evaluate the impacts of the leading Federal manpower
training program--the Job Training Partnership Act. The objective of this study
is to ascertain the determinants of program awareness among the eligible
population, the determinants of application, enrollment, placement, and long-run
labor outcomes of the program. This study will present new insights about the
effectiveness of the job training program. The second study will examine the
effects of randomization in evaluating social programs. Finally, the third part
will investigate the sources of wage inequality utilizing new methods for
measuring inequality. This research is important because it will develop new
methods for evaluating social programs, and it will provide new insights about
the problem of income inequality.