* 9111881
* Dissertation Research:  Determinants of Host Range in       Specialized Leaf Beetles
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1993
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/31/1993
* USD 6,500.00

The leaf beetle Ophraella notolata and Ophraella sp. nov. (Coleoptera:
Chrysomelidae) that specialize on the asteraceous plants Iva frutescens and
Ambrosia artemisiifolia respectively, offer a unique opportunity to examine the
relative contribution of the many factors that may act to restrict insect host
ranges. Results to date suggest that the species feeding on the derived host
plant (O. notulata) retains a greater ability (in terms of behavior and
physiology) to utilize the ancestral host than the species (O. sp. nov.) feeding
on the derived host. Further, there exists significant genetic variation in both
species for the ability to utilize the host of its congener. These results will
be expanded and complemented with a series of field experiments in Florida,
where the two congeners overlap, to examine the ecological selective pressures
that may be operating to restrict host range. The main objectives will be to: 1)
test for tradeoffs in larval performance between hosts in the field, 2) examine
effects of competition between the two Ophraella species and between each
Ophraella species and other phytophages of their host plants, 3) scrutinize the
effects of generalist predators and parasitoids, and 4) investigate the
behavioral and physiological responses of Ophraella to host plant secondary
compounds. It is expected that this effort will yield valuable information about
how various intrinsic and extrinsic ecological factors (aspects of plant
chemistry, competition, predation, and behavior/physiology) affect host plant
utilization. Such knowledge should prove valuable in enhancing our understanding
of the processes responsible for shaping patterns of insect host use.