* 9111824
* Root Length and Its Relationship to Root Plasticity and     Root Life-Span
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* David Eissenstat, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 06/30/1994
* USD 173,000.00

The ratio of root length to root dry weight (specific root length SRL) varies
widely among plant species. Since water and nutrient uptake is influenced more
by root length than mass, species of high SRL may appear to invest their root
biomass more efficiently than species of low SRL. A more complete cost-analysis,
however, must include the life-span of the root. Species that construct fine
roots (high SRL) may tend to proliferate roots in favorable volumes of soil and
shed roots in unfavorable soil volumes more readily than species with coarse
roots (low SRL). Thus, the short-term efficiency of high SRL roots may be offset
by higher costs associated with higher root turnover rates. This proposal tests
the relationship of SRL to root plasticity and root life- span by using a
microvideo camera inserted into transparent tubes buried in the ground in the
field. A citrus rootstock trial, with genetically diverse root systems grafted
to genetically identical shoots, will serve as the model plant system. This
study will provide information on factors that influence root death and turnover
as well as insights into how interspecific differences in root characteristics
may influence nutrient and water acquisition, root turnover, and, ultimately,
plant productivity. In plant breeding, selection based on specific root traits
is seldom undertaken. While the citrus rootstock trial serves as an excellent
model system with which to examine basic relationships between root
characteristics and root turnover rates, the information gained also has direct
practical applications, since the rootstocks in the study are all of economic
importance. Additionally, this information will be valuable for ecosystem models
that are being used to help estimate global climate change, since root turnover
is a major source of carbon dioxide efflux into the atmosphere.