* 9111112
* Collaborative Research on Divided Government
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,04/30/1994
* Alberto Alesina, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 04/30/1994
* USD 46,118.00

In western democracies and, in particular, in the United States, policy
outcomes are functions of the interaction of the separate executive and
legislature. Policy decisions are reflections of the partisan and ideological
composition of the two branches. In this context, divided government occurs as a
result of voters' desire to create checks and balances by moderating an
executive controlled by one party or point of view against a legislature
dominated by another party or perspective. This sophisticated research explores
several theoretical and empirical issues with respect to the growing trend
toward divided government both in the United States and in various other
democratic nations. First, the research will examine the effects on presidential
candidates of knowing the policy composition of the legislature. Second, the
study will consider the effects of divided government on the propensity toward
and success of third parties. Third, the possibility that voter turnout may be
used as a moderating devise will be explored. Finally, the robustness of the
results will be evaluated by examining the dynamics of divided government in
other countries, specifically in france. When completed this research should
greatly increase our understanding of the causes and consequences of divided
government in the United States. It also should and provide valuable information
on the operation of institutional checks and balances that will be of use not
only in the United States but especially in new democracies as they make
decisions about the types of institutions to develop. This is collaborative
research with Howard Rosenthal (SES-9111059).