* 9111220
* High-Speed Distributed Storage Management
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Darrell Long, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 06/30/1994
* USD 68,955.00

The goal of this research is to develop a high-speed distributed storage system
that provides a general purpose file system with integrated storage and
retrieval of large data objects, such as digital audio and video, at guaranteed
data rates. Applications of such a system range from visualization of scientific
computations to real-time recording, editing and play-back of color video.
Support for integrated access to continuous media such as digital audio and
video is difficult for current computing systems. They lack the necessary
capacity to provide data at a sufficient rate, and do not support the necessary
end-to-end performance guarantees. The interest in fields such as scientific
visualization require that this be addressed. The design, called Swift,
addresses these issues by providing a scalable architecture capable of
exploiting current and future technologies. In particular, to provide high
performance it relies on the rapidly increasing performance of communication
networks to use many storage devices in parallel. It will provide the end-to-end
performance guarantees necessary for continuous multimedia through negotiations
with the schedulers of each of the cooperating components. Its distributed
nature will allow resource sharing according to the needs of its clients; and,
through the use of redundancy, it will provide a high degree of fault tolerance.