* 9111241
* RIA: High-Speed Interconnection Technologies for Digital    Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Anujan Varma, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1994
* USD 69,990.00

This research aims at applying high-speed digital communication and switching
technologies to computer systems. Typical applications to be considered includes
interconnection of processor subsystems among themselves for multiprocessor
configurations, and the interconnection of processors to I/O subsystems. These
applications require high bandwidth, low latency, and low error- rate beyond the
capability of current electrical buses and O/I channels. It studies the
applicability of various high-speed interconnection technologies and the
development of new architectures and protocols suitable in a computer system
environment. It uses fiber-optics as the link technology and high-speed crossbar
switches for interconnection. The structure of these switches, as well as
mechanisms for connection setup, routing, and flow-control across multiple
cascaded switches are studied. In addition, fast connection setup within a
switch by the use of multiple controllers are also investigated. Alternate
interconnection technologies such as optical subcarrier multiplexing are also
investigated as low- cost replacements for the switch. Experimental evaluation
of the concepts is performed on a testbed consisting of IBM RS/6000 AND PS/2
high-performance workstations equipped with 100 Mbits/s optical link cards