* 9111647
* Using National Economic Power to Pursue Economic and        Environmental Goals
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Jonathan Eaton, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1994
* USD 130,459.00

Economic analysis of trade policy has usually sought to explain trade
intervention in terms of domestic objectives. Tariffs and quotas, for example,
have been seen primarily as a response to protectionist pressures emerging
directly from domestic groups perceiving themselves as benefiting from them. But
trade policy is increasingly seen as a mechanism for enforcing international
economic and environmental agreements. For example, trade sanctions have been
threatened as a means of enforcing international debt contracts and punishing
nations that violate international environmental protocols. This project
rigorously analyzes the ability of national governments to use trade policy as a
way of influencing the policies of other sovereign nations. The ability of a
government to exert external influence is investigated in the context of
theories of dynamic strategic interaction. The focus is not on the development
of theoretical methods per se, but on their application to the international
economic order. The project assesses the ability of existing multilateral and
unilateral arrangements, such as GATT and U.S. trade law, and alternative
arrangements to achieve objectives in global environmental protection, trade
policy, protection of intellectual property, and international banking. Two
specific questions are addressed: (1) Does the cost, in terms of reduced
flexibility, of laws constraining the executive's pursuit of foreign policy
outweigh any improved commitment vis-a-vis foreign governments that such laws
might impart? (2) In the presence of asymmetric information about the national
and global costs and benefits of environmental protection, should national
environmental protection be rewarded, or should sanctions be imposed against
polluters?