* 9111646
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Three-Dimensional Regionalization and Modeling for Sedimentary Basin Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1992,12/31/1995
* John Davis, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1995
* USD 10,150.00

This award supports John C. Davis and several colleagues and students of the
Energy Research Center of the University of Kansas to collaborate in geological
research with Jan Harff and others of the Mathematical Geology Department of the
Central Institute for the Physics of the Earth, Potsdam, Germany. The two groups
have been independently engaged in improving methods for regional geological
modelling while working locally to model the North German depression and the
Western Kansas shelf. They are now combining their fundamentally different
modelling approaches to produce a new and stronger modelling process, based on
three- dimensional regionalization. A further and more significant objective of
their collaboration is to produce computer software, running interactively on a
graphical computer workstation, that can easily be used for the regionalization
and modeling of any sedimentary basin. Three-dimensional regionalization is a
quantitative process that seeks to divide a sedimentary basin into discrete
parts that are simultaneously as homogeneous and distinct as possible in their
characteristics, and also as geographically compact as possible. The resulting
subdivisions can then be treated as discrete entities, greatly simplifying both
static and dynamic modelling of the basin. There is increasing need for improved
methods of basin analysis in order to locate energy and water resources and to
predict fluid movement for environmental purposes. Implementation of this
greatly enhanced method of basin analysis in software operable in a workstation
environment will have a substantial impact beyond the field of sedimentary
geology. A further contribution of this collaboration is that it links
fundamental concepts of geostatistical theory with computer methodologies that
have been developed relatively independently in the Eastern bloc and in the
West. The valuable developments in this area of quantitative geology by
scientists of the former socialist countries of Europe and the USSR (including
Dr. Harff and his group at Potsdam) are not widely known. Basically, the
"eastern " approach focused on the discovery and description of discontinuous
aspects of geological structures and processes, while "western" researchers have
tended to focus on the continuous aspect of geological properties.