* 9111244
* Research Initiation Award: Synthesis of Pseudo-Fuzzy Logic  Controls for Chemical Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1993
* Tomas Co, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 11/30/1993
* USD 70,000.00

Chemical processing systems are typically nonlinear and complex. Control
operators in industry tend to rely on their own experience and heuristics (or
simple common sense) to control a complicated process. Fuzzy logic control is an
efficient method which can easily incorporate heuristics. Fuzzy logic controls
are based on fuzzy set theory which is designed to allow quantitative
measurements of qualitative descriptions such as tall, large, small, etc. used
frequently in human reasoning. A fuzzy set is a set of numbers having membership
values between 0 and 1, where 0 signifies weakest membership and 1 signifies
strong membership. This research project will investigate pseudo-fuzzy logic
controllers (PFLC) for the control of complex nonlinear chemical processes. PFLC
is based on conventional fuzzy logic controllers but it translates heuristics
into algebraic equations (fuzzy logic sets use decision tables) with tunable
parameters. The methodology includes the derivation of pseudo-fuzzy logic models
which incorporate confluence methods for obtaining model structure and
modulating function methods for system identification. Heuristics are then
translated to PFLCs. System performance can be analyzed using modern control
methods such as frequency response, Lyapunov or H infinity methods. New rules
can be obtained by explicitly solving for the control variables from pseudo-
fuzzy logic models. To investigate the practical applications of PFLC, an
experimental study of temperature control of a polymerization reactor will also
be performed. The system will be the polymerization of polydimethylsiloxanes.