* 9111867
* Toward Accurate Inference in Nonlinear Dynamic Models
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1993
* A. Ronald Gallant, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1993
* USD 58,402.00

This project develops econometric methods that do not rely on the correct
specification of the structure of economic models for their validity. This is an
extremely important line of research because these methods permit empirical
research to concentrate on drawing economic inferences from data without risking
potentially large specification errors. The basic idea is to replace the
structural model with an approximation that sequentially improves as more
information becomes available. The methods developed by this project permit
reliable inference at each intermediate stage of model evolution. The procedures
are general enough to encompass most econometric inference procedures. Under a
previous grant the investigator succeeded in developing statistical methods that
have certain advantages particularly relevant to econometric applications:
simplicity, ease of implementation, and ease of extension to nonlinear,
multivariate, and time series applications. Under this grant these methods will
be extended to a dynamic setting and used to analyze financial markets. As in
the past, algorithms implementing the theoretical and empirical work will be
coded and documented to current standards for professionally written, scientific
software and put in the public domain. The methods developed under this project
are termed seminonparametric (SNP) methods because they are parametric yet have
nonparametric properties. The procedures replace the structure models with a
truncated series expansion, the error density with a truncated expansion, or
both. By letting the truncation grow adaptively with sample size, the
approximation is accurate enough at each intermediate stage to permit reliable
inference and ultimate convergence to the underlying data generating mechanism.
Applications are made to conditionally heterogeneous time series such as occur
in finance and macroeconomics. Bayesian methods are also studied.