* 9111781
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for III-V/II-VI Heterovalent Molecular Beam Epitaxy
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Jacek Furdyna, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1993
* USD 322,200.00

Funds are requested for setting up a hybrid molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system
consisting of two growth chambers, with an ultrahigh vacuum channel for
transporting wafers from one chamber to the other. Specifically, this proposal
requests funds for a second MBE growth chamber for III-V layers, and a transfer
channel, which will be added on to an existing MBE growth chamber for II-VI
compounds and alloys. The individual growth chambers will be devoted to epitaxy
and doping of III-V and of II-VI semiconductor compounds. The UHV transport
channel will permit epitaxial deposition of II-VI layers and heterostructures
directly on III-V epilayers. The research program includes studies of the
interface to understand mechanisms which determine nucleation of heterovalent
growth; studies of II-VI material growth on III-V epilayer alloy substrates and
lattice matching for particular II-VI compounds or short-period superlattices;
exploration of injection of carriers in heterovalent heterojunctions from the
III-V into the II-VI region; and exploration of the magnetic proximity effects
which may occur at the interface of a III-V material with a II-VI based diluted
magnetic semiconductor (DMS) as a result of electron wavefunction penetration
from the III-V into the DMS region. Structural, optical, electronic, and neutron
scattering studies on the proposed materials will be conducted. About 8 grad
students, 2 undergrad students, and 1 post-doc will be directly involved in the
program. The instrumentation is to be maintained and operated by the university
and the research group. The university is providing significant matching funds
(48%).