* 9111912
* Loosely-Coupled Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Jayadev Misra, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 05/31/1995
* USD 284,794.00

Large-scale distributed programming, where processes communicate via messages,
is a reality whereas large-scale shared variable programming remains an ill-
understood activity. It is postulated that the distinction between these two
classes is the type of communication-it is disciplined in the former case and
arbitrary in the latter case. Furthermore, implementations of shared-variable
systems on multiprocessors with individual caches pose several problems,
including cache-coherence. This work attempts to impose certain disciplines on
shared variable programming so that large-scale system design becomes feasible
and the implementations avoid most of the issues associated with cache
coherence. The plan of research is to identify a substantial class of shared-
variable systems that enjoy some of the advantages of distributed (i.e.,
message-passing) systems. The systems will be constrained to a class called
loosely-coupled, in which the computations of different processes are largely
non-interfering even though they share variables. Loosely-coupled systems will
acquire certain properties-such as absence of "race conditions" -normally
associated with distributed systems. Designs of loosely-coupled systems will be
accomplished without extensive analysis of scenarios based on execution
sequences, process interactions or deadlock. Compositional proof theories for
such systems will be developed and the efficient implementation of such a system
on multiple-memory multiprocessor architectures will be indicated.