* 9111779
* Creativity &amp; Representing in Science:                       A Cognitive-Historical Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Nancy Nersessian, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 04/30/1993
* USD 40,000.00

Dr. Nersessian is addressing a central question in the area of science and
technology studies: how do new conceptual structures emerge in scientific
revolutions. Philosophers and historians of science have been divided on the
issue: some have viewed conceptual change in science as occurring suddenly,
often as a psychological Gestalt switch; others have viewed change as extended
over a long period of time. This project seeks to show how a more refined
understanding of conceptual change can be achieved by combining the short-term
cognitive -- or psychological -- approach with the long-term historical one. It
does so on the basis of two premises. First, the extant literature has
demonstrated that conceptual change in science is rarely, if ever, sudden.
Hence, in order to understand the evolution of conceptual change, the temporal
perspective of history is needed. Second, conceptual change in science has its
roots in ordinary thinking; the representational and problem-solving practices
of scientists and outgrowths and refinements of ordinary cognitive resources.
This investigation unites the resources of two methods normally kept separate by
applying a new interdisciplinary method that deploys modern tools of cognitive
analysis in fine-structure long- term examinations of theoretical and
experimental practices responsibly for major conceptual innovations.