* 9111968
* Low Temperature Depositions and Growth of Dielectric Films  Using Electron Cyclotron Resonance Source
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Stella Pang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 07/31/1994
* USD 70,000.00

For devices with submicrometer dimensions and densely packed integrated
circuits, low processing temperature is essential. While most of the fabrication
steps can be carried out at low temperature, the only exception is the formation
of dielectric layer. To obtain low temperature dielectric materials for
different applications, we propose using electron cyclotron resonance (ECR)
source for deposition and growth. The high efficiency for gas dissociation and
excitation provided by ECR source allows the activation energy to be lowered and
high density of reactive radicals to be generated. There are two additional new
thrust for the proposed work. The effect of selective excitation and
dissociation will be studied by adjusting the gas injection to the two gas
inlets: one by the ECR cavity and one around the sample stage. The second focus
is on controlling the surface reaction by timing the arrival rate of the
reactive species. By providing control of these parameters, high quality films,
new dielectric materials, and effective step coverage for high aspect ratio
features can be obtained. There are three objectives of this proposed project:
(1) deposition and growth of low temperature gate dielectric, the focus is on
high electrical quality and reasonable deposition rate for single wafer
processing; (2) deposit planarized dielectric for multilevel interconnections, a
major issue is on high degree of global planarization and good electrical
properties; (3) reaction time control for conformal step coverage of high aspect
ratio features with uniform thickness.