* 9111566
* Settlement Systems and Sea-Level History in the Central     Pacific
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Jeffrey Clark, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 57,327.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Jeffrey Clark and his colleagues
will conduct one field season of archaeological and geological research on
Tutuila Island, American Samoa. Archaeological research will focus on the 'Aoa
and Leone valleys and combine survey with excavation of known sites. The data
collected will, hopefully, permit the culture history of the region to be
reconstructed. Changing lifestyle and settlement pattern over time will be
studied. The central goals of the geological part of the project will be to
determine how relative sea level changed over time and how landforms were
modified by human activity. To accomplish this, ancient shorelines will be
located and mapped. Geological cores will be extracted and analyzed to determine
geomorphological changes. Palynological data will also assist in this process.
The results will be generalized to other islands in the Pacific. Through
integration of both aspects of the research, it should be possible to
reconstruct the mutual interactions between changing human practices and
landforms. In recent years, archaeologists have come to realize that Pacific
islands provide a excellent context to study complex human- landform
interactions. On the one hand, changes in relative sea level due to local
tectonism altered the landscape available for human subsistence. On the other
hand, the felling and burning of forests by local populations also had a major
effect because of the erosion which resulted. The response by these groups in
many instances led to the rise of the complex chiefdoms observed by early
Western explorers. Archaeologists, however, disagree on the specific interaction
mechanisms and this study should provide new insight. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide basic geological information on changing
sea levels which, hopefully, can be generalized to other islands in the region.
It should yield new insight into human-land relationships and shed new light on
the rise of cultural complexity. Finally, it will help to strengthen the
scientific infrastructure at North Dakota State University.