* 9111249
* Interacting Signals and Cheap Talk Games
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Steven Matthews, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 07/31/1994
* USD 88,338.00

This research is on communication and has two parts. Part one concerns costly
signaling by multiple parties. With few exceptions, signaling has been modeled
as a game with one informed sender. This is inappropriate for situations with
multiple informed parties. For example, industry insiders tend to have better
information about their industry or each other's products than do outsiders, and
many of their actions, such as pricing, investment, or advertising choices, are
separably observed by the outsiders. Such senders "compete" in the signaling
domain to influence the beliefs of receivers. This research will develop models
of signaling competition in correlated private information settings. A central
focus will be on the conditions under which signaling competition reduces
asymmetric information losses. Part two concerns communication which is not
costly, "cheap talk." Simple talking plays a large role in actual economic
activity, but it plays no role in most economic models. The proposed research
will develop theoretical models of face-to-face communication without mediators,
emphasizing the role of multiple rounds of message exchange. Cheap talk
refinement criteria for games with multiple privately informed parties and
multiple rounds of communication will also be considered. These analyses are
important because they will help advance our understanding in two issues in
communication, namely, interacting signals sent by agents, and face-to-face and
costless communication conveyed by people.