* 9111034
* Research Initiation Awards:  Configurational Transport      Processes in Reactions with Enzymes Bound to Fabricated     Tailored Supports
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Johannes Nitsche, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1993
* USD 64,841.00

The objective of this project is to investigate the configurational transport
processes that underline site- specific reaction with soluble and immobilized
enzymes, via theoretical, numerical and experimental techniques. The specific
goals are: (1) to further the understanding of confined transitional, rotational
and conformational diffusion of macromolecular substrates in fine pores; (2) to
develop a predictive theory describing the interplay between these
configurational modes of transport and site-specific binding steps fundamental
to enzymatic reactions; (3) to work the detailed diffusion-reactions theory
evolved into a comprehensive computer-aided methodology for optimization of
conversion rates with respect to structural and physicochemical support
properties; (4) to aid the development of industrial applications of immobilized
enzymes via detailed study of large- substrates binding and other phenomena of
practical relevance; and (5) to fabricate porous carriers with tailored
microstructures and test them experimentally. This work will furnish an
experimentally-supported fundamental transport framework for analyzing site-
specific diffusion- reaction processes. Its practical value derives from its
quantification of poorly understood pore-scale phenomena that mask intrinsic
kinetics, for which improved understanding will empower commercial and
biomedical process development.