* 9111264
* The Interaction of Grammar and Discourse in Northern Pomo Conversation and Monologue
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Catherine O'Connor, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 06/30/1995
* USD 132,739.00

ABSTRACT Investigation of grammatical elements functioning within naturalistic
discourse expands our understanding of the workings of grammar. Moreover, it
reveals how discourse genres and cultural practices are partially constructed
through speakers' use of grammatical resources. The grammar of Northern Pomo, a
dying American Indian language of Northern California, displays several
grammatical subsystems (e.g. fluid-S' subject case marking, logophoric pronouns,
so-called switch reference) which interact with discourse in ways that are of
interest to theories of grammar and discourse. The grammar has been extensively
described, but descriptive and theoretical work on these and other topics has
been limited by the availability of a very small corpus of extended discourse.
Now an opportunity has arisen to collect a large corpus of conversational and
traditional narrative data from two of the last fluent and intellectually active
Northern Pomo speakers. The Principal Investigator will collect conversational
data, and working with her consultant of the last decade, will transcribe,
analyze, gloss, and translate new and existing conversational and monologue
data. This will culminate in a volume of texts, with grammatical and lexical
supporting material. The PI will also investigate specific linguistic hypotheses
about the grammar of Northern Pomo based on the analyzed corpus of connected
discourse.