* 9111050
* The Volunteer or Resist:  Case Studies in Contingent Consent
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Margaret Levi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1992
* USD 45,000.00

Voluntary compliance by citizens with the laws and policies of the nation is
fundamental to the stable functioning of democratic society. Although compliance
can be produced in the short run by force, theory maintains that in the long run
compliance must be voluntary if democratic institutions are to survive. This
study examines the nature, extent, and determinants of voluntary or contingent
compliance by comparing decisions to volunteer for military service with
decisions to resistance military conscription. Two critical cases will be
examined, the Irish in Britain during the late 19th and early 20th century and
the French Canadians during this century. These cases will be used to test the
hypothesis that voluntary compliance is possible only when institutional
arrangements exists that provide information to the public so that government
policies are perceived as fair and other citizens are perceived as doing their
fair share. When completed this study will enhance our understanding of the
circumstances under which citizens will voluntarily comply with government laws
and policies. The findings should have implications not only for contemporary
democracies such as the United States but for the many nations in Eastern Europe
and the third world that are struggling to establish stable democratic rule.