* 9111588
* Rainforest Fires, Human Disturbance, and Vegetation History
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Sally Horn, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 07/31/1994
* USD 120,124.00

Large tracts of rainforests in Central and South America have been considered
"virgin," the products almost entirely of natural processes. Significant human
impacts on rainforests are thought by many to have been recent occurrences.
Paleoecological and archeological research is providing new evidence that
substantial human modifications of forested areas already may have been taking
place in centuries before Europeans settled in the Western Hemisphere. This
project will continue research on pre-Columbian forest modification already
underway in and near the Le Selva Biological Station in northern Costa Rica.
Pollen grains, charcoal fragments, and diatoms in sediment cores taken from
lakes and swamps will be analyzed and used to reconstruct histories of natural
vegetation, agricultural plants, and fires in the area. Among the research
questions to be answered in this project are: How frequent were fires in Pre-
Columbian forests? What crops and weeds associated with farming activity are
found in the pollen record, and how does the presence of those crops and weeds
relate to records of fires in the charcoal record? How frequently were forests
cleared? Can climatic shifts be distinguished in the pollen and diatom records?
This project will contribute new understandings related to the specific
questions listed above and to many other related inquiries. Because similar
types of inquiries are underway at other sites in Latin America, the results of
this project also will contribute to comparative research aimed at identifying
the nature and processes associated with human and environmental change on a
continental scale. Methodological advances also will be made, especially the
refinement of a new procedure for automated image analysis to identify charcoal
fragments. Finally, the involvement of graduate and undergraduate students as
members of the research team will provide excellent opportunities for their
education, and collaboration with Costa Rican investigators should stimulate
scientific development in that nation.