* 9111546
* Dissertation Research:  Mate Choice in the Bicolor          Damselfish, Segastes partitus
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1991,11/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 11/30/1993
* USD 8,770.00

In many mating systems, females mate repeatedly during a reproductive period.
Under such conditions, mate choice may involve two distinct phases: initial mate
selection and subsequent female fidelity. When males provide parental care,
natural selection should favor female mate preferences that result in higher
offspring fitness. However, at the beginning of a reproductive period, females
cannot directly assess offspring fitness, and so may choose mates based on
indicators of potential offspring fitness. Once the initial mate selection has
been made, females should be able to assess offspring fitness directly by
monitoring the survival of offspring resulting from previous matings. This
research will involve a detailed study of female mate choice in the bicolor
damselfish, Stegastes partitus, a coral reef fish in which males provide
exclusive parental care of eggs. The objectives of this study are to (1)
establish the connection, if any, between the initial female choice of a
character and the fitness consequences to offspring of the female preference,
(2) manipulate the character to establish causality, (3) determine whether
subsequent mating decisions are more strongly influenced by direct information
on offspring fitness, and (4) manipulate the cue to determine whether female
responses do indeed increase subsequent offspring fitness. The research
represents one of the first fully integrated studies of mating dynamics.