* 9111556
* Comparative Study of The Influence of Structural Variations on Juvenile Justice Processing
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Robert Sampson, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 12/31/1993
* USD 72,652.00

To date most of the research on the juvenile justice system has focused on
individual-level case processing, examining variations within a given
jurisdiction that could be explained by either case or defendant-specific
characteristics. Probably the most common topic has emphasized how "extra-legal"
factors such as race, social class, and gender influence court decisioning. This
tradition of work has added substantially to our understanding of juvenile
justice and the workings of the court. The picture, however, is necessarily
incomplete. Despite the vast number of studies on the micro causes of juvenile
justice processing (i.e., within court variation), there are few efforts that
have examined its macro causes; that is, differences among court systems that
can be attributed to the characteristics of the communities in which they
reside. The study being undertaken by Dr. Sampson represents a major advance in
current research on official reactions to juvenile delinquency by shifting from
micro level concerns to macro level interests in examining how environmental and
structural factors affect the operations of the juvenile courts. Specifically,
the research asks the question: how do features of the community-- especially
urbanization, population density, heterogeneity, concentration of poverty, and
court-organizational structure-- influence rates of referral, formal
petitioning, secure pre- disposition detention, release, and placement. These
five dimensions of justice court processing, classified by crime type, age,
race, and sex, will be analyzed in conjunction with social, economic,
demographic, and court organizational data for over 300 counties in 1985 and
1990. Both stability and change in the macrostructural context of juvenile
courts will be examined as they bear on theories of the underclass and social
dislocations, political economy, conflict, and social control. Through rigorous
analysis of how contextual factors shape juvenile court processing across
jurisdictions and over time, this study is likely to produce important new
knowledge that will establish the research agenda for years to come.