* 9111149
* Ballistic Electron Optics in Two Dimensional Electron       Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Joseph S. Spector, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 01/31/1994
* USD 60,001.00

This proposal describes a program of research which builds upon work done while
the principal investigator was a postdoctoral member of the technical staff at
AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories. In previous studies it was demonstrated that within
the ballistic mean free path, electrons in two- dimensional electron systems can
be controlled in a manner similar to the manipulation of photons in optical
systems. This field of research can aptly be labeled ballistic electron optics.
The low temperature electronic mobilities in the devices of the previous studies
were extremely high (&gt; 5x106cm2/Vs), corresponding to elastic mean free paths
of many tens of micrometers. This enabled the manipulation of ballistic carriers
over relatively long distances (&gt;10um). Since the characteristic electron
wavelength is typically two orders of magnitude smaller than this, the wave
nature of the electrons did not play an important role, and analogies with
geometrical optics have been made. In order to further this field of research
and to investigate whether ballistic electron optical devices have the potential
for the creation of new types of switching systems and computer architectures,
the present research is focused on the following areas: 1) the investigation of
how these devices can be scaled down in size and what role the wave nature of
the electrons will play, 2) integrating two or more devices together, and 3) the
development of new ballistic electron devices. The equipment necessary to carry
out this research (3He cryostat with 11 Tesla magnet, and photolithography and
electron beam lithography facilities) are available within the Center For Solid
State Electronics Research of which the principle investigator is a member.