* 9111346
* Research Initiation Award:  Parameter Estimation in         Adaptive Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Konstantinos Tsakalis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 02/28/1994
* USD 59,956.00

The objective of the research is to analyze and quantify the design of
estimators with intended application in adaptive control systems. Interest is
mainly focused on certain aspects of closed-loop performance in the presence of
uncertainty and, particularly, on preventing the closed loop signals from
reaching excessively large magnitude for short time periods, commonly known as
"burst" phenomena. Such undesirable phenomena are of great practical
significance, especially in cases of poorly excited systems where the true
nonlinear nature of adaptive controllers is highly pronounced. The plan is to
investigate the properties of estimators whose design is performed via signal
energy as well as amplitude criteria. Although the minimization of the maximum
amplitude of the estimation error typically leads to a linear programming
problem of increasing dimensionality, recursive suboptimal solutions will be
considered in order to alleviate this problem. The preliminary investigations
indicate that these techniques allow for amplitude considerations in the design
of adaptive systems and for a more efficient use of the available measurements.
Particular emphasis will be given to the extension of this approach to time-
varying systems and the assessment of the associated performance trade-offs. It
is expected that the results of the research will make a significant
contribution in the design of practically acceptable adaptive controllers.