* 9111186
* Compensation System Design, Employment and Firm Performance:An Analyis of French Microdata and a Comparison to the U.S.A
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* John Abowd, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 174,565.00

The purpose of this project is to develop a series of empirical studies that
implement existing models of efficient contracting, labor demand, agency
relationships, and investment in the presence of rent-seeking employees. A major
innovation in this study is the use of French microdata to be analyzed using a
collection of computer files that allow for simultaneous analysis of individual
employees, establishments, and enterprises. For the employees, compensation
information and skill measures are available. For establishments, employment and
compensation levels in various occupations, industry, compensation and
information on revenues are available. For enterprises, detailed financial,
employment and investment information are available. This research is important
because it will provide a detailed and comprehensive summary of the relations
among the various components of compensation system design, employment at
various skill levels and fundamental measures of firm performance. In addition,
because the PI has analyzed similar data for US and Canadian companies, an
effort will be made to estimate some models that are directly comparable. This
should contribute directly to the ongoing inquiry as to the appropriate
framework for modeling negotiated wage rates and the resulting employment
demand.