* 9111853
* Collaborative Research on Topological Relationships at      Alpine Treeline
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1991,10/31/1993
* George Malanson, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/1993
* USD 25,818.00

Concerns about prospects for changing climatic conditions across the globe have
given new impetus to inquiries that would identify zones where the impacts of
such changes can be readily monitored and analyzed. One such set of zones are
alpine treeline ecotones, where montane forests gradually give way to barren
slopes or alpine tundra. Previous studies have shown these areas to be locales
where even minor climatic changes can induce profound changes in vegetation
patterns. This collaborative research project will conduct intensive analyses of
patterns of treeline species and will explore relationships among various
factors that affect the number and location of species. Research will focus on
sites in Glacier National Park of Montana. Data will be gathered from satellite
images and field observations of climatic variables and soil and bedrock
conditions. Data from digital elevation models and tree rings also will be used
to construct and test statistical and path models that represent how treeline
distributions respond to interactions among different variables over time. This
collaborative project will provide new data and models that enhance knowledge
about interactions among different factors in alpine treeline zones, both at the
study site and in many other mountainous environments. This project may provide
new metrics for identifying the impacts of changing climatic conditions, and it
also will explore new methods for monitoring and evaluating the use of remote
sensed data and geographic information systems in vegetation modelling.