* 9111890
* NBER Annual Macroeconomics Conference: Cambridge,           Massachusetts, March 1992 and March 1993
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Geoffrey Carliner, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1994
* USD 75,000.00

This grant provides support to continue a series of annual conferences on
macroeconomics. These conferences, which started in 1986, have made a
significant contribution to the testing of empirical implications of new
theories as well as the use of relevant theory to analyze policy issues of
current interest. The conference series will continue to encourage the writing
of empirically oriented papers by both established and promising young
economists. In addition, the series will continue to serve as a forum for
communication among economists from the different schools of macroeconomics. The
annual conference volume has become a widely cited and influential research
reference. This conference was created in 1986 to fill what was then perceived
to be a major problem in macroeconomic research, namely a widening gap between
the research frontiers and policy issues. It seemed at the time that young
researchers in economics were doing little empirical research and very rarely
examining in any depth the empirical implications of their theories. The
conference also addresses another major problem in macroeconomics. The field of
macroeconomics appears increasingly to be splitting into different schools,
which are not seriously communicating with each other. Support is needed so that
this successful conference series can continue to address these problems in
macroeconomics.