* 9111094
* Collaborative Research on Adjustment Costs and Information  in Aggregate Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Andrew Caplin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1994
* USD 107,730.00

This project studies the aggregate consequences of the interaction between the
adjustment costs faced by individual agents and the transmission of information
in the economy. Adjustment costs provide a natural reason for information to be
imperfect in a multi-agent economy. When action is costly, individuals will not
find it in their interests to respond to every change in their circumstances,
thereby preventing the transmission of individually held information to others
through market data. In turn, the information problem creates a reason why, even
in a competitive setting, equilibrium may be suboptimal. When individuals weigh
the costs and benefits of action, they ignore the value to others of the
information revealed by their action. The goal of this study is to show that the
extent of our ignorance can play a key role in determining both the average
level of business activity and the pattern of fluctuations. To accomplish this
task many difficult modelling problems, such as aggregation in the face of
adjustment costs and the partial revelation of information in general
equilibrium models, must be solved. A preliminary theoretical model which
overcomes many of the difficult modelling problems and allows a complete
analysis of the steady state interactions between information and adjustment
costs was completed. Non-steady state extensions in which the importance of
information dynamics is readily appreciated will be developed. The idea that
information may only be released through action and that adjustment costs limit
action has important consequences for economic fluctuations. In particular, the
interaction of information and adjustment costs may result in the bunching of
individual decisions. The failure of others to act may lead all agents to
hesitate, while action by others may promote responses. This may lead to
increased market volatility. This study takes us down the path to a better
understanding of possible causes and consequences of incomplete information on
the behavior of the economy.