* 9111573
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Material Handling Research
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/1991,01/31/1997
* Eric Malstrom, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Jay Lee
* 01/31/1997
* USD 638,959.00

This project initiates the first year of a five-year continuing award to the
University of Arkansas to join with the University of Cincinnati and Florida
Atlantic University in merging with Georgia Institute of Technology's
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Material Handling. The
university has developed the company support to be added to the Center's
industry base. The research projects approved by the new consolidated Industry
Advisory Board for the University of Arkansas are "Improved Postal Pak
Operations", "Analysis of Flat Mail Containers", "Simulation Methodology to
Support Process Manufacturing", and "Analysis of the Warehouse Layout Problems
for an Electronic Assembly Environment." A minority woman graduate student will
augment the Center's research by studying "the Extension of JIT Software
Development to Manufacturing Automation Alternatives." The researchers are
experts in their fields and have the capability and facilities to participate in
the new merged Center. The Program Manager recommends the University of Arkansas
be awarded $50,000 for the first year of a five-year continuing grant. An
additional $20,500 for one year is recommended with funds provided by the
Research Centers for Minority Scholars Program. Near the end of each 12 month
period the Program Manager and/or the Director of the Engineering Centers
Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of criteria,
including the following: (1) the extent to which the university-industry
interaction and collaboration is developing; (2) the extent to which the support
base is expanding; (3) the extent to which a robust research program is
developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program Director will recommend
support of the next period of this continuing grant.