* 9111141
* RIA: Mechanisms of High Temperature Subcritical Crack Growthin Ceramic-Matrix Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Jian Ku Shang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jerome Sackman
* 01/31/1994
* USD 66,000.00

The ability of ceramic materials to withstand high temperature and hostile
environments offers great prospect for potential major improvements in the
design performance of high temperature components in chemical processing, power
generation and industrial waste recovery applications. Their use as structural
materials, however, has been limited primarily because of their poor fracture
toughness and lack of damage tolerance. Although research in the past has
resulted in major advances in the low temperature toughening of ceramics
especially be second phase reinforcements, the majority of these low temperature
toughening mechanisms become ineffective at high temperatures. In this research
the fundamental micromechanisms of high temperature subcritical crack growth in
three classes of ceramic-matrix composites, chosen to reflect different primary
room temperature toughening mechanisms, namely crack deflection, crack trapping
and crack bridging, will be examined. The approach will be 1) to develop a
viable high temperature crack growth monitoring technique in semiconducting
ceramics, ii) to identify salient mechanisms impeding crack advances in these
composites at high temperatures, iii) to examine the microstructural origins of
these mechanisms in terms of the interaction between the crack and the
constituents of the composite, iv) to document the toughening from these
mechanisms as a function of the microstructural parameters, and v) to establish
physical models describing the microstructural dependence of the toughening
mechanism.