* 9111848
* Collaborative Research:  Life History Tradeoffs:  An        Integrative Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Patricia Parker, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1994
* USD 51,479.00

One objective of population biology is to understand how the environment leads
to differences among species; another is to explore the behavioral and
physiological mechanisms that control life history traits of individual species.
This research is designed to contribute to this basic knowledge by studying how
hormones shape and direct the life of a small bird, the dark-eyed junco. The
focus is on males and the hormone testosterone, which is known to have numerous
effects on animal behavior, physiology, and morphology (shape and form). These
effects include a suppressive effect of testosterone on male parental behavior
and a stimulatory effect on behavior related to mate attraction, e.g. singing.
Testosterone can also decrease resistance to disease. By manipulating the amount
of testosterone in the blood and comparing the behavior and physiology of the
treated birds to that of untreated, control birds, changes induced will be
examined and related to correlates of fitness, such as ability to sire
offspring, life span, and survival of offspring. The birds will be studied in
the field where their survival and success in producing offspring can be
monitored. By tracking the fates of animals whose physiology and behavior
deviates from the normative state, the research will lead to a more fundamental
understanding of how hormonal systems evolve and what balance of selective
factors and organismal responses keeps a particular animal species "on track"
over evolutionary time.