* 9111768
* Acid-Base Properties of Photoexcited Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1997
* Laren Tolbert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1997
* USD 585,500.00

The phenomenon of enhanced acidity occurring in the excited state of
hydroxyarenes will be studied. Through strategic design and directed synthesis,
new molecules with specifically designed internal proton acceptors or with
greatly enhanced photoacidity have been prepared and will be studied. These
substrates will allow the testing of various theories of exited state proton
transfer, provide new methods of studies of proton transfer initiated reactions,
and yield novel structures unattainable by ground state methods. These studies
will involve molecular orbital calculations, organic synthesis of target
molecules, time-resolved nanosecond fluorescence and other spectroscopic
techniques, and structure analysis. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics
Program supports the continuing work of Professor Laren M. Tolbert at Georgia
Tech University. One of the important properties of organic molecules is their
acidity, that is, how readily a proton can be transferred to a substrate. Proton
transfers are important in the catalysis of many reactions and this is one of
the reasons for the great interest in the acidity of organic molecules.
Molecules that are excited by irradiation with ultraviolet light may display
enhanced acidity, compared to their acidity in the absence of irradiation. The
origin of this effect is not well understood and previous explanations may be in
error. In the present study, molecules will be specifically designed to test
various theories of proton transfer from molecules that are excited by
ultraviolet light irradiation.