* 9111549
* RUI:  Ultralow Temperature Acoustic and Thermal Evaluation  of Technical Materials for Gravity Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* William Duffy, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 06/30/1995
* USD 66,514.00

Significant future improvements of the detection sensitivity of ultralow
temperature resonant mass detectors of gravitational radiation may be achieved
by refined detector material selection. This award in experimental gravitational
physics will allow Professor Duffy to continue his evaluation of material
Q-values and thermal properties. This research will emphasize studies of the
mechanical quality factor (Q) vs. temperature from 50 mK to 300K of selected
polycrystalline technical materials. The focus of the l kHz studies will be on
the significant temperature region from 50 mK to 1 K, where there is a paucity
of data. Q-values will be determined from the vibration decay of a mechanical
resonator mounted in the vacuum chamber of a dilution refrigerator cryostat.
Resonators will be fabricated from high-purity refractory metals and ceramic
materials, which exhibit large cross-sections for gravity-wave detection by
resonant bar antennas. Detailed annealing procedures needed to achieve the
highest cryogenic Qs will be developed. Grain size and hardness will be
evaluated. Ultralow temperature specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity
studies will be carried out on selected materials. In addition to supporting
gravity wave antenna development, the results should contribute to the
fundamental understanding of acoustic loss mechanisms at ultralow temperatures.