* 9111786
* Electron Transfer Reactions Between Cytochrome c,           Cytochrome c Oxidase and Dioxygen
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Robert Bass, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 12/31/1994
* USD 398,959.00

This research, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, will study electron transfer thermodynamics, kinetics, and
mechanisms of enzyme action for cytochrome c oxidase. The enzyme will be
adsorbed to a gold electrode and embedded in a lipid bilayer. Through both
electrochemical and spectroscopic measurements (including magnetic circular
dichroism) the electrical and structural dynamics of oxidation/reduction
processes will be studied. The use of lipid bilayers will keep enzyme subunits
from clustering at the electrode surface, improving the likelihood that the
dynamics observed correspond to the specific units desired rather than to
agglomorates. %%% Cytochrome c is a ubiquitous biological transfer agent. The
efficiency of respiration and photosynthesis are largely dependent on the
dynamics of electron transfer between cytochrome c and two enzymes: cytochrome c
oxidase and cytochrome c reductase. This research will study the electron
transfer dynamics by adsorbing cytochrome c reductase on a gold electrode,
otherwise covered by a lipid bilayer to emulate a cell membrane. The goal of the
work is to observe conformation changes in the enzyme as a result of electron
transfer; such changes are hypothesized to be an essential feature of efficient
biological electron transfer processes.