* 9111796
* Effect of Immobilization on Metabolism of Escherichia Coli: Research Planning Grant
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Judith Miller, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/28/1993
* USD 18,000.00

The use of immobilized whole cells to conduct biochemical conversions has
increased significantly in the last several years. One of the most important
areas is the effects of immobilization on the intrinsic metabolism of the cells
employed. Little has been reported, particularly with respect to E. coli, on how
immobilization affects carbon flow, energy production, and product formation.
Preliminary results have shown that significant changes in metabolism occur upon
immobilization. E. coli cells grown in alginate synthesize significantly more
beta-galactosidase per cell, and elevated quantities of the normal metabolic
byproducts acetate, pyruvate, and lactate, compared to free cells. These results
support the hypothesis that immobilization changes the relative rates of carbon
consumption and growth. The specific objectives of this work are to test the
following two hypotheses: i) that the excess carbon consumed by immobilized
cells is diverted to the synthesis of acid byproducts or of inducible protein;
and ii) that mass transfer limitations on the removal of acid byproducts cause
the observed changes in metabolism. The ultimate goal is to exploit
immobilization-induced metabolic changes for the overproduction of recombinant
proteins.