* 9111429
* Collab. Res.:  Relative Fitness &amp; Gender in Wild Populations of Spergulaic marina (the sand-spurrey:  Caryophyllacea):  An Examination of the Assumptions of Theoretical Models
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Veronique Delesalle, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1994
* USD 26,963.00

Sand-spurrey, Spergularia marina, is a common species of natural coastal
wetland habitats throughout the world. Like most plant species, flowers of S.
marina produce both male and female gametes through the production of pollen
grains and ovules. However, in contrast to most species, S. marina exhibits ten-
fold variation in pollen production, which represents allocation to male
reproduction. In addition, S. marina individuals show three-fold variation in
average ovule production (from 50 to 150 ovules per flower), although this range
of variation is not uncommon in flowering plants. More importantly, the
variation in both stamen number and ovule number has a genetic basic and is thus
likely to show change over time in response to selection. This species,
therefore, provides an excellent opportunity to investigate the causes and
consequences of variation in the allocation of floral resources to male and
female gametes, commonly known as "gender allocation". Currently, although there
exists a great deal of theoretical work on this topic, there are no empirical
studies that explore thoroughly the assumptions of this theory. For example, it
has long been believed that selection to increase male allocation (e.g. high
pollen production) should necessarily result in a reduction in female allocation
(e.g., reduced ovule or deed production), promoting the evolution of specialized
reproductive systems. This assumption, however, has never been adequately
tested. Our study of the ecological genetics of sand-spurrey will test the
assumptions of gender allocation theory by providing measurements of the genetic
component to stamen and ovule production and measurements of any "costs"
associated with increased allocation to male or female reproduction. Moreover,
our data will allow an evaluation of the evolutionary flexibility of S. marina -
and species similar to it - and its ability to alter its productive biology in
response to changes in its increasingly threatened habitat.