* 9111674
* Building Political Culture Again:  Unification and the      Political Integration of Germany's Young
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Meredith Watts, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1993
* USD 29,018.00

The reunification of East and West Germany has brought back together two
political cultures which had grown rapidly apart during the preceding forty
years. The dramatic rejoining of political cultures provides a rare opportunity
to assess the effects of the different political institutions of east and west
on the divergent development of their political cultures. It also facilitates
analyses of the development of a new and democratic political culture among
German youth who grew up in the east. Of particular interest is the development
in these youth of attitudes toward democracy and of democratic citizenship. This
award contributes to the support of the first wave of a national survey of the
political attitudes and beliefs of 3500 German youth drawn from both east and
west. The study builds on a long tradition of research on attitudes toward
democracy but provides the first opportunity to study intensively and in a
controlled setting how political attitudes develop in response to different
political environments. In addition to providing systematic evidence of the
effects of the East and West German political systems on citizen's attitudes,
this study will provide important baseline data for tracing changes in the
political attitudes of East German youth as they become reintegrated into a
united democratic Germany. When completed this study will provide a better
understanding of the attitudinal underpinnings of democracy and of the prospects
for developing democratic values in formerly authoritarian states.