* 9112249
* REG: Ultrasonic Resonance Spectrometer
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Paul Heyliger, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jerome Sackman
* 01/31/1993
* USD 29,970.00

Necessary components will be purchased to construct an ultrasonic resonance
spectrometer. The equipment will be used for several research projects involving
the evaluation of the mechanical properties of materials, particularly the
elastic constants. The intended use of the apparatus is to measure the resonant
frequencies of free vibration of materials of very small size that have been
manufactured or already exist in the shape of a parallelepiped, a sphere, or a
cylinder. Using numerical techniques that are currently being developed,
approximations to these frequencies are also evaluated using the theory of
elasticity. By comparing the measured frequencies with the calculated
frequencies and minimizing the difference between these values, optimal
estimates can be obtained for the elastic constants. The measurements system
will allow a wealth of material studies to be completed and can be used to study
any solid: metal, ceramic, semiconductor, polymer, composite, and so on. Other
uses include the effects of temperature and pressure on the elastic constants,
general structural vibration studies, and internal friction measurements. The
system possesses both scientific and practical potentials, and will provide the
opportunity to establish a new standard method for measuring material
properties.