* 9112177
* Dissertation Research: Ecological Pressures of the DampwoodTermite, Zootermopsis nevadensis
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1994
* NONE NONE, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 04/30/1994
* USD 8,904.00

Few studies have examined the ecological factors that shape the social life
histories of termites, a taxon important for comparison with other cooperatively
living animals. The dampwood termite, Zootermopsis nevadensis, is a model
organism for studies on nest-founding, biparental care, foraging and offspring
production. Much of a colony's nesting and feeding activity, up to the 2nd year,
can be observed on the log's surface, just under the bark. These characteristics
serve to facilitate studies of the ecological pressures influencing
Zootermopsis. This study on incipient colonies of Zootermopsis nevadensis will
show how limited nitrogen availability, intraspecific competition, and predation
influence 1) mate choice and/or competition for mates and 2) survivorship of
breeding adults, territory size and offspring production. 3) The advantages of
biparental care under various ecological conditions will also be assessed, by
comparing uniparental colonies with biparental colonies. An estimated 900 field
colonies will be sampled over a one year period. Experimental manipulations that
serve to increase and decrease potential ecological pressures on colonies,
coupled with information obtained from undisturbed colonies under assessed
ecological conditions, will provide a comprehensive and quantitative view of the
factors hypothesized to be important in the social life history of Zootermopsis.