* 9112194
* Conference:  "RNA Processing and mRNA Decey in Prokaryotic  Cells held October 27-31, 1991, Woods Hole, MA"
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* David Apirion, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1993
* USD 7,000.00

The proposed conference deals with two topics that are clearly inter-related but
have not been dealt with together previously. Research over the last several
years has revealed that several bacterial and eukaryotic RNA processing enzymes
possess an RNA component that in itself has catalytic activity. Interest in such
enzymes and catalytic RNAs has been broad and progress rapid, leading to the
award of the Nobel Prize to workers in the area in 1989. Recently, research in
bacterial mRNA decay has also been vigorous, although the process is still
poorly defined. However, the decay of mRNA is formally similar to RNA processing
and very recent work, from several American, European and Japanese laboratories,
indicates that these two processes have components in common. The objective of
the conference is to provide a forum where workers in these two rapidly moving
areas can interact and exchange information. The meeting has the sponsorship of
the American Society of Microbiology. It is to be organized by Drs. David
Apirion and Donald Nierlich at a site on the U.S. Eastern seaboard, and held
October 27-31, 1991. Seven regular sessions and three poster sessions are
planned. An opening talk is to be given by Dr. Sydney Altman (New Haven) and the
closing talk by Dr. Marianne Grunberg-Manago (Paris).