* 9112319
* Dissertation Research:  Variation in a Mutualism:  The      Phenology and Reproductive Biology of Dioecious Figs in     Seasonal Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 10/31/1993
* USD 6,597.00

Knowledge of how spatial and temporal environmental variation affects an
ecological mutualism could reveal clues about mechanisms for the persistence and
evolutionary origins of the mutualism. This study will focus on seasonal, site,
and gender variation in the phenology of two dioecious fig species (Ficus, of
which there are more than 500 altogether) and their pollinator wasps (including
Ceratosolen marchali and Kradibia gestroi). The dioecious fig - fig wasp
mutualism is of special interest because: 1) its persistence requires that wasps
regularly enter and pollinate female fig flowers in which the wasps die, leaving
no offspring, and 2) according to ideas relating seasonality to the evolution of
dioecy, maintenance of the obligate pollinators requires that male trees flower
at times when their success as pollen donors to female trees is small. How this
mutualism persists seems therefore rather problematical. This study will
investigate predictions formulated from studies of monoecious figs and a
dioecious fig (Ficus carica), an ecological outlier exhibiting unusual
phenology. Detailed observations of known (mapped) individual branches, together
with hand pollinations, self-pollination, and choice experiments will facilitate
tests of hypotheses regarding the persistence of this mutualism and various
possible outcomes for each of the participating components. Studies will be
conducted in protected deciduous and evergreen forests of Karnataka State,
India. It may be that these figs, like many others, reign as keystone species in
the forests in which they occur, heavily influencing the occurrence/absence of
other particular plant or animal species within the same habitats.