* 9112815
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Heavy Particle IonizingCollision Dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Ronald Olson, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1996
* USD 19,450.00

This award supports Ronald E. Olson, Michael Schulz and two graduate students of
the University of Missouri-Rolla to collaborate in atomic physics research with
Horst Schmidt-Boecking and his large research group at the Institute for Nuclear
Physics of the University of Frankfurt, Germany. These scientists are working
with a common goal of understanding ionizing collision systems. However, the
Frankfurt and Rolla research groups have different theoretical and experimental
strengths, and each laboratory possesses unique equipment that measures
complementary and overlapping collision products. Their efforts will be
substantially enhanced by sharing their expertise and cooperating in parallel
coordinated efforts to achieve the first complete momentum distribution of
products in singly ionizing collisions between protons and a Helium target.
These data will provide a benchmark for theoretical models at the most
fundamental level, and thereby improve understanding of ionizing collisions. As
a longer-term goal, the collaborating scientists hope to combine their unique
equipment into one experiment. This will enable them to study more complex
processes such as multiple ionizations. The microscopic details of ionization
induced by fast collisions of ions with atoms are poorly understood, even after
decades of study. The problem arises because of the difficulty of formulating
theoretical methods to handle the "n-body" collision dynamics and the lack of
detailed experimental data to test critically the theoretical models at the most
basic level. While the current level of research, such as that proposed here, is
very fundamental, it is a necessary prerequisite to models that will have
applications in many other fields, such as understanding the microscopic details
of cell damage in heavy-particle cancer radiotherapy, or cosmic ray damage to
microprocessors in satellite based computers.