* 9112053
* Workshop on Discrete Event Systems, Amherst, MA,            June 21-23, 1991
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1991,04/30/1992
* Christos Cassandras, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/1992
* USD 17,000.00

A Workshop on Discrete Event Systems (DES) is being held during the weekend of
June 21-23, 1991. The field of DES emerged in the early 1980's as an effort to
extend classical system and control theory to discrete- state event-driven
dynamic systems and to solve many critical technological problems commonly
encountered in areas such as manufacturing, computer systems, and communication
networks. Although the field has reached a stage of healthy maturity, it is
still young and multidisciplinary in nature. The proposal for this Workshop
stems from a broad-based interest to bring together people from both academia
and industry who are actively involved in DES research. The main objectives of
the Workshop are: (a) to consolidate contributions to date and explore the
field's potential for practical impact on existing and future technologies, (b)
to stimulate interaction among DES researchers from different disciplines and
varying schools of thought, (c) to expose students to ongoing activities in the
DES field and foster their interest, (d) to identify benchmark problems forming
the targets for future research directions. The Workshop is to be conducted in
an informal but well-structured setting, emphasizing open discussions of
critical technical issues and tutorial presentations. It is planned for
approximately 50 people from various disciplines including systems and control,
operations research, industrial engineering, and computer science.