* 9112777
* Progesterone and the Neural Mechanisms of Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1995
* Joseph DeBold, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 06/30/1995
* USD 223,226.00

Progesterone is an important steroid hormone for regulating many aspects of
physiology. It also has a number of effects on behavior. The research findings
from Dr. DeBold's previous NSF grant showed that progesterone can affect
behavior through direct action on two specific sites in the brain, one in the
forebrain and one in the midbrain. The primary objective of the present award is
to determine how progesterone acts at its target site in the midbrain to
influence behavior. Steroid hormones generally exert their effects by entering
cells, binding with a receptor inside the cell, and then the steroid-receptor
complex acts on specific sites on the chromosomes to change the proteins that
the cell synthesizes. This mechanism of action has been found in virtually every
cell that responds to steroid hormones. In the midbrain, however, progesterone
appears to have its effect through a different mechanism. A form of progesterone
which cannot enter cells can be effective in the midbrain, although it is
inactive elsewhere. The effect of progesterone on behaviorally-relevant actions
via neuronal membranes will be tested. The specific protein which mediates this
action will be determined. The proposed studies will demonstrate an alternative
mechanism of action for one class of steroid hormones. This work will contribute
to knowledge about how hormones act to regulate behavior.