* 9112039
* RUI: The Partition of Unstable Polytopes of Polynomials and Its Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* L. Pujara, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1994
* USD 60,000.00

The thrust of the project is to develop an algorithm to partition an unstable
standard polytope of polynomials into stable and unstable regions. This will be
an extension of the Principal Investigator's work for the partition of unstable
polygons of polynomials (convex hull of finitely many coplanar polynomials).
Since the strong theoretical foundation for the resolution of this problem has
already been laid in the Principal Investigator's earlier work, a reasonable
solution of the partition problem for polytopes looks quite promising. It is
also proposed that the partition approach has several useful practical
applications. For example, this approach could be utilized to find a controller
that would stabilize a given uncertain plant with affine coefficients in the
parameters over a certain compact domain of its uncertainty. The concept of
Youla's parameterization of all stabilizing controllers for a nominal plant is
utilized to achieve this end. Another potential application is to obtain maximal
robustness bounds for the parameters involved in the characteristic polynomial
of a control system when the coefficients are affinely dependent on the
parameter vector. A possible approach for this is to partition the unstable
polytope generated by the characteristic polynomials and identify the maximal
domain of parameter vector by identifying the values of the parameter vector
corresponding to the boundary of the partition.