* 9112373
* Engineering Research Equipment - Submillimeter Laser System
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1992
* Harold Fetterman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 68,333.00

New experiments at millimeter wave frequencies have shown important nonlinear
effects using specially developed materials. In each case the observations have
been relatively difficult with the available materials and power densities. At
shorter wavelengths these nonlinear effects become significantly larger and more
amenable to study. One of our more novel experiments involves phase conjugation,
an important and useful area of research at visible wavelengths, which had not
been achieved at longer wavelengths. Using an artificial Kerr medium we were
able to demonstrate four wave mixing and phase conjugation in waveguides. The
use of higher frequencies will permit the crucial extension of this concept to
free space. Another set of experiments uses high temperature superconductor
films to make unique, tunable quasi-optical filters. The properties we are
studying, involving concentrations of paired superconducting electrons, will be
much more sensitive to applied laser fields when observed at the submillimeter
frequencies. This NSF Engineering Research Equipment Grant will therefore be
used to purchase an optically pumped molecular gas laser system which will
generate CW Submillimeter and Far Infrared radiation. In addition to opening up
an entire range of new experiments in nonlinear effects and superconducting
structures, this work will have important applications in remote sensing and
communications.