* 9112070
* Dissertation Research:  The Evolution of the Skull and Air  Sinus System in Archosauria
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1993
* NONE NONE, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1993
* USD 9,885.00

The skulls of humans as well as other mammals are characterized by air sinuses
associated with the nasal cavity and the middle ear. The mammalian sinuses tend
to be minor aspects of skull form. However, another group of vertebrate animals,
the Archosauria, certain extinct dinosaur groups and their presumed living
descendants the birds and crocodiles, exhibit air sinuses in the skull but of
different shape and position from those of mammals. In many archosaurs, sinuses
dominate skull morphology. Although archosaurs have been the most diverse land
vertebrates for over 200 million years, their important anatomical system of
sinuses has been neglected in morphological studies. Consequently it has not
been possible to determine which sinuses are strictly comparable among
archosaurs, that is, which are "homologous" in an evolutionary sense, having
evolved from the same developmental and anatomical source in ancestral forms.
Faculty sponsor David Weishampel and graduate student Lawrence Witmer are
studying the air sinus systems in several representative samples of living birds
and crocodiles and in well preserved skull fossils of extinct archosaurs. Their
methods of study include sophisticated clearing and double staining procedures
with the modern forms, and the use of elaborate casts from fossil forms. Their
comparative data will help determine which features of the air sinus system are
similar or different among archosaurs and which features provide strong evidence
for close genealogical relationship within the group. When correlated with what
is known about the life history of the animal, whether fossil or living, the
skull sinus data may help in solving the puzzle about what functions these
cavities perform in the life of the organism.