* 9112598
* RUI: Tropical Forest Resource Management Along Deltaic      Estuaries
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Mario Hiraoka, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/1994
* USD 160,000.00

Concerns about global warming and the loss of biological diversity have focused
attention on development processes in tropical forests, which traditionally have
been the locations of a large share of the world's biomass and of many of its
plant and animal species. Recent research by geographers, anthropologists, and
other social and natural scientists has helped improve understandings of the
processes by which humans and natural systems interact with each other. Of
special interest have been the impacts of different types of economic activities
and land-use practices on forests. This project will examine the economic
potentials and ecological viability of traditional farm- and forest-management
practices of indigenous residents along the estuary of the Amazon River west of
Belem in Brazil. The spatial structure of different management practices will be
mapped using data from satellite images, and field observations will be used to
measure the sizes and patterns of tracts worked by individual households.
Additional information about the economics of indigenous management practices
will be gathered through participant observation, questionnaire responses,
interviews with household members, and data gathered by local informants. This
project will contribute to greater knowledge about the ways that agricultural
changes affect traditional indigenous resource-management and land-use practices
in the lower Amazon basin and in other similar locales. In addition to enhancing
understandings of interactions among human and natural systems, the conclusions
of this project also should provide considerable information of use to managers
trying to determine what forms of tropical forest development will improve the
economic standing of local residents without harming the natural environment.