* 9112726
* Light Scattering, Rheo-Optical, and Rheological Studies on  Concentrated Polymer Solutions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Guy Berry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

This study comprises four distinct areas of investigation: (1) Static and
dynamic light scattering on aligned nematic solutions of a rodlike polymer, and
rheological and rheo-optical studies on aligned and unaligned nematic solutions
of the same solutions; (2) Similar studies on the nematic phase of a
thermotropic copolymer, as a function of temperature; (3) Static and dynamic
light scattering, and rheological studies on moderately concentrated solutions
of polystyrene in decalin; and (4) Static and dynamic light scattering on dilute
solutions of polymers prone to intermolecular association. In the first study,
the Leslie viscosities, the Frank curvature elasticities, and the order
parameter will be determined over a range of chain length and polymer
concentration. These parameters will also be used in the analysis of nonlinear
rheological behavior in fast flow behavior. In the second, a preliminary study
will be undertaken to evaluate the feasibility of the scattering studies to
determine certain Leslie viscosities and Frank elasticities on a solvent-free
aligned nematic polymer. In the third, the thermodynamics and chain dynamics
will be studied over a range of conditions, from the Flory Theta state to "good
solvent" conditions. The appearance of relaxation in the dynamic scattering due
to chain entanglements will be of special interest. Finally, in the fourth, the
possibility that certain thermochromic effects in dilute solution are linked to
(metastable) intermolecular association will be investigated. This research aims
to clarify the solution behavior of various types of important polymers,
especially those able to form liquid crystals.