* 9112833
* Facilities Support for the James Entomological Collection
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1994
* Richard Zack, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 05/31/1994
* USD 53,627.00

The James Entomological Collection at Washington State University is one of the
largest University collections of insects in the country. The Collection is
representative in all major groups of insect orders and contains approximately
1.25 million specimens. It is especially strong in Diptera (flies), Coleoptera
(beetles), Lepidoptera (moth and butterflies), Hemiptera (bugs), and Hymenoptera
(bees and wasps) and maintains a collection of type material. Begun in 1892, the
holdings of the Collection are of significant historical as well as scientific
importance. It is one of the few collections which can provide specimens from
the Pacific Northwest and thus serves as an important regional and national
resource. The Collection has moved to new facilities (December 1992) which were
actually designed as a collection room with adjoining offices and library. The
addition of new drawers , cabinets, and pinning trays, will provide adequate
housing for specimens which are now stored in substandard housing. Funding also
allows us to house our material in a single style of drawer (USNM) for the first
time in the history of the Collection and, because of the efficiency of the new
drawers, eliminates the problems of on going pest infestations and the constant
need for fumigants. The addition of technical help allows for the transfer of
specimens form the old housing to the new with only a minimum disruption to the
day-to-day activities of the Collection. Washington State University agrees to
fund 30% of equipment (housing) costs.