* 9112802
* Grant for Exploratory Research: Flow and Stopped-Flow NMR   Spectroscopy of Reactions of Organotransition Metal         Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Louis Messerle, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 01/31/1993
* USD 40,000.00

The goal of this project is to establish the feasibility of using flow and
stopped-flow NMR spectroscopy to study rapid (less than one second half-life)
organometallic reactions. The combination of NMR spectroscopy, the most powerful
method for characterizing organometallic species in solution, with rapid mixing
techniques may provide a valuable probe of the structures and kinetics of
important, previously unobservable intermediates in element-H activation, olefin
insertion, and other important organometallic reactions. Three specific systems
from ongoing research that will be studied are: 1) E-H activation (E = C, B, H)
reactions of dinuclear tantalum complexes, 2) CO and RNC insertion reactions of
cyclopentadienyl tantalum complexes, and 3) olefin and acetylene insertion
reactions of electrophilic zirconium complexes. The results may yield new
mechanistic insights to these specific reactions, and will provide the basis for
more general application of these NMR techniques in organometallic chemistry.
%%% With this Grant for Exploratory Research from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic,
and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Louis Messerle and Dr.
Richard F. Jordan of the University of Iowa will endeavor to establish the
feasibility of using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy for the study
of rapid organometallic reactions that are complete within a few seconds. This
technique should enable the observation of unstable reaction intermediates and
shouldsubstantially extend our understanding of the mechanisms of these
important reactions.