* 9112100
* Dissertation Research:  A Comparative Study of Skull        Development in the Thamnophiine Snakes (Serpentes:          Colubridae)
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 10/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

A central question in modern biology is the evolution of morphological
diversity. How does form in one species, where it presumably fits the creature
to life in its habitat, change to a different form in descendant species, where
each again must be fitted to life in its environment? One approach used to
address this problem is to determine how changes in the morphological
development of embryos have contributed to evolutionary changes in the form or
structure of adult organisms. This developmental approach increasingly is being
emphasized by morphologists, in conjunction with molecular data that provide a
phylogenetic framework for the group of organisms under study. The skulls of
snakes are highly complex in comparison with most other vertebrates; their
structure is closely related to such functions as feeding and in supporting and
protecting the brain and sense organs; but changes in skull morphology among
snake species are not well understood, either developmentally or evolutionarily.
Faculty advisers Virginia Roth and Alan Savitsky will direct graduate student
William Velhagen in a study of the pattern and timing of development of the
cranial bones of thamnophiine snakes, the group that includes the gartersnakes
and watersnakes. Although closely related genealogically, the thamnophiines are
diverse in their morphology and habits: some are large and eat fish and
amphibians; some are small and feed only on soft-bodied invertebrates like
earthworms; still others feed exclusively on crayfish. In analyzing the
embryonic development of the thamnophiine skull within the context of the
evolutionary history of the group (derived from independent molecular data) and
the known feeding adaptations of the species, insight will be gained about the
direction and extent of developmental change in closely related species. The
study will contribute to the general issue of whether, and to what degree,
particular embryonic developmental events constrain or facilitate change in
adult form.