* 9112725
* Dissertation Research: Economic Strategies and Human        Interaction in the Levantine Early Neolithic
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Ofer Bar-Yosef, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Professor of Anthropology at Harvard
University, Mr. Ian Kuijt will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr.
Kuijt will build upon preliminary excavations conducted at the early Neolithic
site of 'Iraq ed-Dubb which is located northwest of Ajlun, Jordan and situated
in an extensively forested region 550 meters above sea level. Previous work
indicates that this cave site was occupied ca. 10,000 years ago and that it
contains an oval stone structures with multiple mud floors, indicating repeated
occupation. Mr. Kuijt and his colleagues will conduct one season of research
which combines continued excavations inside the cave with limited survey and
excavations outside of it and in front of neighboring caves. Within the cave
wide horizontal exposure will delineate and excavate two of the stone structures
(the third has already been exposed). Floral and faunal materials will be
collected and analyzed and these will provide information on both basic
subsistence and season of occupation. Lithic materials will be examined to
determine sources of origin and to reconstruct how the inhabitants moved over
the landscape. The early Neolithic in the Near East dates to ca. 10,000 years
ago and marks the first domestication of plants and animals in the Old World.
Intensive archaeological attention has been focussed on the low lying areas
within the Jordan Valley where this process, in part at least, appears to have
taken place. Little is known however how such sites fit into a broader regional
context and whether, for example, these first agriculturalists relied completely
on new food crops or whether they incorporated them into a broader seasonal
round which included hunting and gathering. If the former is the case then it is
unclear how lowland agriculturalists interacted with hunting and gathering
populations from higher elevations. In this context, the site of 'Iraq ed-Dubb
is both important and unique because of its location in just such a highland
area. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
archaeological data from an unknown area/period which will be of interest to a
wide group of scientists. It will increase our understanding of how complex
agriculturally based societies emerged and will assist in the training of an
extremely promising young scientist.