* 9112755
* A Principal-Agent Perspective on Supreme Court-Circuit      Court Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Jeffrey Segal, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1993
* USD 64,000.00

The Supreme Court is at the top of the federal judicial hierarchy, but hierarchy
does not necessarily imply control. If the Supreme Court is in fact to be
supreme in its impact, normative legal theory posits that inferior courts must
follow judicial policy as determined by the Supreme Court. Alternatively,
principal-agent theory suggests that there will be times when agents (e.g.,
Circuit Courts) will shirk this responsibility and represent their own interests
rather than the interests of their principals (e.g., the Supreme Court). Despite
the importance of understanding court interaction, research on the topic has
been quite limited and attention to a principal-agent perspective virtually non-
existent. The theoretical and empirical work being undertaken by Dr. Segal
represents a valuable step forward. Using principal-agent theory, he plans to
investigate the degree to which the circuit courts carry out Supreme Court
policy versus the degree to which they substitute their own self-interest.
Specifically, the study will focus on search and seizure cases from 1962 through
1990 and examine both the following of precedent by circuit courts and the
reviewing of circuit court decisions to correct them by the Supreme Court. Too
little is known about the processes by which Supreme Court decisions affect
lower appellate court judges. This study will contribute substantially to our
understanding of this interaction and thus to our knowledge of the adminstration
of justice in society.