* 9112974
* The Determinants of Economic Growth in the Short and Long   Terms
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Stanley Fischer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1994
* USD 119,819.00

The eighties were the decade in which macroeconomists returned to growth theory
and turned to development. The new growth theory deals explicitly with
development, seeking to account for the apparent non-convergence of per capita
income levels between developing and industrialized countries. A hallmark of
much of the new literature is the demonstration that distortions and policy
interventions that can be shown to affect the level of income in conventional
models, can affect the steady state growth rate in the new models. The theory
also emphasized the roles of technology, international trade, human capital,
economies of scale, and the possible need for a co-ordinated big investment push
to break out of a low income equilibrium. The empirical work associated with the
new growth theory consists largely of cross-country regressions. But there has
been remarkably little focus on the long-term influence of macroeconomic
policies on growth. The contribution of this project comes from pulling the
different strands of the theoretical and empirical literatures together to
achieve as comprehensive an understanding of the development process as
possible, and within that framework, to focus on the policy choices that are
open to governments. The project will also focus on the influence of
macroeconomic policies on developing countries growth rates. More specifically,
this program on growth and development: (1) isolates the contributions of
physical and human capital investments to growth in different countries, and
attempting to explain the determinants of physical investment; (2) identifies
the policy choices that governments can make to influence the accumulation of
factors and the efficiency of their use; (3) identifies and explains differences
in total factor productivity growth among countries; and (4) focuses on the
technologies for the accumulation of human capital, and the question of the type
of educational policy that is most conducive to economic growth.