* 9112445
* Laws and Explanation in Community Ecology
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1992
* Kristin Shrader-Frechette, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 39,139.00

Under this grant, Dr. Shrader-Frechette is examining three methodological issues
that are central to community ecology or population biology. (1) Are
explanations in community ecology particular, as many biologists have claimed?
(2) Are there empirical laws or laws of nature in community ecology? (3) Are
there individually testable hypotheses, including null hypotheses, in community
ecology? After evaluating these three methodological questions in terms of the
arguments and examples that ecologists on various sides of the issues have
employed, Dr. Shrader-Frechette will attempt to draw two sets of conclusions.
One set concerns the nature of scientific explanation in ecology. The other set
of conclusions concerns what, if anything, the status of law and explanation in
community ecology might reveal about scientific law and explanation in general.
This project promises to contribute to the on-going debates about whether the
alleged explanations and laws of ecology are like those of the physical
sciences; what is the empirical status of alleged ecological laws; what is the
scope of realistic hopes for improving he "scientific" status of ecology;
whether, and if so, in what sense, ecology is a science; and what the nature of
explanation and law in ecology reveals about scientific law and explanation in
general.