* 9112899
* International Symposium on Fatigue and Fracture in Steel    and Concrete Structures, Madras, India, December 19-21,     1991, Group Travel Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,07/31/1992
* Venkataswamy Ramakrishnan, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1992
* USD 24,150.00

Description: Under this project support is provided for participation of seven
U.S. scientists in the International Symposium on Fatigue and Fracture in Steel
and Concrete Structures to be held in Madras, India in December 1991. The
technical sessions will include the following topics: Fracture Mechanics;
Fatigue and Fracture of Steel; Fatigue and Fracture of Concrete; Crack Growth;
Fatigue Behavior and Testing of Joints; Fatigue Behavior and Testing of
Structural Members; Condition Monitoring and Damage Assessment; Life Prediction;
Design; and Reliability. The organizing secretary is Dr. A.G. Madhava Rao of the
Structural Engineering Research Centre (SERC), in Madras, India. Proceedings
including the presented papers and poster papers is expected to be published.
Scope: This is the first international meeting in the area of fatigue and
fracture in steel and concrete structures to be held in India, and is attracting
wide response from many countries. There are over 110 papers already submitted
for presentation. The SERC is India's best known research institute in the
field. It has excellent facilities for research and for the meeting arrangement.
The proposed U.S. participants are eminent scholars in the field. They are
likely to contribute well to the symposium and to gain from their participation.
It is also likely that future joint projects will be identified. This project
fits the objectives of the US-India Program.