* 9112433
* International Symposium on Environmental Ethics
* SBE,SES
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1993
* Frederick Ferre, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 05/31/1993
* USD 8,541.00

This grant provides partial funding for an international symposium in
environmental ethics entitled "Theory Meets Practice." The symposium is
sponsored and supported by the University of Georgia, the Fondazione Lanza, the
International Scoeity for Environmental Ethics, the International Ecological
Society, and the Council of Educators in Landscape Architecture. The conference
has four subthemes: What are the practical implications of new environmental
ethics theories on environmental problems? To what extent should legislation of
ecological sustainability restrict property rights? How can nationsl share
responsibility for global environmental problems? How can military and political
threats to the environment be diminished? Speakers include philosophers,
theologians, ecologists, and environmental policy experts from the United
States, other industrialized countries, and developing countries. This is the
first international environmental ethics meeting to be held in the United
States; the event and its proceedings should stimulate increasing attention to
these issues by U.S. academicians, policymakers, and interested citizens. This
project allows a highly qualified group of researchers from different
disciplinary backgrounds in the United States and abroad to address theoretical
issues in and practical issues of environmental ethics. The principal
investigators and conference participants are well qualified; institutional
support is very good. A volume of general interest to the field will result. The
budget request is modest. Support is recommended.