* 9112622
* Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Light Scattering      Characterization of Polymer Solutions and Dispersions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* David Hunkeler, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1994
* USD 62,220.00

Light scattering photometry is an absolute characterization method which can be
used to investigate the dilute solution behavior of macromolecules and the
colloidal properties of suspensions, emulsions and dispersions. A light
scattering photometer and laser differential refractometer will be purchased by
the School of Engineering at Vanderbilt University. These complementary
instruments will both employ Argon Ion lasers (488 nm) with the differential
refractometer used to provide optical parameters for the scattering
measurements. The light scattering photometer will operate over a broad angular
and temperature range and function in both the static and dynamic modes. Both
pieces of equipment will be computer interfaced. They are intended for an
interdisciplinary polymer program which includes projects involving several
academic departments. They will be principally dedicated to research in Chemical
Engineering including the molecular measurement of water soluble polymers,
kinetic and latex characterization of heterophase polymerizations, and in
analyses aimed at improving the precision of light scattering. The photometer
will also be used for engineering education in the laboratory component of a
graduate polymer course. Additionally, it will be applied to the investigation
of research areas in polymer science and engineering including the conformation
of polymer chains prior to degradation, the mechanism of polymer separation
inside a sorbent pore of a Gel Permeation Chromatograph, and determination of
structure-property indices to improve the quality of biomaterials such as those
used in artificial organs.