* 9112563
* Japan Long Term Visit:  Study of Exactly Solvable Models    in Statistical Mechanics
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Jacques H Perk, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 01/31/1993
* USD 34,874.00

This award will support a long-term visit by Professors Jacques H.H. Perk and
Helen Au-Yang, Department of Physics, Oklahoma State University to travel to
Japan to undertake a joint research project with Professors Michio Jimbo,
Tetsuji Miwa and Mikio Sato who are located at the Research Institute for
Mathematical Sciences (RIMS) which is located at Kyoto University in Japan.
Their research will involve continuous studies of the new higher-genus solutions
of the star- triangle (Yang-Baxter) equation in the chiral Potts model. They
will also continue research on the spin-spin correlation functions of the
Z-invariant inhomogeneous Ising model on an irregular lattice. The results may
provide correlation functions of certain quasicrystals and of some quasiperiodic
Ising lattices. This research is of fundamental importance in statistical
mechanics, in low-dimensional quantum field theory and completely integrable
systems. Progress on the higher-genus solutions may bring forth interaction
between many other research areas in mathematics and physics. RIMS is the ideal
Institute for the PI's to carry out their research. The Japanese researchers
have the greatest collective knowledge and expertise of integrable systems of
any institution in the world. Professors Perk and Au-Yang are among the few best
researchers in solvable models in the U.S. The researchers from both countries
are all very well known and respected in their field. It is expected that,
following the expiration of this award, collaborations between the researchers
are likely to continue.