* 9112216
* REG: Mini-Supercomputer
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1991,03/31/1992
* Brian Moran, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jerome Sackman
* 03/31/1992
* USD 60,645.00

A graphical mini supercomputer will be purchased. This computer has vector and
parallel processing capabilities which are the focus of two of our research
projects. Furthermore, vector and parallel processing capabilities will make
feasible the large scale scientific computations which are an essential feature
of all of the projects described herein. The 2 CPU system configuration offers
multi-processing features and will permit single users to achieve speeds up to a
sizeable fraction of the speed of a CRAY- XMP. Multi-user capabilities ensure
ready access to the system. The equipment will be dedicated to support research
in computational mechanics and will be used in beginning and ongoing research
projects including: I) Adaptive ALE Finite Elements for Material Forming
Simulations (Liu, Belytschko) II) High Temperature Heterogeneous Materials
(Keer, Moran) III) Adaptive Mode Decomposition Methods (Belytschko) IV) Accurate
Three-Dimensional Calculations for Advancing Slip Zones in the Earth's Crust
(Rudnicki, Keer) V) A Dynamical Systems Approach to Observing and Predicting
Seismicity (Rudnicki). These diverse research projects have a common feature in
that they each involve extensive amounts of large scale scientific computing,
development of efficient and accurate software for the engineering applications
and the training of students in all facts of scientific computing. This
equipment will complement our Cray usage at the national supercomputer centers
for intermediate development phases and those computations which require
extensive visualization.