* 9112567
* U.S.-Japan Seminar:  Workshop for Young Investigators in    Molecular Science/October, 1991/Okazaki, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* John Frederick, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 01/31/1993
* USD 16,350.00

This award will support a joint U.S.-Japan Workshop for Young Investigators in
Molecular Science to be held during October, l99l in Okazaki, Japan. Professors
John H. Frederick and Kent M. Ervin, Department of Chemistry, University of
Nevada, Reno, are the U.S. organizers and their counterparts in Japan are
Professors Yoshiyasu Matsumoto, Koichi Yamashita, and Hrvoje Petek of the
Institute for Molecular Sciences (IMS) in Okazaki, Japan. The workshop will
encourage and facilitate the initiation of research collaboration among early
career scientists from the United States and Japan in the area of theoretical
and experimental molecular spectroscopy and dynamics. Panel discussions will be
featured on the following topics: i) gas-surface interactions ii) spectroscopy
of clusters/solulte-solvent interactions iii) intermolecular dynamics of highly
excited molecules and iv) spectroscopy of the transition state/reaction
dynamics. These topics share a number of common challenges and concerns, among
them the characterization and modeling of intermolecular forces, the nature of
pre-and post-bond dissociation dynamics in highly excited molecular species, the
role of an external bath (or solvent) in relaxation and accommodation processes,
and the relationship between spectroscopic observations and the underlying
molecular dynamics. The twelve participants from both countries will each
deliver a seminar on their research area which will be followed by group
discussion. They will also participate in guest lectures covering specific areas
of molecular dynamics, discussions on future direction and challenge, and a
visit to the laboratories of the Institute for Molecular Sciences. This
Institute (IMS) is the ideal host for the workshop since one of its objectives
is to promote international exchanges between Japan and other countries. Because
the participants are drawn from early-career scientists, the collaborations
formed as a result of this workshop expect to affect the future direction of
research in both countries, over a long period of time, to the mutual benefit of
both the U.S. and Japan.