* 9112828
* Workshops on Intelligent Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Michael Brodie, Verizon Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 02/28/1993
* USD 25,000.00

Millions of disjoint information / computing resources must be able to be used
cooperatively, efficiently, and transparently. Without integration and increased
"intelligence", the dramatic benefits and massive investments in currently
disjoint computing resources may be lost. The required technical advances depend
on technology integration rather than on any one technology. Such integration
requires a shared vision and an identification of the research, development, and
application problems and opportunities. The workshop addresses core technologies
to support advanced features of next generation information systems, which we
label intelligent and cooperative information systems. Core technologies include
information/data/knowledge/object management, operating systems, artificial
intelligence, distributed computing, and interoperability. Systems development
and cooperative, distributed work are being addressed in separate but related
workshops. The workshop addresses this challenge through the collective insight
and collaboration of academic and industrial researchers in the key
technologies. Technical objectives are to: (i) define the vision, (ii) identify
the key technologies and integration alternatives; (iii) characterize the
research and development status, (iv) outline technical challenges, and (v)
investigate specific issues across disjoint technologies. Technical results and
recommendations will be widely disseminated to the research and development
communities. The unique aspects of this workshop are the focus on technology
integration and international cooperation.