* 9112918
* Purchase of a Fourier Transform Raman Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Edward Mellon, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 08/31/1992
* USD 120,000.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will help the
Department of Chemistry at Florida State University acquire a Fourier-transform
Raman system (FTR). The FTR will be used in research projects aimed at: 1.
Characterization of synthetic polymers, particularly model systems essential to
understanding phase structure and its relation to other structural factors and
properties. 2. Development of analytical techniques for organic species in
complex samples, emphasizing chemometric techniques applied to Raman spectrocopy
of liquids and solids. 3. Determination of conduction mechanisms and properties
of conducting organic polymers. 4. Characterization of metal binding effects on
functional groups in humic and fulvic acids. 5. Study of surface chemistry of
thermally and chemically modified silica gels. Raman Spectroscopy is concerned
with vibrational and rotational transitions in molecules. The information
obtained sometimes complements that obtained from an infrared study and provides
valuable structural information. Fourier-transform Raman spectroscopy with near-
infrared excitation provides a powerful solution to problems of high background
fluorescene or sample photodegradation, as well as enhanced signal-to-noise
quality. Raman spectroscopy is an invaluable tool in studies of condensed-phase
chemical and biomolecular systems.