* 9112481
* Displacement Chromatography of Proteins:  Identification of Critical Displacer Properties and Development of Novel      Nontoxic Displacers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* James Moore, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 02/28/1994
* USD 160,002.00

The project studies displacement chromatography and polymer synthesis to
investigate the effect of critical displacer properties using well defined
polymeric displacer compounds. A variety of novel polymeric displacers will be
synthesized for ion exchange, hydrophobic interaction, and metal affinity
chromatographic systems. The developed displacers will be purified and subjected
to appropriate analytical chemical techniques to establish their structure and
purity. Chromatographic behavior of these compounds will be evaluated using
elution chromatography and adsorption isotherms will be determined by frontal
chromatography. Model protein feed mixtures exhibiting a spectrum of properties
will be established for these adsorbent systems. The ability of polymeric
displacers of various molecular weights, functional group densities, and
conformations to act as protein displacers in these systems will be examined,
and the relative importance of these properties will be established. The
resulting data on displacer properties will be used to identify combinations of
displacer physicochemical properties which are required for efficient
displacement of biopolymers and rapid removal of the displacers for regeneration
of the stationary phase materials. This fundamental research will provide basic
insight into the displacement phenomenon at the molecular level and will
establish guidelines for the design and synthesis of appropriate displacers for
future bioseparation problems.