* 9112675
* Dissertation Research:  Bat-Plant Interactions: A Multi-    Species Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 04/30/1994
* USD 6,400.00

Within the domain of ecological studies of species interactions, those
involving insects and birds are relatively more common while those dealing with
volant mammals, bats, are relatively less frequently encountered. But there are
250 species of bats that pollinate and disperse the seeds of more than 130 plant
genera, many of which are of substantial economic significance. Such studies
have centered on individual bat species and a limited number of plant species
rather than on a guild or community of bat species or a suite of plant species.
Attention has been focused almost exclusively on the Neotropics, with very
little study devoted to fruit bats of the Old World tropics; these two groups
have undergone independent evolution toward frugivorous and nectarivorous
feeding modes, and thus may differ significantly in their ecologies. A two year
field study of fruit bat ecology in northeast India (the Tista valley in
Sikkim), focusing on community level interactions and effects on plant
reproductive success via pollination and seed dispersal, and the roles of other
pollinators and dispersers (birds, moths, ants), will be undertaken. Differences
between phytophagous bats of the Old World and New World, in terms of dispersal
abilities and nutritional needs, will be investigated. A study of the
potentially highly-coevolved relationship between the bat Eonycteris spelaea, as
pollinator of a plant (Oroxylum), is planned. The conservation implications of
these interactions will be studied, as will the role of these fruit bats as
pests of commercial fruit production.