* 9112965
* Steroid Hormones and Opiate Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Ronald Hammer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 07/31/1994
* USD 146,330.00

The medial preoptic area of the hypothalamus is known to exhibit sexual
dimorphism in a number of mammalian systems, including humans. Moreover, sex
differences have been revealed in several neurochemical systems, including the
endogenous opioid peptides and their receptors. Evidence suggests that
hypothalamic opioid peptides influence neuroendocrine physiology and behavior.
Dr. Hammer will examine the regulation of brain opioid peptide and receptor
systems by gonadal steroid hormones in identified neuronal circuits of the
hypothalamus. Using state-of-the-art neuroanatomical and molecular biological
techniques, he will describe and characterize changes in the regulation of
opiate receptor expression in specific brain regions and neurons during estrus.
After determining the precise localization of these receptors, which are the
functional site of action for opioid peptides, he will identify the various
populations of opioid neurons that project to this important hypothalamic
region. These studies will provide novel information about the anatomy and
steroid sensitivity of opioid hypothalamic circuits. The results will lead to a
greater understanding of the basic mechanisms underlying the control of
neuroendocrine function, and how disruption of this mechanism by aberrant
hormonal or narcotic action could produce reproductive or other neuroendocrine
disorders.