* 9112037
* Dissertation Research:  Fungal Mediation of Plant-Insect    Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 03/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

Many factors are known to influence the abundance and diversity of insects that
feed on plants. These include host plant characteristics such as nutrition and
secondary compounds, attack by predators/parasites, and abiotic factors such as
temperature and humidity. Microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi
commonly associated with plants can also influence where insects settle and how
well they fare. One class of microorganisms, endophytic fungi, live benignly
within leaf tissues but appear to protect plants from insect attack by producing
deterrent toxins. This idea has not been broadly tested however, particularly in
plants other than grasses. Toward this end, the role of endophytic fungus
(Chaetophoma quercifolia and several other species) in colonization, dispersal,
and survival of a leafmining insect (Cameraria sp. nov.) and the southwestern
tent caterpillar (Malacosoma incurvum) on Emory oak (Quercus emoryi) will be
studied. The following are to be investigated: 1) how the distribution of fungi,
insects, and plant characteristics are related, 2) seasonal and yearly variation
in the diversity and abundance of fungi, 3) if endophytic fungi affect survival
and growth of leafminers and other oak-feeding insects. This work will serve to
address fundamental ecological questions, as well as increase our knowledge and
understanding of microorganisms as potential biological control agents.