* 9112000
* Dissertation Research: The Speciation Process in Orconectes, subgenus Procericambarus (Decapoda:Cambaridae)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1994
* Alan Templeton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 04/30/1994
* USD 15,041.00

The factors that permit or, at the least, are correlated with rapid speciation
of a lineage when a founding member moves into a new habitat are little
understood. Yet the phenomenon of adaptive radiation is considered significant,
and numerous cases have been proposed over the years. One basic issue at the
start needs to be established solidly, that is the phylogenetic relationships
among the species of the radiating assemblage. A test case of precisely this
matter is under investigation with North American crayfish of the genus
Orconectes. Approximately 24 species of the subgenus Procericambarus inhabit a
variety of streams, pools, and river margins at high and low elevations in
middle North America, and provide opportunities to study the pattern of adaptive
speciation into new ecological habitats. Faculty sponsor Alan Templeton and
graduate student Keith Crandall are emphasizing molecular data from
mitochondrial and nuclear DNA to establish a phylogeny of this group of animals.
Special attention is being given to issues of assessing the statistical
significance of these molecule-based phylogenetic reconstructions, and such
statistical tests are likely to have general applicability to studies by other
researchers. With a robust phylogenetic estimate in hand, the investigators can
then explore such questions as: are habitat divergence and geographic isolation
among species independently associated through evolutionary time or do they
interact with speciation events? Does a transition into a very different habitat
type lead to much subsequent speciation (the well-known adaptive zone hypothesis
of the late paleontologist G. G. Simpson)? Can speciation occur within an
isolated drainage only if it is associated with habitat divergence? As well, the
investigators will study aspects of morphological change including overall size
reduction in these crayfish against the background of their molecularly based
phylogeny.