* 9112962
* A Study of Behavior and Design of Reinforced Concrete Shear Walls With Unsymmetrical Cross-Section
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1994
* John Wallace, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 12/31/1994
* USD 163,199.00

In seismic design of reinforced concrete structures using shear walls L-shaped
or T- shaped walls are often used. The lateral load behavior of these
unsymmetrical "flanged walls" is not well understood. No experimental studies
have been conducted on unsymmetrical flanged walls with aspect ratios greater
than two, and no recommendations exist to provide guidance on appropriate
analysis or design procedures. This project involves both analytical and
experimental studies of unsymmetrical flanged shear walls. Detailed analytical
studies will be conducted on two shear wall dominant buildings in the San
Francisco Bay Area with instrumented response data recorded from the 1989 Loma
Prieta earthquake and its aftershocks. The analytical studies are designed to
investigate modeling techniques for lateral load response by comparing measured
and computed responses. The experimental studies will involve the design,
construction, and testing of four specimens with different flanged widths and
reinforcing ratios. The specimens will be subjected to reversed cyclic lateral
loading and constant axial stress to investigate stiffness, strength, and
deformation characteristics of the walls. Detailed analytical studies using
nonlinear finite element techniques will be used to evaluate existing analytical
models and to develop new analytical models. The objectives of the combined
analytical and experimental studies will be to establish guidelines for
analytical modeling, proportioning, and detailing of unsymmetrical flanged shear
walls for earthquake resistance.