* 9112602
* Dissertation Research:  Studies of Diversification in       Anolis marmoratus Lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1993
* David Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1993
* USD 10,307.00

Lizards of the genus Anolis are the most common and diverse terrestrial
vertebrates in the Caribbean. Despite extensive knowledge about their ecology,
behavior, and geographical distributions, little is known about levels of
genetic variability within and between populations of the many species, and of
how these levels affect processes of speciation. The morphologically diverse
species Anolis marmoratus, with 12 named subspecies in the Guadeloupean
archipelago of the Lesser Antilles, provides a test case for exploring the
relationship between mating systems, levels of genetic variability, and
speciation involving morphological change. Variation in this species is
particularly conspicuous in color and pattern of adult males; characters that,
along with signalling behavior, are important in social competition and mate
recognition. Variation in these characters, leading to what is called
assortative (that is, preferential) mating, will promote the accumulation of
genetic differences among populations, a postulated first step leading to
speciation (complete reproductive isolation). Faculty advisers David Wake and
Harry Greene will supervise graduate student Christopher Schneider in a study of
genetic, behavioral, and morphological variation in this group of anolis
lizards. Emphasis is placed on nucleotide sequencing of select mitochondrial
genes to acquire fine-scale evidence of variation and of gene flow between
populations, within islands and between islands. The gene data will allow
several tests of hypotheses concerning how male color patterns and display
behaviors affect mating success, and thereby help structure local populations
genetically. In turn, knowledge about the genetic structure of local populations
will help test ideas about speciation processes in this diverse group of
lizards.