* 9112753
* NSF Workshop On Visual Information Management Systems,      Ann Arbor, Michigan, September 1991
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1992
* Ramesh Jain, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 07/31/1992
* USD 25,000.00

From satellite images to elementary school textbooks, our everyday life is full
of information presented in the form of images. Since so much information is in
non-alphanumeric form, as a natural extension of the ideas in databases,
researchers started exploring the design and implementation of image databases.
The progress in this area requires close interaction among researchers from
disparate areas of computer science and other fields. To bring together active
researchers in databases, object-oriented systems, image and signal processing,
multi- media, and other related areas a workshop will be organized. In addition
to the researchers in the above and related areas, a few researchers and
practitioners interested in applying these systems in industry, health-care,
global change and other areas will be invited. The practitioners will provide
input into the discussion to guarantee that useful systems will be designed by
researchers and practitioners working in this emerging area. The participants
will be drawn from academic institutions, research centers, Government, and
industry. The report of the workshop will be submitted to NSF and will be widely
publicized. The report will identify major research areas that should be
addressed by researchers for designing user-friendly visual information
management systems suitable for a wide range of application domains.