* 9112302
* Ranking and Rating Systems as Vehicles for Incorporating    Beliefs and Values into Environmental Management            Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Thomas Leschine, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1994
* USD 88,548.00

Informal observations suggest that, despite a growing body of environmental
agency experience with ranking and rating systems, their effectiveness in
informing the decision processes they are intended to support has been very
mixed. More specifically, the important actors in policy debates in which these
systems are used appear about as likely to see them as irrelevant or as
impediments to decisionmaking as they are to see them as truly instrumental to
the outcomes achieved. This observation appears to be especially relevant to
situations with the potential to affect significantly the distribution of
resources outside of the managing agencies themselves, the primary focus of the
proposed research. The research objectives are to explore the relationships
between the real or perceived utility of ranking/rating systems in informing
policy debates and an array of factors associated with a) technical aspects of
how such systems are constructed, b) problem setting, and c) the institutional
environment in which such systems are utilized or applied. The research will
explore how values incorporated in mathematical formulations of ranking/rating
systems inluence policy oriented learning, as well as how factors such as
discretion, social conflict, and credibility of experts do. Thus, the study can
focus on hypotheses and variables that can help in understanding and explaining
when learning occurs within and between groups concerned about environmental
policy. The investigator will study two cases in depth -- the use of decision
systems in coastal wetlands protection and mitigation, and use of such systems
in the cleanup of hazardous waste sites in the coastal zone. The research design
uses review of documentation, and phone and in-person interviews. It will use
expert elicitation techniques in studying the first case and, possibly, content
analysis in the second study. Results from this work have both theoretical and
practical interest. The investigator is well qualified; the research plan is
good; the proposal is recommended for support with high priority.