* 9112855
* Conservation and Preservation of Natural Science Collections
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Carolyn Rose, National Institute for the Conservation of Cultural Property
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 180,586.00

The National Institute for Conservation (NIC) is an organization devoted to the
preservation of historical objects for research. The Institute's traditional
focus has been on objects in the arts, humanities, ethnography, archeology, and
anthropology, but the organization's vision has broadened recently to include
natural history specimens. Dr. Donald Duckworth, President of the Bernice P.
Bishop Museum of Natural History, proposes an initiative aimed at preserving
natural history collections curated in museums and herbaria. NIC would conduct a
series of meetings between materials scientists, conservators, and museum
curators to better define preservation problems and materials research needed to
protect museum and herbarium specimens. These meetings would result in a series
of reports outlining recommendations for specimen care, materials research, and
training of museum professionals. Museum and herbarium specimens are unique
objects that record the biological diversity on earth. As natural habitats
shrink and species become extinct, these specimens become irreplaceable objects
of study. Future generations of biological research will rely on the
preservation of these specimens, and the proposed workshop activities will set
in motion a long-term planning process. These planning activities will formulate
recommendations and priorities, and will greatly advance the research
community's ability to preserve these resources.