* 9112358
* Dissertation Research: The Geological History of Polyploidy in Woody Angiosperms
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1994
* USD 4,801.00

Polyploidy, the condition in an organism of having more than two complete sets
of chromosomes, is a common and important evolutionary phenomenon in flowering
plants (angiosperms), but the historical development of polyploidy is poorly
understood. Many questions about the base chromosome number of angiosperms
(important for establishing the extent of polyploidy) and the origin of
polyploidy could be addressed if fossil plants could be used to determine its
history. One of the common physical effects of polyploidy is a general increase
in cell volume and in the size of guard cells, the leaf epidermal cells that
control the opening and closing of the gas exchange pores or stomates of plants.
At least two previous studies have used guard cell measurements to estimate
ploidy levels in fossil taxa of Sequoia and Metasequoia. The paleobotanist Dr.
Peter Crane of the Field Museum and University of Chicago will supervise
graduate student Jane Masterson in an analysis of the history of polyploidy in
four woody angiosperm families: Platanaceae (sycamores), Magnoliaceae,
Juglandaceae (walnuts), and Lauraceae (laurels). These groups were chosen
because all have (1) a long record of fossil remains; (2) well preserved leaf
cuticle samples with measurable guard cells at a variety of growth stages; (3)
multiple ploidy levels presently known for living species; and (4) a positive
correlation between cell size and ploidy level based on preliminary study,
including measurement of DNA content in chromosomes using
microspectrophotometry. The work will establish the antiquity of polyploidy in
several angiosperm families and circumscribe the paleoecological conditions that
may have promoted polyploidy. It will contribute empirical data to the debate
surrounding the base chromosome number of flowering plants, and provide the
first test in plants of the hypothesized inverse relation between evolutionary
diversification (numbers of species in a lineage) and genome size (numbers of
chromosomes and DNA amounts).