* 9112486
* Engineering Research Equipment: Emulsion Polymerization>>>>>Process Control Facility>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Cesar Silebi, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/1993
* USD 61,252.00

Emulsion polymerization is widely used in industry to produce latices for
applications such as latex paints, adhesives, coatings, binders in paper and
textile products, synthetic rubber, etc. The latex stage of the production is
coagulated to give bulk polymer, or a final product, which after suitable
treatment is made available in its original latex form ( for example, acrylic
paints). In addition, environmental concerns and regulations have initiated a
major trend driving away from paint products with high solvent content leading
to widespread use of water based latices. The control of emulsion polymerization
reactors is still a difficult task. The problems of controlling emulsion
polymerization processes are due to their multiphase nature which is not well
understood. Newly emerging sensor technology combined with advances in modeling
and process control, introduce the potential to better control such industrial
systems and provide US industries with a competitive edge in emulsion
polymerization. This grant is for equipment only a prototype process control
facility for emulsion polymerization. Included are a fully instrumented polymer
reactor and automatic sensor and control equipment. Various process design and
experimental testing of different control strategies will be carried out
including the testing of new on-line sensors.