* 9112854
* Stochastic Trees:  Modeling and Preference Applications to  Medical Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Rowland Chang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 07/31/1994
* USD 104,388.00

This proposal introduces several new decision analysis techniques for stochastic
models (that is, probabilistic models in which uncertainty unfolds over time).
These techniques cam fruitfully be applied to medical decisions in which
tradeoffs must be made between immediate and temporally distant risks. Two of
these techniques, stochastic trees and stochastic factoring, are model display
approaches that have significant advantages over current technique in medical
decision modelling with regard to: (a) formulation of the stochastic model by
the analyst, (b) presentation and display of the stochastic model to the medical
practitioner, and (c) computational friendliness. Like more familiar decision
trees, stochastic trees may be rolled back to determine the optimal treatment
decision. These techniques should make stochastic modelling more understandable
for the decision analyst and the medical practitioner. The third technique,
risk-sensitive stochastic trees, draws on newly developed results from
preference theory and has significant advantages over other risk-preference
models with regard to ease in modelling a patient's temporal risk-taking
preferences. Using these techniques, the impact of risk-averse preferences on
medical treatment will be examined, and the utility of these methods will be
demonstrated with respect to the long-term treatment of mild gout and decisions
to undergo total hip replacement.