* 9112484
* REG:  Infrared Laser, TV Camera and Fabry Perot for MM-Wave Modulator Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1992
* William Bridges, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 8,855.00

This NSF Engineering Research Equipment Grant will enable the purchase of a
Neodymium-YAG infrared laser, an infrared TV camera, and an infrared scanning
Fabry Perot optical spectrum analyzer for novel electro-optical modulator
research at Caltech. A serious difficulty in extending the operation of
travelling-wave electro-optical modulators into the 100 GHz (3mm) region is
caused by dispersion in the modulator material, crystalline lithium niobate. The
optical wave travels through the crystal much faster than the modulation wave;
as a consequence, the modulation process gets out of step at these high
frequencies. A technique being studied at Caltech breaks the modulation
transmission line into a number of short segments, and drives each segment from
its own tiny dipole antenna integrated on the surface of the crystal. The
antennas are excited by a plane wave radiated from a waveguide, incident at just
the correct angle to keep the modulating wave in step with the optical wave on
the average. As a bonus, using antennas and radiation rather than coax
connectors and bond wires to couple the modulation to the transmission lines
eliminates parasitic electrical elements that would be very detrimental in the
mm- wave range. Modulation frequencies as high as 63 GHz (4.8 m) have been used
with an 18 mm long lithium niobate modulator with good efficiency. These initial
experiments employed red laser light at 633 nm. Practical fiber optical systems
that use such modulators for information transmission (telephone, CATV, radar
signals, etc.) all operate at 1320 or 1550 nm, however. This grant will allow
the extension of this wave-coupled modulator research to those wavelengths.