* 9112183
* New Intermolecular Traps of Captodative Stabilized and OtherRadicals: Studies Toward Radical Based Asymmetric Synthesis of Amino Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Janet Grissom, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John S. Showell
* 12/31/1992
* USD 18,000.00

This project will involve the study of intermolecular radical trapping of
captodative stabilized radicals. This work has important implications in two
major areas: 1) the development of new intermolecular radical traps and 2) the
use of chiral glycine radical templates for the asymmetric synthesis of natural
and non-natural amino acids. Given the tremendous utility of radicals in organic
synthesis there is a real need for the development of new intermolecular radical
traps. Radical traps that will be developed include nitrones, stannyl
nitronates, vinyl aziridines (for both the synthesis of allyl amines and
pyrrolidines), enol stannanes, stannyl alkynes, and chiral dehydroalanines. For
the asymmetric synthesis of amino acids, several chiral glycine radical
templates will be investigated including a chiral diketo piperazine,
oxazolidine, and 9-phenyl menthol amino acid ester. Intermolecular trapping
reactions of the chiral glycine radicals will be carried out with both
established radical traps (such as allyl and vinyl stannanes) and with the novel
radical trapping agents. This work will be an important contribution to the
areas of radical chemistry and asymmetric amino acid synthesis. %%% Research
Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior independent Federal research
support to develop a competitive research proposal. This project involves the
trapping of stabilized free radicals, i.e., molecules with unpaired electrons,
for the construction of organic molecules. Such reactions may have wide
applicability in organic chemistry and complement other organic synthesis
methods.