* 9112462
* Doctoral Dissertation Research on The History of Technology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Thomas P. Hughes, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 5,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Student, Gabrielle Hecht; topic: "Technological Choice and
Cultural Change: The French Nuclear Program, 1945-69." Under the guidance of
Professor Hughes, Ms. Hecht is exploring the genesis of the French nuclear
program from 1945 to 1969. The study focuses on the design and operation of the
gas-graphite reactors which constituted the French nuclear energy program in
this time period. In the first part of the study, Ms. Hecht is tracing the ways
in which the political, economic, and technological agendas of engineers,
managers, public servants, and politicians became embodied in the design of
these reactors. In the second part she is examining the emergence of nuclear
safety regulations from the social, cultural, and technological context of the
work practices of reactor operators. The third and final part explains early
public perceptions of nuclear energy in France by looking at how nuclear plants
affected regional lifestyles and economies. The study's aim is to explore the
reciprocal relationships between technology and society as well as the emergence
of different "nuclear cultures" among politicians, engineers, technicians,
workers and local residents. It does so by analyzing a combination of
interviews, archival documents, and publications. Its primary significance lies
in its exploration of relationships between national political agendas and
technological change through an analysis of the organization of work, and in its
examination of relationships between technological choice and cultural change.