* 9112722
* Energization and Disruption of Magnetic Arcades in the      Solar Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1991,06/01/1992
* Jon Linker, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth H. Schatten
* 06/01/1992
* USD 23,600.00

Coronal mass ejections (CME's) provide a spectacular manifestation of solar
activity. The plasma and magnetic flux ejected into the solar wind by CME's
subsequently interacts with the Earth's magnetic field to produce geomagnetic
disturbances. It is planned to investigate possible initiation mechanisms for
CME's. This will permit examination of the hypothesis that CME's and flares are
minefistations of a single event, an ideal or resistive instability of the
overall magnetic configuration. The investigation will center around a study of
the dynamical evolution of global coronal field structures (single and multiple
arcades, as well as helmet streamer configurations) in response to shearing
photospheric motions. The behavior of the corona will be modelled using time
dependent magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations. The global evolution of the
coronal field will be followed self-consistently in spherical geometry over
several solar radii in response to motions applied at the photosphere. The
resulting evolution of the plasma density and velocity will be compared to
available CME observations. Semi-implicit methods will be employed to allow for
efficient computation of slow energy build-up in the coronal magnetic fields.
Initially, a 2- dimensional (axisymmetrical) description will be used, followed
by development of a 3-dimensional simulation and description.