* 9112988
* New Computational and Experimental Methods for the          Structural Characterization of Homogeneous Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Clark Landis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 11/30/1994
* USD 236,700.00

With funding from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
program, Professor Clark Landis of the University of Wisconsin, Madison will
undertake the development of new computational and experimental tools for
elucidation of solution structures of organometallic molecules. Landis will
develop methods for fitting experimental Nuclear Overhauser Effect timecourses
in NMR spectra of organometallic molecules with timecourses that are calculated
based on a population of possible conformers. Ensembles of possible conformers
will be generated using force field minimization methods combined with
systematic or Monte Carlo searching techniques. Solvent mixtures of high
viscosity will be used to partially eliminate the loss of NOE due to rapid spin
relaxation that normally results from the rapid rotation of small molecules.
Secondly, a new empirical force field method (SHAPES) that is specifically
designed for describing complex geometries of transition metal containing
compounds will be developed. Both techniques will be applied to the
determination of structures of homogeneous asymmetric hydrogenation and alpha-
olefin catalysts. The ultimate aim of the research is the determination of the
reasons behind the high stereoselectivity of these catalysts and the prediction
of new and more highly stereoselective catalysts for these and other types of
reactions. %%% New methods for the determination of structures of transition
metal organometallic molecules in solution will be studied. Complex molecules in
solutions are constantly twisting and turning, with consequent changes in
overall shape. One of the methods to be developed to study molecular shapes in
solution will utilize a variation of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(Nuclear Overhauser Effect). The existence of various conformational isomers
(molecules with different twists) of the dissolved organometallic compounds will
be considered in the interpretation of the spectral data so as to provide
structural information for all participating isomers. Only an average structure
can be deduced using existing methods. The second method to be developed will
allow for the determination of structures using molecular mechanics methods that
are specifically tailored to include parameters for transition metals. Such
techniques are well developed for small organic molecules and proteins but have
only begun to be applied to the computation of structures of organometallic
molecules. The ultimate objective of the work is to be able to understand the
origins of stereoselectivity in reactions catalyzed by organometallic compounds.
Such reactions are very important in the chemical industry with applications to
the manufacture of commodity, fine and specialty chemicals. An understanding of
catalytic stereoselectivity potentially influences issues such as energy and raw
materials utilization.