* 9112405
* Dissertation Research:  Evolution and Phylogeny of          Hemidactyliine Salamanders:  Molecular Tests of             Morphological Hypotheses, and Relationships of Genome Size
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Inferences of evolutionary relationships in most groups of organisms have
traditionally been based on morphological characters. In recent years, however,
the use of molecular data has become widespread in systematics. Although there
is usually close agreement between morphology-based and molecule-based
inferences about phylogeny, there are special cases in which rates of evolution
in the two components differ greatly. This appears to hold for salamanders of
the tribe Hemidactyliini in the family Plethodontidae, in which morphological
characters alone do not appear to provide a reliable estimate of phylogeny.
Knowledge of patterns of genetic divergence in this group (which may occur in
the absence of morphological differentiation) also has implications for the
conservation of these salamanders and their habitat, especially because some of
the species involved are threatened by habitat destruction. Under the guidance
of faculty advisor David Hillis, graduate student Paul Chippindale will use
several molecular systematic techniques to reconstruct phylogenetic
relationships among these salamander species. The techniques include protein
electrophoresis, restriction enzyme analysis of nuclear ribosomal and
mitochondrial DNA, and sequencing of mitochondrial genes. Special emphasis is
placed on the surface and cave-dwelling central Texas salamanders of the genera
Eurycea and Typhlomolge, with a diversity of morphologies and of life
histories.The research will determine whether parallel changes in morphology and
in life history characterize this group, and it will also test hypotheses about
the evolutionary significance of changes in genome size.