* 9112870
* Photoaffinity Labeled Acyl CoA for Mitochondrial Membrane   Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Earl Shrago, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 03/31/1996
* USD 150,000.00

The major objective of this project is to synthesize by a newly divised method a
sufficient quantity of 2-azido ı32p! palmitoyl CoA for photolabeling specific
mitochondrial membrane proteins, namely the ADP/ATP carrier from beef heart
mitochondria and the uncoupling protein from brown fat mitochondria. Following
purification and cleavage of the photolabeled proteins, the radioactive peptide
amino acids will be sequenced to mp the acyl CoA and possibly the nucleotide
binding sites. The ADP/ATP carrier will be photolabeled from both the cytosolic
and matrix sides of the inner mitochondrial membrane with the aim of
differentiating between a single or two distinct binding sites. The amino acid
profiles of the acyl CoA binding sites on the ADP/ATP carrier and uncoupling
protein will be compared for the degree of homology of these two similar
proteins. Long chain acyl CoA esters are recognized to be biological regulatory
ligands for a number of important enzymes. These experiments will provide for
the first time pertinent biochemical information on the mechanism of regulation
of cellular bioenergetics by acyl CoA esters. Furthermore, it is anticipated
that 2-azido palmitoyl CoA will prove very useful in screening for the co-valent
binding of a number of membrane and soluble proteins which are modulated by acyl
CoA esters.