* 9112757
* Disturbance and Environmental Variability Effects on Plant  Colonization and Establishment
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Susan Beatty, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 09/30/1994
* USD 110,000.00

Ecologists, biogeographers, and other scientists recently have devoted
considerable attention to the study of factors that influence the form and
extent of biological diversity within various types of locales. Among the
factors that have been studied intensively are the impacts of various types of
natural and human- induced disturbances (like fires or floods) and the response
of vegetative and faunal communities to changes in general environmental
conditions (like changes in temperature or precipitation). Relatively little
research has been devoted to interactions between these general factors,
however. This project will focus on description and analysis of vegetation
change in the mixed deciduous forest ecosystems of the Huyck Preserve in upstate
New York. The project will focus on answering two questions: (1) What role does
disturbance play in determining the species composition and richness of forest
and old field communities? and (2) What responses in understory forest-
vegetation phenology and spatial population dynamics can be related to
environmental variability within and between years? These questions will be
answered using data gathered through a variety of means, including vegetation
censuses and mapping, tree-ring measurements, measurement of vegetation gaps,
testing of soil samples, and experiments in which environmental variables are
controlled to replicate different climatic regimes. This project will provide
new information about and new insights into the ways that different forms of
disturbance and different types of environmental change affect the number, form,
and location of different species in temperate mixed deciduous ecosystems.
Because analyses of these two general factors will be conducted simultaneously,
the project will also enhance understandings of interactions among disturbances
and different forms of environmental variability as they affect vegetation. The
conclusions of this project therefore will contribute to increased knowledge of
the fine-scale dynamics within and between vegetative communities, and they also
will advance the development of more comprehensive regional and global models
that relate natural change to human and physical activities.