* 9112596
* Movement in Depth and Velocity: Cortical Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Robert Emerson, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 02/28/1995
* USD 217,901.00

One feature of visual systems that is very important is detection of image
motion. Such motion may occur across the visual field, or have a component
toward or away from the observer, called "motion in depth." To understand how
the visual system handles motion it is important to learn how nerve cells in the
complex network of the visual cortex respond physiologically to moving stimuli,
including selectivity to particular directions or velocities of motion. This
project combines a mathematical modelling approach with physiological recording
of single cortical neurons. The intent is to obtain detailed functional
information about connectivity in the visual pathway that cannot be obtained
through other methods such as anatomical labelling or tissue culture. Visual
stimuli will be mainly those of a moving bar array which will be modulated in
space and time, using the principles of "white noise" to produce a randomized
stimulus sequence. One part of the study will test how velocity sensitivity may
be modeled in cortical cells, and how it may suggest connectivity and cellular
mechanisms for that selectivity. The other part will test selectivity for
movement sensitivity in three dimensions, analyzing monocular and binocular
responses to the stimulus components. This powerful approach should give results
that will have an impact not only on visual neuroscience, but also on computer
vision, artificial intelligence, and neural networks.