* 9112727
* Synoptic Studies of Convective Systems, Frontogenesis and   Baroclinic Development
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Frederick Sanders, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 01/31/1994
* USD 56,383.00

Sanders proposes to complete two case studys in which significant weather
features are present which have not been intensively analyzed previously, and a
third study in which the prediction skills of two operational Numerical Weather
Prediction models are assessed and compared. The region covered in the third
study is the western North Atlantic, and the period of concern is the winter of
1988-89, when a significantly enhanced observational system was deployed at sea
as part of project ERICA. ERICA was mounted after Sanders' prior pioneering
research focussed attention on the weather phenomenon he labelled "explosive
marine cyclogenesis". The subject phenomenon of the first study is an organized
but isolated thunderstorm system which produced many tornadoes and much damaging
hail, again cap- tured in an ehanced observational network, this time deployed
du- ring the 1985 O-K PRESTORM field project. That of the second study is a form
of sloping roll circulation that often develops as part of the process of
frontal formation. It is associated with alternating lines of heavy and little
rain, and with alter- nating layers of saturated and extremely dry air aloft.
Sanders has been a leader in synoptic meteorology for decades. He has
established a record of using methods and theory in the forefront of atmospheric
science in the study of those weather systems which directly affect human safety
and property.