* 9112884
* Mathematical Sciences: "Variational Problems from Nonlinear Elasticity in Several Space Dimensions"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1994
* Patricia Bauman, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1994
* USD 45,000.00

In this project the principal investigator will examine several problems
involving nonlinear elliptic systems of partial differential equations in two
and three space dimensions. The specific systems to be considered come from the
theory of nonlinear elasticity, and the principal investigator will study the
properties of solutions that are the energy minimizers of the associated
variational problems. Her primary goal is to determine various regularity
properties of solutions and to examine their qualitative behavior. The main
tools to be used are previous results of the principal investigator concerning
maximum principles and a'priori estimates. The solutions of many problems that
describe physical reality are what mathematicians call "variational" solutions,
that is, the correct physical solution is the mathematical solution of a
variational problem. In ordinary language, a variational solution is one that
maximizes or minimizes a fundamental quantity like the total energy of a system.
For example, the bubbles in your glass of beer are spherical, because the
spherical shape minimizes the surface energy. In this project the principal
investigator will study various mathematical properties of solutions of
variational problems that model two- and three-dimensional nonlinear elastic
phenomena.