* 9112648
* Divided Government in the American States
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1993
* Morris Fiorina, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1993
* USD 49,826.00

Divided government occurs when different political parties control the
executive and legislative branches of government. Once a rare occurrence in
American politics divided government has become increasingly commonplace. As a
consequence, the subject of divided government has attracted increasing
scientific attention not least because the growth of divided government is
variously blamed for budget deficits, policy paralysis, and increasing partisan
conflict in government. To date most scholarly attention has focussed on divided
government at the national level of American politics. However, the evidence is
that the incidence of divided government has increased just as rapidly in the
American states and with similar consequences. This innovative project
undertakes to examine the nature and determinants of divided government in the
American states. In addition to the intrinsic importance of American state
government, there are sound scientific reasons for examining divided government
at the state level. Although a number of explanations have been advanced to
explain the growth of divided government, the national focus of previous
research has precluded rigorous analysis since these studies have been limited
to a single case. By focussing on divided government in the American states,
this project will take advantage of the substantial variance in divided
government at the state level to refine and test competing hypotheses. Of
particular interest is the hypothesis that divided government is a consequence
in large measure of the growing professionalism of state legislatures which has
tended increasingly to shelter legislators -- especially members of the
Democratic party -- from competitive electoral pressures. If substantiated, this
explanation has important implications for the current debate about legislative
term limitation. When completed this project should provide much richer and more
rigorous explanations of both the causes and consequence of divided government.