* 9112936
* Capacity and Macroeconomic Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Matthew Shapiro, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1996
* USD 126,345.00

This project addresses a major and important puzzle with implications for our
understanding of U.S. manufacturing productivity. The results should also
enhance our understanding of the determinants of economic fluctuations in
output. The puzzle is the idleness of capital much of the time in U.S.
manufacturing. Specifically, the workweek of capital in U.S. manufacturing
averages only 55 hours per week. If a unit of capital does not get less
productive with more intensive use over time and if its user cost is independent
of the rate of utilization, then the productivity of the capital stock in U.S.
manufacturing could be three times higher simply by increasing the utilization
of the existing capital stock. The idleness of capital also implies that even at
cyclical peaks, tight capacity does not limit the expansion of the economy. This
project investigates the costs of increasing the workweek of capital along
several dimensions. It determines whether these costs justify the low
utilization of capital. The estimates of the cost of using capital more
intensively are based on a study of the U.S. economy during World War II. The
private U.S. economy during World War II produced a tremendous increment in
output with little increase in capacity. This project assembles and analyzes
data on shift work, female labor participation, on work hours and conditions for
production works and on other labor arrangements during World War II from the
records of the price control board, the military procurement agencies and
private companies.