* 9112729
* Openness, Secrecy, Authorship, and Intellectual Property
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Pamela Long, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 04/30/1993
* USD 36,000.00

Issues of openness, secrecy, authorship, and intellectual property remain of
central concern in scientific and technical research. The current debate between
the French and Americans over the discovery of the HIV virus or the criticism of
classified CIA- supported research at the Rochester Institute of Technology are
just two of many examples of conflicts that can arise concerning these issues.
The creation of an office of scientific integrity at the NIH and an Inspector
General's Office at NSF are manifestations of the importance government has
attached to these questions. Yet these are not in any sense new problems. Under
this grant, Dr. Long is continuing her investigation of the origins of beliefs
and attitudes towards openness, secrecy, authorship and intellectual property in
the period before the rise of modern science and technology in the scientific
revolution. She argues that the most important sources for these attitudes and
beliefs consist of practical, technical and military writings and craft guild
documents. In this study, Dr. Long is evaluating the ways in which prior
traditions of practical authorship influenced the development of an ideal of
openness in the new experimental science. At the same time, however, she has
found a rising interest in secrecy, priority, intellectual property, patents and
privileges. She is examining the conflicts that emerged from these competing
interests. Her study concludes with an analysis of the ways in which scientific
methodology was influenced by such issues as they had been elaborated in prior
practical traditions. This research promises to enrich our understanding of the
bases for contemporary debate over these issues.