* 9112572
* Directions and Implications of Advanced Computing           (OIAC)-92 - May 2-3, 1992
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Douglas Schuler, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1993
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides partial support for the conference "Directions and
Implications of Advanced Computing (DIAC-92)" to be held in Berkeley, California
on May 2-3, 1992. The objective of the conference is to help build an
understanding of a wide range of social and ethical concerns relating to
computing technology. The approach is to sponsor an open scientific forum and
disseminate the results. Presenters at the symposium include invited speakers as
well as those selected on the basis of submitted papers. An interdisciplinary,
broadly representative group of persons with expertise and interest in impacts
of computing form the selection committee. Results include a proceedings as well
as other publications in a wide variety of outlets. The funds from NSF will be
used to support some travel, publicity, and printing costs of the proceedings
for the conference. The topic of this proposal is of highest priority for Ethics
and Values Studies. The qualifications and track record of the investigators and
organization are excellent. The project provides an important effort to
encourage interdisciplinary communication about important social and ethical
concerns associated with new developments in computing. Results will be useful
for a wide range of individuals and groups. The budget is modest. The proposal
is recommended for support.