* 9112122
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Optical Fiber Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Theodore Morse, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 01/31/1993
* USD 39,479.00

At the Laboratory for Lightwave Technology within the Division of Engineering at
Brown University, a new method for the fabrication of rare earth fiber lasers
has been developed. These are important not only for their role in amplification
of telecommunications signals, but for a host of novel sensing applications. The
technique involves a novel aerosol technique for the transport and incorporation
into the core of an optical fiber preform rare earth elements whose precursors
have low vapor pressures. Organic solids containing rare earth elements are
dissolved in liquid organometallic compounds. The resulting solution is
nebulized and the (approximately) four micron diameter droplets are convected by
means of a carrier gas into a substrate tube in the MCVD (Modified Chemical
Vapor /Deposition) process used optical fiber preform fabrication. At an
appropriate heat source, these particles then vaporize and react to form multi-
component oxide particles that are thermophoretically deposited and subsequently
sintered. This process represents a new technique for the formation of high
purity glass, in particular, for the cord doping of fiber lasers using the MCVD
process. The PI seeks additional equipment to aide in the characterization of
these fiber lasers, and to assess the role of co-doping on laser gain.