* 9112535
* Dissertation Research:  Cassowary Foraging Ecology and Fruit Choice, and Consequent Evolutionary Implications
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 11/30/1993
* USD 11,000.00

Fruits have evolved as a means for plants to disperse their seeds. The progeny
of a zoochorous plant that is unsuccessful in attracting animal dispersers will
likely have lower survival than a plant of the same species that does attract
dispersing agents. Tightly coevolved frugivore-plant systems are relatively
rare, but a bird-plant interaction in Papua New Guinea offers special
opportunities for such a study. The dwarf cassowary (Casuarius bennettii) is
frugivorous and may be the sole disperser of many large-seeded plant species in
New Guinea. One hundred twenty 50 x 10 m transects are to be monitored monthly
for the purpose of quantifying crop parameters, fruit characteristics, and
phenological patterns. Scats are to be analyzed to compare cassowary diet with
fruit availability on the transects. An effort will be made to determine the
most important factors determining cassowary fruit choice. Using manipulations
(such as exclosures), fruit traps, and observations, it will be possible to
ascertain whether these large birds are the sole consumers or sole dispersers of
their primary food plants. Radio-tracking is to be utilized in order to learn
about ranging patterns, habitat use, and specific foraging movements. Finally,
this information is to be used in conjunction with floral comparisons to
estimate the importance of cassowaries to the evolution and maintenance of New
Guinea's flora.