* 9112310
* Archaeological Research at the Formative Mayan Site of      K'axob, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,08/31/1997
* Patricia McAnany, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 112,979.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Patricia McAnany will conduct one
season of fieldwork at the archaeological site of K'axob and analyze the
materials collected. The site, located on a low rise in the lowland swamp and
riverine country of northern Belize, covers about 84 hectares and includes
approximately 90 structures with detectable surface elevation. The majority of
these are low platforms. Prior excavation has indicated that this Mayan site
includes stratified Formative Period strata and therefore it documents the early
phase of the rise of Mayan civilization. In 1990, Dr. McAnany conducted test
excavations at a large mound - Structure 18 - and recovered a sequence of human
burials which cover most of the Formative and succeeding Classic periods. She
will continue this work and expose a large horizontal area in this portion of
the site. Excavation will also be conducted at other structures within this
complex as well as at other plaza groups. While all classes of recovered remains
will be studied, analysis will focus in three specific areas: 1. Domestic
architecture will be analyzed to document chronological changes in the use of
space within one location and to investigate differences in architectural
elaboration among locations. 2. Burial practices. Since the way individuals are
interred can yield information on social organization, and how this changes over
time attention will be focussed on the predicted 170+ remains. 3. Flora and
molluscs. These materials provide a basis for environmental reconstruction and
through their analysis it should be possible to trace changing land use and
agricultural practices. Prior to European arrival, the Maya peoples built a
civilization in the inhospitable lowland jungles of Middle America. During its
height in the Classic Period, cities centered around large temples and a
priestly elite, were established and considerable archaeological research has
provided a good picture of this interval. However, much less is known about the
preceeding periods which set the groundwork for this achievement and Dr.
McAnany's research should help to remedy this situation. It focusses on the
development of the social inequality which is manifest during the Classic Period
and which, Dr. McAnany believes provided a driving force for change. By studying
variation in architecture, land use and burial practices she hopes to study this
process in detail. This research is important for several reasons. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our
understanding of the emergence of Mayan civilization and provide insight into
how complex societies arise.