* 9112156
* Dissertation Research:  The Relative Importance of Host     Genetics, Host Density, and the Environment to a Natural    Plant-pathogen Interaction
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1994
* Daniel Dykhuizen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1994
* USD 8,000.00

For many years ecologists have identified pathogens as theoretically important
forces influencing basic processes in natural plant populations. These processes
include, first, the evolution and/or maintenance by natural selection of sexual
reproduction (which provides novel combinations of genes that may enable
offspring to resist local pathogens genetically) and, second, the evolution of
dispersal by offspring (which may help them physically escape local pathogens).
In the first process the pathogen population responds to host plant genetics,
while in the second it responds to host plant density. In addition, the pathogen
can be expected to respond strongly to its physical and biological environment.
This research will determine for one plant-pathogen system which of these three
factors or their combinations the pathogen population responds to most strongly.
This then sheds light on the actual role the pathogen population is having in
the plant population's biology. The plant being studied is the rush, Juncus
dichotomous and the pathogen is a parasitic smut fungus, Cintractia junci. These
organisms occur together in the Long Island pine barrens. The results of this
research directly apply only to nonagricultural plants and pathogens, but its
methodology can be a model for applied problems. With increasing public concern
about the health and environmental costs of using agricultural pesticides and
given the fact that they are not fully effective, detailed population studies on
the interaction of pest organisms with crop plants are needed to suggest safe
and effective ways of reducing crop losses. Population studies involving
pathogens and crops and incorporating genetics, density, and variables together
could be very useful. **