* 9112304
* The Rise and Institutionalization of Geophysics             in American Universities
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Ronald Doel, American Institute of Physics
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 12/31/1995
* USD 50,000.00

In the 20th century, geophysics moved from industrial laboratories and endowed
research facilities into the university. It was one of the last major branches
of physical science in the United States to do so. The transformation of
geophysics into a university-based discipline challenged geologists,
geophysicists, and university administrators who wrestled with the sharp
conflict between solid earth geophysicists and field geologists over proper
methodological approaches and the daunting diversity of geophysics' component
fields. Geophysicists sought to develop academic facilities in part to approach
complex problems such as the nature of the Earth's core through
interdisciplinary contacts readily available at universities. Its leaders also
sought to develop professional centers for training new recruits to the field.
By the 1960s, the rapid growth of geophysics reshaped existing departments of
geological sciences and reoriented the study of geological phenomena. Yet
because the history of geophysics remains largely unexplored, little is known
about these significant and far- reaching changes. Given the importance of
interdisciplinary research in modern science, the subject merits special
attention. Dr. Doel is concentrating on the period from the early 1920s through
the 1960s, utilizing the growth of solid earth geophysics to explore several
broad themes including discipline formation, the development of American
research universities, and the influence of patronage and institutional settings
on the production of scientific knowledge. This study is being undertaken at the
Center for History of Physics of the American Institute of Physics (AIP). The
AIP is playing an important role in this project, including the preservation of
historical "raw data" such as unpublished correspondence, institutional records,
and tape-recorded recollections, using methods AIP has developed for similar
projects in other fields.