* 9113472
* An Approach to Developing Analytical Potential Functions    for Non-Covalent Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Peter Kollman, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 05/31/1995
* USD 240,000.00

With this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Kollman will develop a new approach to the construction of
intermolecular potentials for use in molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics
simulation of biomolecules. He will focus on two issues: first, the addition of
non-additive non-bonded energy terms to the standard intermolecular potential
which will have an important impact on the ability to simulate structures and
energies realistically for the widest range of molecules and, secondly, a
general analysis of the functional forms and parameters in such potentials. The
non-additive effects will be built into the potential by explicitly
incorporating polarization effects into the force field. Professor Kollman has
developed a new model which can represent liquid water better than other non-
additive models and leads to an excellent reproduction of the properties of
dilute ionic solutions. He will extend this model to other simple solvents and
solutes in order to validate it as a general method for studying molecular
liquids and solutions by computer based approaches. The model will be tested
against solutions of simple ions, salts, and small organic molecules as well as
organic macrocycles/ionophores. %%% The ability to simulate the interactions of
biomolecules by means of molecular mechanics and dynamics will lead to a better
understanding of elementary biological processes in such areas as drug design
and electron transport. The intermolecular potentials developed by Professor
Kollman are a key component of these simulations.