* 9113992
* Safe Source Chemical Beam Expitaxy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Laurence Sadwick, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 07/31/1994
* USD 70,000.00

Superlattices, multiple quantum wells, and other heterostructures of various
semiconductors will play an increasingly important role in advanced electronics.
Further development work is needed on the growth techniques used to fabricate
these structures. Advanced electronic systems will require higher performance
devices that will require high-quality heterostructures for radar and
communications systems. At present, the two most commonly employed techniques
for the growth of multilayer materials for today's complex device structures are
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMVPE),
also known as metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). In the last few
years a hybridization of the above two techniques has occurred, resulting in a
new technique known as chemical beam epitaxy (CBE). The initial results suggest
this is a superior technique for the growth of material for use in advanced
device structures such as InGaAs/InP heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs).
Disadvantages exist with both MBE and OMVPE. The inability of MBE to grow good
epilayers of P- containing materials such as InP and GaInAsP will severely limit
this technique for next generation devices. Furthermore, with MBE grown
material, oval defects place an upper limit on the number of devices at an
integrated circuit level and the overall device yield. In addition, an upper
bound on doping levels translates to higher series resistance and a compromise
in HBT design. Low wafer throughput and the down-time needed to reload source
materials substantially increase cost and result in unpredictable time delays.
The most serious problem facing the OMVPE technique is the need for high flow
rates of hazardous and life-threatening gases such as arsine and phosphine. This
point cannot be overemphasized: the impact on future growth techniques will be
highly influenced by environmental concerns, health risks, and legal
prohibition. Engineered properly CBE can overcome these problematic limitations.
This proposal discusses an investigation of chemical beam epitaxy, including
work on the development of new sources and the growth mechanisms. The primary
focus of this investigation is to develop safe organometallic group III and
group V sources that result in materials with properties superior to those
produced to date by CBE and comparable to the best produced by MBE and OMVPE.
The overall objective is to make significant and substantial improvements in the
CBE process for the production of As-andP-based semiconductors with the major
emphasis being on P-containing binary, ternary and quaternary III/V compound
materials for device applications using safer, less toxic sources.