* 9113042
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Study of Low Multipolarity MagneticTransitions in Selected Nuclei
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1998
* Lawrence Fagg, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1998
* USD 17,000.00

This award supports Lawrence Fagg and several others of the Catholic University
of America (CUA) to collaborate with Achim Richter and other physicists at the
superconducting electron accelerator facility of the Institute of Nuclear
Physics of the Technische Hochschule in Darmstadt, Germany. Several years ago
the CUA group designed and built what was then the only low energy 180 degree
electron scattering system in the world. It was installed at the Microtron
Facility of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and operated
successfully to obtain data on ten nuclei ranging from Carbon-13 to Gallium-71.
However, in 1990 the Microtron Facility was shut down, terminating a very
productive line of nuclear research. The CUA group arranged to ship the
scattering system to Darmstadt, Germany for installation and use there. The
support provided by this award will enable the CUA group to travel to Germany to
complete the installation and testing of the scattering system over the next few
months. Then they will be able to begin a series of collaborative experiments
using the system to study low multipolarity magnetic transitions in several
selected nuclei, including Helium-3, Neon-21, and Krypton-86. The system they
built has a unique capability for investigating such transitions as well as
ground-state magnetic structure.