* 9113695
* Dynamics of Dense X-Pinch and Z-Pinch Plasmas Produced by   Pulsed Power Generators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* David Hammer, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/1994
* USD 239,637.00

This project is concerned with the dynamics of dense x-pinch and z-pinch plasmas
produced by submicrosecond pulsed power generators. An x- pinch consists of at
least two fine wires stretched between output electrodes of a high power pulser
such that they cross and touch in the form of an X. Powered by 400-500kA, 80ns
current pulses, the resulting plasma is a very intense, submillimeter source of
soft x-rays (starting with metal wires) or neutrons (starting with deuterated
polyethylene fibers). The objective of this study is to understand the dynamics
of x-pinch plasmas so that possible applications (e.g., to microlithography,
imaging of living cells and determining the spatial resolution of a neutron
detector) can be intelligently evaluated. To accomplish this effectively, a
pulser designed specifically to power the x-pinch will be built, and dense
x-pinch plasmas (as well as the simpler z- pinches for comparison) will be
studied with 1ns time and 0.1mm space resolution using optical and x-ray
diagnostic techniques. Soft x-ray measurements will be used to probe the dense
core plasma, and interferometry and Faraday rotation measurements will probe the
surrounding region. The purpose of these measurements is to determine the mass
density and current density distributions as a function f time. From these
quantities, the various phenomena observed in x-pinch (and z-pinch) implosions
can be understood.