* 9113400
* U.S.-Norway Cooperative Research on Pade Approximants and   Related Topics
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1993
* William Jones, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1993
* USD 12,550.00

This award supports Professor William B. Jones of the University of Colorado and
two of his graduate students to collaborate in mathematics research with
Professors Olav Njastad, Haakon Waadeland and others of the University of
Trondheim, Norway. Professor Jones is devoting his sabbatical year to continuing
his fruitful collaboration with Norwegian mathematicians. During this period,
two of his graduate students will visit Norway with support from this grant to
work with the Norwegian group. The subject of this U.S.-Norwegian collaboration
in classical analysis is rational interpolation in the complex domain by Pade
approximants and continued fractions. The joint work will involve applications
of this technique in moment theory, orthogonal polynomials and Gaussian
quadrature. The collaborators will also pursue mathematical research on digital
signal processing, including the determination of hidden periodicities. Pade
approximants and their generalizations are employed in the theory and
applications of many areas of mathematics. The development of high speed
computers has stimulated applications in the physical and engineering sciences.
The substantial current interest and range of activity in this field will
benefit from the results of this U.S.-Norway collaboration.