* 9113480
* A New Concept for Refining Molten Metals and Recovering     Metals from Slags
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1995
* Uday Pal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 04/30/1995
* USD 285,123.00

The research involves a novel approach for refining metals. It will utilize the
oxygen ion conducting properties of yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) solid
electrolyte to rapidly remove oxygen from molten metals and slags. Typically,
one side of the YSZ electrolyte will be in contact with the melt and the other
side with a reducing gas without letting the gas and the melt come in direct
contact with each other. This arrangement resembles an oxygen concentration
cell, and therefore oxygen may be removed by passing an electric current through
the electrolyte. This can be accomplished without the application of external
potential by externally connecting (short circuiting) the electrodes on two
sides of the electrolyte. The oxygen flux under this (short circuit) condition
can be sufficiently high to rapidly deoxidize (refine) the melt. In order to
efficiently remove oxygen by this technique, the YSZ electrolyte must be thin,
and the electrodes must be porous and should cover the entire electrolyte
surface for charge transfer. This novel refining device will be constructed and
used as described above to study the kinetics of oxygen removal from copper, low
carbon iron and lead oxide-silica melts. Based on the study the principal
investigator will determine the rate- controlling step for oxygen removal in
these systems and establish conditions for efficient refining. This new process
for refining metals is environmentally sound, can use hydrogen and carbon
containing reducing gases without running the risk of increasing hydrogen and
carbon content of the melt, and is also rapid.