* 9113876
* RUI:  Collective Phenomena in Highly Correlated Systems:    Study of the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1996
* Edward Rezayi, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1996
* USD 129,500.00

This renewal award for Research at Undergraduate Institutions is for continued
research on the fractional quantum Hall effect. Numerical work is proposed to
investigate outstanding problems in the fractionally quantized Hall effect which
is observed in a two- dimensional electron gas subject to a transverse magnetic
field. The electron layer is formed at the semiconductor interface of a high
quality Gallium-Arsenide heterostructure device. The recent availability of very
high mobility samples offers a unique opportunity to probe strongly correlated
systems in the extreme quantum mechanical limit, where collective phenomena
occur. In addition, the more recent optical measurements of the quantum Hall
states have provided another dimension in experimental probes of the quantum
Hall effect. The proposed research addresses the nature of half-integral and
hierarchy states of the fractional quantum Hall effect as well as the physical
conditions which stabilize them. Additional areas of research include
understanding edge states; the quantum fluid to classical Wigner crystal cross-
over; optical signature of quantum Hall states; and, the possibility of
fractional quantum Hall effect in a two-dimensional electron-hole fluid. Also
proposed is a finite-size numerical study of a model Hamiltonian for which the
Kalmeyer-Laughlin chiral spin fluid ground state is exact. Chiral spin fluids
are similar to quantum Hall states and support fractional statistics (semion)
excitations. %%% The quantum Hall effect is due to a unique state of matter - a
two- dimensional electron fluid. The cooperative behavior of electrons in two-
dimensions is markedly different from their behavior in the more familiar three-
dimensions. The proposed research will use numerical and analytical techniques
to study a number of properties of this strange two-dimensional system which are
of current interest. Besides providing insight into the underlying physics of
this strange state of matter, the results may also be of interest in device
fabrication and for high temperature superconductivity.