* 9113123
* Investigation of Metal-Semiconductor and Heterojunction     Devices at Tarahertz Frequencies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Thomas Crowe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 08/31/1994
* USD 375,265.00

This research program will investigate electron transport in heterostructure
devices with the goal of improving the performance of terahertz-frequency
semiconductor devices. Three specific types of two- terminal devices will be
investigated; metal semiconductor junctions, heterojunction barrier diodes, and
a high-electron mobility diode. Metal- semiconductor junctions have been the
workhorse device in millimeter and submillimeter wavelength applications for
many years, and continue to yield state-of-the-art performance at THz
frequencies. The goals of our continued work on these devices will be to
increase the operating frequency to the 10 THz range and determine the
fundamental limit to their maximum operating frequency. The heterojunction
barrier devices will use the barrier between two III-V semiconductor materials
to control the current flow perpendicular to the interface. Since the
composition and doping of the semiconductor materials can be varied over a wide
range, the properties of the barrier can, to a degree, be tailored to yield the
desired device characteristics for specific applications. The heterojunction
barrier varactor which is a novel device that promises to greatly improve the
maximum frequency and output power of frequency multipliers, will be extensively
investigated. As time permits, the effect of a heterojunction barrier on a
metal-semiconductor junction will also be investigated, by varying the design of
the heterojunction, the important properties of the diode can be controlled,
leading to greatly increased design flexibility and improved performance. The
high electron mobility diode is a fundamentally new two-terminal device in which
the electron conduction is in a two dimensional electron gas at the
heterojunction interface. Our previous NSF grant led to the investigation of a
prototype high- electron mobility varactor diode that exhibited strongly non-
linear capacitance-voltage characteristics and large reverse breakdown voltage.
Research on each device investigated in this grant will have three specific
components; the investigation of fundamental device physics, the study of the
feasibility of the proposed device for (2) scientific applications and the
fabrication of prototype devices to evaluate the theoretical predictions.