* 9113636
* Thermodynamic Isotope Effects in Vapor and Liquid Phase     Polarizability Isotope Effects (Origins and Applications)
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Alexander Van Hook, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 05/31/1995
* USD 219,000.00

Professor Van Hook is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to measure thermodynamic isotope effects in
vapor and liquid phases. Virial coefficients, vapor pressures, condensed phase
partial molar volumes, compressibilities and expansivities, and the isotope
effects on these properties will be measured between room temperature and the
critical temperature, and from less than 0.1 to 200 MPa. In a second and
complementary project, refractive index differences between isotopic isomers,
and between liquids and solutions will be measured. The theoretical analysis of
the results will focus on the relation between intermolecular forces in the
condensed phase and the molecular properties, especially the polarizability, and
will include consideration of the contributions from isotope effects from
different normal mode vibrations. %%% Systematic and accurate measurement of
thermodynamic properties is extremely important for the development of theories
of intermolecular interactions in vapors, liquids, and solutions as well as for
more practical reasons. The current research program will produce precise data
for small differences in thermodynamic properties which result from isotopic
substitution. This research will also provide some of the most accurate
thermodynamic data available on the reference compounds used. The data produced
will provide a valuable resource to the larger community of chemists and
chemical engineers.