* 9113726
* Ultrashort Pulse Propagation and Amplification in New       Cr-Doped LiSAF and LiCAF Solid State Laser Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,10/31/1994
* Michael Bass, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* William H. Carter
* 10/31/1994
* USD 319,039.00

A new avenue of opportunity in the field of intense, ultrashort laser pulse
technology and its applications has opened as a result of the development of the
laser materials Cr-doped LiSAF and Cr-doped LiCAF. These materials, like no
others yet developed, display the most attractive characteristics of a solid
state laser material required for the generation of ultra-intense, ultrashort
laser pulses. They have high gain and energy storage properties, good optical
properties, a high damage threshold and can be grown in large sizes. Moreover,
they uniquely combine long fluorescence lifetimes ( 70 us for LiSAF and 130 us
for LiCAF) and the broadest spectral emission bandwith known (220nm for LiSAF),
making possible, for the first time, the amplification with high gain, of
ultrashort (&lt; 100fs) pulses with flashlamp-pumped, large diameter, solid
state laser modules. The implications will be considerable for future
applications of ultrashort, high intensity laser technology, in the development
of laboratory x-ray lasers, sub-picosecond x-ray studies, and particle
acceleration. We will make a comprehensive investigation of all the physical
properties of these two materials associated with their use as high gain
amplifiers of ultrashort laser pulses. This will include a full examination of
the basic spectral and atomic properties of Cr-doped LiSAF and LiCAF pertaining
to broadband pulse amplification, their capacity to amplify short pulses, the
effectiveness with which chirped pulse amplification (CPA) can extract energy,
and those material properties affecting their use in wide aperture, multi-
segmented array (MSA) amplifiers. This study will therefore address all the
issues necessary to incorporate these new materials as a major laser amplifier
medium. Armed with data produced by this study, we will then be able, in future
work, to move forward towards the construction of lasers capable of emitting
tens, perhaps hundreds of joules in times of less than 100fs, focusable to
intensities greater than 1020W/cm2.