* 9113224
* The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center at the Ohio StateUniversity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1997
* Randall Scholl, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/1997
* USD 2,123,500.00

This award supports the U.S. Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center located at
Ohio State University. The center will collect, maintain, and distribute
Arabidopsis seeds and other biological resources such as RFLP markers and YAC
libraries. An advisory committee consisting of active Arabidopsis researchers
will advise the center on its policy and overall operation. The Center also
provides information associated with the resources it maintains, including
genetic data, biological history, and bibliography. The research community will
have access to this information either electronically or via regularly published
catalogues. Necessary databases and software for this purpose is being developed
in collaboration with a computer scientist at Michigan State University under a
companion NSF grant, DIR 91- 21030. The Arabidopsis research community had
identified the establishment of resource centers as high priority for the
multinational coordinated Arabidopsis genome research project, and recommended
that at least two such centers be established world-wide. There are currently
two Arabidopsis resource centers in Europe; a seed center in U.K. and a clone
center in Germany. The U.S. center will collaborate with the European centers so
that together, they can efficiently meet the needs of the world Arabidopsis
research community.