* 9113412
* U. S.-Germany Cooperative Investigation of Interfacial Mass Transport in a Biofilm System
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1993
* Slawomir Hermanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1993
* USD 9,640.00

This award provides partial support for a long term visit by Professor Slawomir
W. Hermanowicz, University of California at Berkeley, to the Institute for Water
Quality Control and Waste Management of the Technical University of Munich,
Germany. There he will collaborate with Dr. Peter A. Wilderer in the area of
mass transfer and hydrodynamics in biofilm systems. Dr. Hermanowicz has been
investigating microbial attachment to and growth on surfaces, with a primary
emphasis on dilute systems. His goal is to develop a novel method for assessing
biological growth in dilute systems such as drinking water distribution
networks. This research will be greatly enhanced by a capability to measure
fluid hydrodynamics near the surface and the effects of surface topography on
mass transport of particles such as bacteria. Dr. Wilderer is a world expert in
biofilms, with particular expertise in biofilm structure and ecology. He is
currently researching the effects of biofilm surface morphology on mass
transfer. During this long-term visit, Dr. Hermanowicz will benefit from this
expertise and will gain experience in the application of Laser Doppler
Anemometry to the measurement of interfacial transport properties in biofilms.
Biofilms are formed by microorganisms which attach to surfaces. They are
ubiquitous in many natural and engineered environments, such as groundwater
aquifers, tooth surfaces, drinking water pipelines and ship hulls. The role
played by the dissolved and particulate components in these systems is poorly
understood. A better understanding of the growth and stability of these films
would have applications in industrial processes, environmental research and any
field which adhesion of cells or particles is important.