* 9113212
* Microvoltammetric Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1991,05/31/1995
* R. Mark Wightman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* David J. Curran
* 05/31/1995
* USD 313,400.00

Support for Wightman's research in the development and use of
ultramicroelectrodes has been renewed by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program in the Chemistry Division. Study will focus in three areas: mechanisms
of electrochemically generated chemiluminescence (ECL), ultra-high speed cyclic
voltammetry (UHS-CV), and electrochemical detection of species in supercritical
fluids (SCF). Extension of Wightman's previous work in UHS-CV will lead to
electrochemical methods nearly as fast as optical (laser) time-resolved methods,
permitting redox chemistry to be studied by complementary techniques for the
first time. ECL experiments require this high speed for elucidation of branching
of excited redox species into various decay paths. Few techniques for detecting
solutes in SCF exist, so Wightman's efforts in this area promise to provide an
important, species selective method for detecting reactive solutes. %%% This
research, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, continues development of ultramicroelectordes for
electrochemical detection of oxidizable or reducable species. Small size allows
very rapid experiments to be done, so that observation of reactions which occur
on a time scale of nanoseconds becomes possible. Among the applications of this
novel technology are studies of species which emit light as a consequence of
electrochemical reaction (electrically generated chemiluminescence) and
detection of species dissolved in supercritical fluids (fluids which are gases
at room temperature unless highly compressed).