* 9113967
* Collaborative Research on Global Corporate Structures and   Attributions of Responsibility and Wrongdoing
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* V. Lee Hamilton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1994
* USD 114,482.00

Many of the most serious misdeeds in modern societies are committed not by
individuals acting for personal gain, but by members of organizations obeying
orders from authority. These acts are sometimes called "crimes of obedience" and
globally seem to be a consequence of the growth of bureaucracy. While we surmise
that within organizations there are differing and even changing conceptions of
responsibility, corporate crime, and what should be done in the face of such
wrongdoing, there is little known about these attitudes and the conditions that
lead to accountability. The study being undertaken by Hamilton and Sanders
directly examines such issues. The research explores how responsibility and
sanctions for wrongdoing in organizations are affected by the global dispersal
of corporate forms. Three different cultures, U.S., Japanese, and Soviet,
representing contrasting legal and economic environments (marked capitalism,
corporate capitalism, and socialism) are the sites for assessing the impact of
different organizational forms on individual behavior. Based on a survey design
that systematically varies vignettes according to key characteristics of
organizational structure, the study examines perceptions of individual and
corporate responsibility as separate matters, yet within the context of three
contrasting economic systems. This design allows for the isolation of political,
economic, and cultural influences and the effects of global changes in
organizations on attributions of responsibility, perceptions of wrongdoing, and
attitudes toward social control. The research has considerable potential to
yield important knowledge not only about attribution theories but also about
organizational compliance, regulation, and social control in a transnational
context.