* 9113496
* Support for Computerization and Maintenance of Botanical    Systematic Collections at the California Academy of Sciences
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Thomas Daniel, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 02/28/1995
* USD 209,074.00

Dr. Frank Almeda is the Senior Curator of the Botany Department in the
California Academy of Sciences, and he has designed a significant
computerization program for the department. Dr. Almeda proposes to establish a
computer linkage to the national computer network Internet for the Botany
Department and the entire Academy. In so doing, the Botany Department will join
several other large California herbaria in an ambitious program of database
development. The University Herbarium at the University of California at
Berkeley is implementing the Specimen Management System for California Herbaria
(SMASCH), a networked computer database of California plant specimens. The
computerization program designed by Dr. Almeda will allow the Academy's
important plant collections to become a part of the SMASCH database as it
develops. The proposed plant database initiative has implications beyond the
collections at the California Academy of Sciences. Natural history museums and
herbaria are establishing world-wide networks of information sharing, and these
computerized information resources will revolutionize research on biological
diversity. Research scientists in earth sciences, geography, economics, as well
as biology will draw on these databases for information that is presently
unavailable. Future generations of scientists will depend on data resources such
as these as they investigate global climate change, evolutionary history, and
other integrative research questions.