* 9113426
* Mathematical Sciences: DIMACS Workshop on Groups and        Computation; New Brunswick, NJ
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1992
* Daniel Gorenstein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1992
* USD 14,000.00

Computational group theory is an interdisciplinary field which involves the use
of groups to solve problems in computer science and mathematics. At least three
communities have strongly influenced this field: (1) the theoretical computer
science community through studies of the complexity of computation with groups
and their connections with the complexity of combinatorial isomorphism or search
problems; (2) the symbolic algebra/computer algebra communities, which have
built large integrated software packages and have developed CPU efficient
algorithms for group theoretic computations; and (3) the group theory community
through continued progress on understanding the structure of groups, most
notably the classification of finite simple groups. This project will support
the DIMACS (Center for Discrete Mathematics and Computer Science) Workshop on
Groups and Computation to be held October 7-10, 1991 at Rutgers University.
Research on computational group theory currently appears in diverse forums in
both mathematics and computer science. This reflects the role of groups as
fundamental mathematical objects with a wide range of applicability. This
workshop will bring together researchers in theoretical computer science,
computer algebra, and group theory to discuss group-theoretic algorithms for
both serial and parallel computer architectures.