* 9113345
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Vibratory Grinding     of Structural Ceramic Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1992,11/30/1993
* Guruswami Sathyanarayanan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1993
* USD 11,340.00

This award provides partial support for a sabbatical visit by Professor G.
Sathyanarayanan of Lehigh University to the Technical University of Berlin,
Germany, to collaborate in manufacturing engineering research with Professor
Gunter Spur and others of that University and the nearby Fraunhofer Institute
for Production Systems Engineering and Design Technology. The participating
universities have longstanding research programs focused on the grinding of
structural ceramics that will benefit from the stronger linkage established
through this sabbatical visit. The proposed joint research will evaluate the
effect of vibratory grinding on the rate of removal of ceramic material as well
as the strength and surface integrity of the ground ceramics. The results will
be used to develop a model of vibratory grinding as a prerequisite to
controlling the process in a manufacturing setting. Structural ceramic materials
possess extraordinary characteristics of hardness, strength and resistance to
heat, wear and corrosion. However, the same characteristics make them difficult
to be shaped. Machining flaws have been identified to be the major contributor
in degrading the strength of structural ceramics. These flaws are most often
cracks that are introduced during the grinding operation. While many of these
flaws can be removed by secondary finishing, this adds to the production cost.
New effective methods such as vibratory grinding are needed to produce finished
structural ceramics that are competitive with metal components. The fundamental
goal of this collaboration is to establish the necessary manufacturing science
base for ceramic grinding, and thereby to enhance U.S. competitiveness in the
finishing of structural ceramics.