* 9113062
* Evaluating Change in Behavioral Potential: A Study of Households with Young Children
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1997
* Stuart Aitken, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 12/31/1997
* USD 99,513.00

Recent changes in family arrangements and employment patterns have renewed
scholarly interest in the behavior of family members and in the ways that family
members make locational decisions, both individually and collectively. Some of
the most abrupt shifts in householders' behavior comes immediately after a child
is born. This project will analyze the impacts of the birth of a child on the
activities and responsibilities of a sample of San Diego metropolitan household
members, paying special attention to the ways that individuals' alter their use
of time. Impacts on spatial behavior, including changes in places of work,
commuting patterns, and shopping behavior, also will be examined. Data will be
gathered through a series of questionnaires to be administered annually over a
five-year period to members of a large number of different types of households.
These questionnaires will elicit data on household member's daily activities, on
their family and other responsibilities, and on their mobility. Qualitative and
statistical analyses of these data will be complemented by detailed time-budget
surveys of a subsample of families taken at three times for each family (before
the birth of a child, immediately after the birth, and four years later). One of
the largest health-maintenance organizations in the San Diego area is providing
additional financial and in-kind support to assist in completion of this
project. This project should provide valuable new information about the ways
that members of different types of household alter their use of time and their
behavior in space after the addition of a child to the family. Data from the
questionnaires, time-budget surveys, and interviews will provide new insights
about changes in behavior resulting from abrupt transformation of families and
about the relationship of those changes to family members' attitudes and
feelings and to associated geographic conditions. Resulting analyses should also
provide new information about broader issues of household formation and
persistence, home-work relationships for family members, and gender differences
in temporal and geographic adjustments.