* 9113322
* Implementation of an IP based backbone for MichNet
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Eric Aupperle, Merit Network, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Priscilla Jane Huston
* 11/30/1994
* USD 475,000.00

This award supports upgrading equipment and data communications lines for
MICHNET, a statewide network operating among higher education institutions in
the state of Michigan. The MICHNET system has been operating since 1973
utilizing X.25 network protocols. Current traffic volume, however, has exceeded
the capacity of the hardware and software and modern data communications
equipment supporting TCP/IP is being installed. Also, the lines comprising the
statewide backbone are being upgraded to 1.5 million bits per second from the
current speed of 56,000 bits per second to accommodate the larger volume of
traffic. A primary goal of the network is to facilitate collaborative projects
and sharing of resources between institutions, including those outside the
state. MICHNET will provide operations management and information services and
it will give the participating universities a connection to the NSFNET, a high
speed (1.5 - 45 million bits per second) National Backbone network. The project
will also support an upgrade of central site redundant and equipment. The
universities need greater functionality and network speed to be able to access
supercomputers, libraries, and make file transfers along with being able to
implement a more reliable mail system. Students and faculty research will
benefit from the link. This is also a unique opportunity for the schools to
explore innovative educational resources.