* 9113269
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Preservation of        Historic Stained Glass
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,12/31/1995
* William Lanford, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,130.00

This award supports William A. Lanford and a graduate student of the University
at Albany, SUNY, to collaborate in studies of the surface chemistry of glass
with Dieter R. Fuchs and others of the Fraunhofer Institute for Glass Research
in Wurzburg, Germany. The scientific goal of their research is to improve
understanding of the mechanisms leading to the corrosion of glasses. This
requires sophisticated techniques of chemical and physical analysis to
characterize the state of the glass surface as it is changed by exposure to
water and gases. The collaborating Fraunhofer Institute has world class
facilities for traditional glass chemistry. Among other activities, the German
group is currently very involved in research to provide a sound basis for
treatments to conserve historic stained glass. They have developed some glass
compositions to use as test models for appropriate experiments, and are working
on various coatings to protect old glasses from further deterioration. The U.S.
team at the Accelerator Laboratories of SUNY Albany brings to the collaboration
special expertise and equipment for nuclear reaction analysis and various
spectrometric methods that are necessary for the surface characterization. They
will also participate in experimental analysis of new coatings developed
originally for use in the microelectronic industry. The results of this research
will increase knowledge of the chemical reactivity of glass surfaces, a subject
with diverse implications in industry and every day life. The proposed
collaborative research will make an immediate contribution to the current
international effort to preserve historic stained glass, through the involvement
of the German institute in a NATO sponsored project on this subject. Sound
conservation efforts require as complete knowledge as possible of the mechanisms
leading to the corrosion of these glasses.