* 9113544
* Surface Architecture to Control Guest Behavior in           Monolayers for Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1991,04/30/1997
* Mary Wirth, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* R. Kenneth Marcus
* 04/30/1997
* USD 598,162.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of interfacial structure and dynamics. During the tenure of this
three-year continuing grant, Professor Wirth and her students will investigate
the dynamics and orientational distributions of guest molecules interacting with
covalently bonded, monolayer organic film hosts. The specific theme of this work
is the control of guest behavior through structural design of the host
monolayer. An understanding of guest-host monolayer interactions will facilitate
the design of sensors for rapid and specific molecular recognition. The
particular aspects of host monolayer architecture being investigated in this
project are the development of structurally ordered monolayers, the control of
defect shapes in dense monolayers, and the role of density in covalent, liquid
crystal monolayers. The guest properties of orientation and rotational diffusion
dynamics in these host monolayers will be probed by picosecond fluorescence
anisotropy and fluorescence microscopy. Professor Wirth and her students will
derive corroborative data from scanning tunneling microscopy and ellipsometric
and contact angle measurements. %%% This research furthers the basic
understanding of guest molecules with covalently bound thin film hosts that is
essential to the rational design of sensor devices which have a significant
degree of sensitivity and molecular selectivity.