* 9113499
* Dissertation Research: Archaeological Study of the          Development of Fijian Sociopolitical Complexity
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1992
* Timothy Earle, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1992
* USD 8,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Timothy Earle, Mr. Robert Rechtman will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will radiocarbon date samples of bone and
charcoal collected during archaeological fieldwork in the Fiji Islands. In all,
35 samples will be dated. During fieldwork on Wakaya Island in central Fiji, Mr.
Rechtman conducted a complete survey and located ten substantial fortified
sites. Two of these, Korolevu with a ring'ditch wall and Delaini with a
different stone wall system of defence were excavated. In the process, Mr.
Rechtman collected extensive ceramic, floral and faunal remains as well as human
burial material. His most immediate goal is to reconstruct the cultural sequence
for this area which is poorly archaeologically known. In conjunction with
ceramic seriation, the radiocarbon dates should provide the necessary ordering.
The Fiji Islands, together with the rest of Polynesia, are of great interest to
anthropologists because of the complex highly organized chiefly societies which
arose there. Because the Polynesian islands were originally populated by a
single group of people and because different islands exhibit distinctive kinds
of social organization, anthropologists look for cross-island similarities and
differences in environment and history in an attempt to explain social
variation. Fiji is known for the development of two fort types and several
scenarios have been proposed for how they emerged. Some anthropologists posit
that sequential waves of migrants are responsible for differences - and for the
development of warfare - while others believe that strictly internal forces
played a dominant role. The problem is that few sites have been excavated and
those which have received archaeological attention have not been securely placed
in time. Mr. Rechtman's research is important for several reasons. It will
produce a cultural sequence of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed
light on the emergence of warfare and its role in the development of social
complexity. It will also further the training of a promising young scientist.