* 9113923
* US-Bulgaria Research on Synthesis and Applications of       Alkylammonium and Metal Phosphonates
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* D. Roundhill, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 01/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

This U.S.-Bulgaria research project in chemistry is between Dr. D.M. Roundhill
of Tulane University and Dr. K. Troev of the Central Laboratory for Polymers,
Sofia. The researchers' previous collaboration has shown that the reaction of
dialkyl phosphonates (RO)2PHO, with either amines or metal chlorides results in
dealkylation of the phosponate, and the formation of an alkylammonium or metal
ion in salt of the monoalkyl phosponate anion (RO)PHO2. This project will
synthesize new alkyl phosponate anions for use as plant growth inhibitors and as
catalysts for the synthesis of flame retardant polymers. By alkyl group transfer
to an amine functionality, lipophilic monoalkyl phosphonate anions can be
incorporated into a water-soluble VP-VA copolymer. The researchers will
synthesize R4NÄ±(RO)PHO2! and of complexes M(O2HP(OR))6(M=Co,Ni,Pd,Pt,Ru,Fe).
They propose to investigate whether these salts and complexes act as catalysts
for the addition of dialkyl phosphonates to aledhydes or ketones (Abramov
reaction), and alkense. The products will be tested for use as agricultural
chemicals and as polymeric materials. This project in chemistry fulfills the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts
in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and
pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.