* 9113838
* Conference on Transnational Aspects of Legal Pluralism      in Southeast Asia  -  Winter 1992, Chiangmai, Thailand
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Barbara Yngvesson, Law and Society Association
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 07/31/1994
* USD 49,200.00

Sociolegal scholars have come to recognize that understanding interrelations
between legal and social processes requires an appreciation of global
interactions. There has been an imbalance in transnational information flows in
analyzing global processes particularly in areas commonly classified as
peripheral to modernized and industrialized countries. The Law and Society
Association, in an attempt to start correcting this imbalance, is sponsoring a
conference in Southeast Asia in the winter of 1991-92 with approximately 25
scholars, mostly Southeast Asians. The conference will be held in Chiangmai,
Thailand and will focus on transnational dimensions of legal pluralism. The
conference has three purposes: (1) to build an intellectual foundation for
future collaborative research between Southeast Asian and Western sociolegal
scholars by developing shared conceptual frameworks that will enable scholars
from different research traditions to appreciate and use each other's
approaches, methods, and findings; (2) to contribute to a developing globalist
perspective on legal pluralism by using a dual lens that considers both the
influence of transnational processes on local politics and epistemologies, and
the ways that local interpretive contexts reshape transnational influences; and
(3) to advance knowledge about transnational sociolegal processes in Southeast
Asia by analyzing how various groups in the region have influenced each other in
developing legal responses to religious movements, demands for human rights, and
international feminism. By bringing transnational issues more explicitly to the
forefront, conference discussions will contribute toward developing a better
understanding of the origins and meanings of pluralism in Southeast Asia and of
the various interpretive contexts in which Southeast Asian law and society can
be viewed. Conference papers and introductory essays will be published in an
edited volume which will include a discussion of the theoretical issues involved
in developing a globalist perspective on legal pluralism. In addition to
contributing to our understanding of transnational sociolegal issues, the
conference will help to build and strengthen a community of international
scholars.