* 9113052
* Esr Dating of Pleistocene Hominid Sites, with Particular    Reference to Europe, Western Asia and Africa: Continuation 2
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,12/31/1992
* F. Clark Howell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 69,225.00

This project will continue and elaborate an extensive electron spin resonance
(ESR) dating program directed toward age determination of significant sites in
Europe, western Asia and southern Africa which yield important hominid skeletal
remains and/or occupation occurrences reflecting varied adaptations and
behaviors of Pleistocene (or still older) hominid populations. This ESR dating
program at McMaster University (Hamilton, Ontario) is the only such operation of
its kind in North America. Age determination of Pleistocene hominid skeletal
samples and of residues of occupation sites is critical to diverse on-going
investigations directed at the elucidation of aspects of hominid evolutionary
biology and phylogenesis, past cultural adaptations, inter-site correlations and
the evolution of past environmental circumstances in temporally-delineated
frameworks. Due to the abundance of bone/dental material in archaeological and
paleontological sites the ESR method is particularly applicable to many
important Pleistocene occurrences, and for ages up to several million years ago.
The precision of the method is approximately %3 - %5. The method has been
increasingly successfully applied by this laboratory at a diversity of Middle
and Upper Pleistocene situations in Europe and western Asia and, preliminarily,
in southern Africa, and provides an important resource for US archaeologists.