* 9113755
* Collaborative Research on International and Domestic        Determinants Legal and Institutional Change in Japan
* SBE,SES
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1993
* J. Mark Ramseyer, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 03/31/1993
* USD 11,166.00

This project focuses on the way that the legal and institutional structure of
government in Japan shapes policymaking and enforcement. The analytic approach
is guided by a rational-choice principal-agent perspective. Undertaking both
theoretical and empirical work, the research challenges "culturalist" theories
holding that Japanese bureaucracy, and more specifically Japanese bureaucratic
culture, has a singular and salient effect on Japanese policy-making. A working
hypothesis in the study is that "culture" is a less effective explanatory
variable than particular rational concerns explored under the rubric of
"principal-agent" theory. Based on time-series analyses over four decades, the
study examines the impact that changes in international trade and domestic
elections have had on budget patterns, regulatory policies, court decisions, and
bureaucratic and judicial career paths. By clarifying the institutional
structure of politics and testing the impact that this structure has on Japanese
domestic and international policies, the study will identify the determinants of
Japanese policymaking and enforcement and how those change under foreign
pressure. It will also move principal-agent theory beyond its U.S.-based roots
to a more global model. As such, it will uncover new ways of understanding the
role of party leaders, new forms of principal-agent monitoring, and new
implications that such monitoring poses for judicial independence.