* 9113664
* Magnetospheric Current Sheets and Boundary Layers
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Bengt Sonnerup, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 12/31/1995
* USD 400,597.00

This ongoing research program is concerned with some of the physical processes
and structures that occur in thin electrical current sheets and plasma boundary
layers in the Earth's magnetosphere, with special emphasis on the magnetopause.
This current sheet forms the outer boundary of the magnetosphere and separates
it from the rapidly streaming solar wind. The proposed research is centered in
three areas. The first of these is concerned with the development and testing of
data-analysis methods for single-spacecraft data that can be used to examine the
two-dimensional or three-dimensional structure of the magnetopause itself as
well as the geometry of bulges, or deformations of the magnetopause, caused by
magnetic flux connection across the current layer (so-called FTEs) or by
dynamic-pressure pulses in the solar wind. The data to be used in this part of
the study were obtained by the AMPTE/IRM spacecraft. The second area concerns
the development of analytic and numerical models of one-dimensional current
sheets representing so-called intermediate shocks which are dissipative and
rotational discontinuities, which are nondissipative. Both of these types of
magnetic and plasma structures have been proposed to represent the magnetopause
during periods of magnetic field reconnection. The third area of study is the
reconnection process itself and the manner in which it may be initiated and grow
in the region near the subsolar magnetopause. Analytical theory, as well as
numerical simulation methods will be employed.