* 9113283
* RIA: Adaptive Neurocontrol Using Concepts from Immunology   (REU Supplement)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* K. KrishnaKumar, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 07/31/1994
* USD 73,130.00

This research project addresses an important area in automatic control, namely,
robust adaptive control. The primary goal is to draw a strong analogy between
concepts from immunology and concepts from adaptive neurocontrol and to use this
analogy to enhance the current practices in adaptive neurocontrol. Immunology is
the science of in-built defense mechanism that is present in all living beings
to protect them against external attacks. The science of immunology has many
parallels to the robust adaptive control problem. This project assumes that
there is a match between the concepts of neurocontrol, immunology, and genetic
alogortihms, and if this match is properly understood, there is a great
potential for scaling up current trends in adaptive neurocontrol. Objectives of
the research are related to the actual realization of this match. Adaptive
neurocontrol, if fully developed, could be successfully used in autonomous space
explorations and robot planning, high performance aircraft/missile control, man-
machine interaction, the national aerospace plane, and flexible structure
control. Two of the above areas are proposed to be used to test the concepts
presented in this proposal. These are: (a) adaptive control in man-machine
interaction problems; and (2) robust adaptive control of a high performance
aircraft. It is anticipated that these applications will bring out the essential
features of the proposed immunized adaptive neurocontrol approach.