* 9113837
* Constitutional and Legal Change in Eastern Europe
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Jon Elster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 08/31/1994
* USD 75,000.00

Since 1989, seven countries in Eastern Europe have begun the transition from
one-party rule to constitutional democracy: Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia. Historically unprecedented, this wave
of constitution- writing presents an exceptional opportunity for the study of
constututionalism, comparatively and transnationally. Although the American and
French experiences at the end of the eighteenth century took place at the same
time, the sharp dissimilarities between the two countries limit the fruitfulness
of comparative study. But contemporary developments in Eastern Europe are ideal
for comparative and transnational study for a number of reasons. All of the
countries have emerged from a comparable period of Communist Party rule. Also,
all have pre-constitutional traditions. And, along with the liberalization and
democratization of political institutions, all are undertaking transitions from
central planning to a market economy. This project will enable the construction
of a data bank for unprecedented, comparative and transnational study of the
sociolegal dynamics of constitutionlism. Specifically, comparable data from each
of the seven Eastern European countries will be collected, translated, coded,
and archived according to the following analytic categories: legislative-
government relations; electoral laws; the formation of political parties; the
formation and implementation of basic rights; constitutional courts and judicial
review; institutionalization of the liberal concept of private property;
federalism and local government; ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
degree of autonomy of state agencies and corporations; restitution and
retribution; and the constitution-making process. These data will be available
on Microsoft Word and Macintosh. Scholars will be informed about additions to
the data bank through a quarterly newsletter.