* 9113006
* Rujm el-Hiri: A Megalithic Monument from the Southern Levant
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 11,989.00

Under the direction of Dr. C.C. Lamberg-Karlovsky, Mr. Yonathan Mizrachi will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
excavations at the site of Rujm el- Hiri, a megalithic monument located in
northern Israel. The site consists of a massive carefully constructed central
cairn ca 20 m. in diameter encircled by several concentric stone circles. These
concentric walls have two monumental entryways and are connected in some spots
by radial walls. The area immediately surrounding the site is dotted with
hundreds of smaller cairns, dolmens (free standing stones) and stone walls. The
complex, which is unique, probably dates to the Bronze Age, ca. the 3rd
millenium B.C. With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Mizrachi will
continue his excavation of the site. His goals are to reconstruct the
chronology, stratigraphy and overall cultural sequence and to identify the
primary and secondary functions of the complex. He also hopes to clarify the
relationship between the core of the complex and features in its immediate
periphery. In last season's work, Mr. Mizrachi conducted a radar survey of the
central cairn and located several burial chambers, the first of which he
excavated. He will direct a more detailed radar survey and excavate additional
chambers. He will also conduct excavations in selected areas around the cairn in
an attempt to determine how different portions of the site were used and to
learn whether they were occupied simultaneously. This research is important for
several reasons. The Near East marks one of the cradles of civilization. Within
this region, one can trace the origins of plant and animal domestication and the
development of increasing social complexity. The Bronze Age marks a stage of
this process. Using archaeological data and adopting a dichronic perspective one
can gain insight into how complex societies function. Excavation at Rujm el-Hiri
will provide unique information relevant to this goal. The project will also
assist in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.