* 9113520
* Promoting East-West Exchange on Scientific Freedom          and Responsibility
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1992
* USD 24,306.00

At this time, as a result of political and economic changes, scientists and
engineers in Eastern Europe confront new issues of scientific freedom and
responsibility. The initiation of East- West exchanges to explore these issues
promises intellectual and practical benefits to all parties. This project is
designed as a planning effort; it will initiate such exchange and lead to
further exchanges in workshops involving scientists, engineers, and other
specialists from the U.S. and Eastern Europe. In this planning effort, a U.S.
delegation composed of project staff and three Advisory Committee members will
travel to Eastern Europe to meet with counterparts, four of whom have been
chosen to be members of the Advisory Committee. The trip will be preceded by a
careful process of preparation to develop a framework and agenda for discussion.
This process will generate a background paper with review comments by four
academic specialists to be circulated for feedback from the Advisory Committee
members prior to the trip. The aim is to ensure not only that cooperative ties
are formed by that knowledge useful for further research and for policy is
generated. The institutional resources of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science have already been used to identify and secure the
commitment of appropriate key people in Eastern Europe. These are very good
institutional resources for carrying out this project effectively. The outcome
is to be a detailed plan for workshops to follow. From this planning effort and
the workshops, reports will be produced to reach appropriate audiences in the
research and policy communities. The proposal is a modest request for support to
enable a well selected group to oprepare for an undertake travel to initiate
East-West exchanges with counterparts in Eastern Europe on issues of scientific
freedom and responsibility. The principal investigators and project associates
are well qualified. The Eastern European representatives have been carefully
chosen. The institutional support is very good. The project plans are good and
have been developed with requisites for academic research in mind. Support is
highly recommended.