* 9113016
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  The Species-Area           Relationship for the Land Birds of the Ryukyu Islands
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* William Beckon, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cassidy
* 01/31/1995
* USD 153,188.00

This award will include a twelve month long-term visit by Dr. William N. Beckon
of the Division of Environmental Studies at the University of California, Davis,
to Japan for a cooperative research project with Professors Makoto Tsuchiya and
Hidetoshi Ota of the Department of Biology at the University of the Ryukyus in
Okinawa. Dr. Beckon will be obtaining scientific data to determine the number of
species that can inhabit any given area of islands or habitat. He has recently
completed a database of unprecedented scope on the distribution of land birds in
the Fiji Archipelago and on larger land masses around the world. He will expand
his survey to the Japanese Ryukyu Islands. This data combined with the Fiji
Island data will provide the broad base needed for a comprehensive theory of
species-area relations. It is expected that the research will be among the most
important long-term studies in island biogeography Results of the research on
species-area relations are important to community ecology and may prove valuable
in framing of policy guidelines for conserving biological diversity. Professor
Tsuchiya specializes in marine and island ecology and Professor Ota has traveled
widely around the Ryukyu Islands undertaking reptile studies. Both of these
researchers are anxious to cooperate in the island biogeographical project. Dr.
Beckon is an excellent field naturalist-ornithologist with impressive field
experience. He is considered the primary American authority on the vertebrate
fauna of the Fiji Islands. This collaboration should provide important
scientific results. It is likely that these researchers will continue their
research exchanges even after the award has terminated.