* 9113244
* Quantum Wire Nanostructures in Multiple Quantum Well OpticalWaveguides: Enhanced Nonlinear Optical Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1995
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 07/31/1995
* USD 400,000.00

This is a proposal for incorporating quantum wire nanostructures into gallium
aluminum arsenide multiple quantum well (MQW) optical waveguide structures in
order to enhance nonlinear optical interactions. The primary technique to be
pursued for fabrication of quantum wires is to use focused ion beam (FIB) direct
writing onto MQW optical waveguides followed by rapid thermal annealing to
induce impurity-induced layer or compositional disordering (mixing). Use of this
FIB mixing technique to define and form channel optical waveguides is also
planned. In addition to using FIB mixing, electric field-induced periodic
surface confinement in multiple quantum well regions to form quantum wires will
also be investigated. Quantum wires are expected to provide a stronger nonlinear
response while the presence of the optical waveguide provides high optical power
densities with low input power over long propagation lengths. These combined
effects may make the nonlinear interactions more efficient at lower power levels
and thus suitable for applications. Extensive experimental characterization will
be performed on GaAlAs MQW samples, including scanning tunneling and atomic
force microscopy (STM, AFM), photon scanning tunneling microscopy (PSTM),
focused ion beam based sub-micron secondary ion mass spectroscopy, cross-
sectional transmission electron microscopy (xTEM), spatially resolved
photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopies, and four-wave mixing and pump-probe
experiments on the picosecond time scale.