* 9113207
* Minority Research Initiation Planning Grant:                Industrial Occupational Health and Safety Programs
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Brenda Hoke, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 01/31/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Since the early 1970s, some groups of organized labor in the United States have
been deeply involved in issues of occupational health and safety. There is some
evidence, however, that these programs have not functioned as smoothly as
anticipated. This Minority Research Initiation Planning Grant conducts the
preliminaries for developing a project to study the conditions that promote the
development and maintenance of sound and effective health and safety programs.
Interviews and data from newspapers, congressional documents and union archives
will provide data on textile union shops in North Carolina and Tennessee to
assess program maintenance costs, to determine whether labor had to make
concessions in order to insure the continuation of the programs, to evaluate the
degree of satisfaction of labor with the operation of the programs, and to
measure how successful the programs have been in decreasing the number of
accidents, injuries, illnesses and deaths on the shop floors. This project will
enhance our understanding of the importance of health and safety issues under
conditions of growing international competition, the weakening of the trade
union movement, and the faltering of the economy. This project also provides an
excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to lay the foundation for
conducting further research on the dynamics of the protection of the health and
safety of American workers.