* 9113871
* International Collaborative Research on Youthful Misbehavior
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Vincent Webb, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 08/31/1994
* USD 80,000.00

Since the early seventies there has been growing interest in using the self-
report method as a means of obtaining measures of juvenile misbehavior. The
self-report method has now gained widespread use among researchers, both in the
United States and abroad. During a 1988 Nato Workshop on Self-Report Methodology
in Criminological Research, the idea of developing a large-scale International
Self- Report Delinquency Project (ISRDP) was proposed. Leading researchers from
fifteen countries examined how to develop a suitable cross-national instrument
to measure delinquency. After some pilot tests, full studies are now being
launched in the Netherlands, Germany, France, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, North
Ireland, United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States. This project is the
United States part of the International Self- Report Delinquency Project. The
objectives of the ISRDP are (1) to examine cross-national variability in
patterns of correlates of self-reported misbehavior among youth and (2) to
obtain measures of cross-national variability in the relative rank ordering of
the prevalence of different types of youthful misbehavior. Data will be
collected from a midwestern, urban community using a probability sample of 1,000
youth between the ages of 14 and 21. The researchers will collaborate with other
participants in the ISRDP on the analysis of the findings. International
collaboration on the design, data collection, and data analysis of self-reported
delinquency will provide a much needed stimulus to the advancement of our
understanding of the true nature and extent of youthful crime in modern
industrial societies. Participation in this unique research endeavor will allow
further exploration of the feasibility of collecting cross-nationally comparable
self-report data using a standardized questionnaire and will permit testing of
the generalizability of theoretical propositions regarding the correlates of
delinquency across different cultures.