* 9113379
* Group-Travel Grant to Enable Junior Women Faculty to Attend the Joint ACSP/AESOP Congress; Oxford, England; July 1991
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1991
* Margot Garcia, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 12/31/1991
* USD 6,932.00

Although much of the basic research in geography and regional science is
conducted by faculty members in disciplinary-oriented departments within
colleges and universities, many faculty members in professional planning schools
also engage in high-quality basic research. For faculty in these programs, the
annual meeting of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning (ACSP) is
one of the foremost settings at which to hear the latest research results, plan
future research and educational collaborations, and discuss other matters of
mutual interest. In July 1991, the ACSP annual meeting will be held jointly with
the annual meeting of the Association of European Schools of Planning (AOESP) in
Oxford, England. This meeting will be one of the first opportunities for large-
scale direct contact between Americans and European with common planning-related
research interests. This proposal provides group-travel support to enable at
least eight women who hold junior faculty positions at American universities to
attend the joint ACSP/AOESP meeting in Oxford. All travel-grant recipients will
be required to seek out and explore possibilities for research collaboration
with at least one European scholar. Travel-grant recipients will report on their
activities at the joint conference and on their efforts to establish
collaborations after the meeting. Recipients also will be required to secure
matching funds to support their attendance at the meeting. Through this award,
American participation in this important international meeting will be expanded.
At least eight young women will be given opportunities to broaden their exposure
to current knowledge and to expand their networks of international contacts.
Long-term benefits of this activity ultimately will include development of
collaborative international research projects and stimulation of the careers of
productive young women scientists.