* 9113124
* Discriminant Upset Prediction:  An Early-Warning Indicator  of Process Upsets
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Paul Berthouex, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 08/31/1994
* USD 192,300.00

This is an award to support research on processes and systems that produce
multivariate data and are subject to changes in performance, some of which are
upsetting and that may be avoided or better dealt with if they could be
anticipated. The statistical method for classifying upset conditions termed
"discriminate upset prediction" involves use of current measurements as
predictors of future conditions rather than using them only to characterizing
the current state. The discriminate upset prediction process involves finding
the parameter or parameters that best characterize a future upset condition and
which may therefore serve to activate responsive measures to avoid the upset.
Preliminary feasibility studies involving a suspended growth biological
wastewater treatment process and the operation of a waste disposal facility have
been conducted. The possibility of being able to predict a future upset in a
process operating normally by examining current operating records would be of
great value in assuring consistent and reliable operation of facilities that
affect environmental quality. Results from this research may be applied in
engineering design relating to the operation of treatment processes for water
and wastewater treatment, other environmental engineering applications and
manufacturing, in general.