* 9113201
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Atomic Structures and Transition Rates in Multiply-Ionized Atoms
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Arthur Livingston, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1995
* USD 14,100.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-Swedish cooperative research in experimental
atomic physics between A. Eugene Livingston of the University of Notre Dame and
Indrek Martinson of the University of Lund in Sweden. The primary objective is
to advance knowledge of the energy structure and transition rate properties in
selected heavy ions by measuring their atomic structures and transition rates.
Using primarily the techniques of fast-ion-beam excitation, the investigators
will perform experiments on the (1) Rydberg transitions in sodium-like ions; (2)
spectra and lifetimes in nickel-like atomic structures and transition rates in
high-Z x-ray lasers; and (3) lifetimes in zinc isoelectronic sequence. The
investigators will participate in specific joint experiments and conduct in
parallel the analysis and interpretation of data. The proposed theories and
experiments have applications in plasma physics and astrophysics and could
contribute to the development of new energy sources. The project will benefit
from the complementary capabilities and facilities of the investigators.
Livingston and his Notre Dame group offer a strong theoretical program in atomic
structure theory. Dr. Martinson's experimental group in Lund are experts in
determining energy levels and transition rates of highly ionized atoms. The
accelerator capabilities at Notre Dame and Lund offer differing energy ranges
and this will prove advantageous for experimentation over a wide range of
ionization stages.