* 9113071
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Charge-Transfer Complexesin Zeolite Supercages
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1992,11/30/1996
* Jay Kochi, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1996
* USD 21,230.00

This award provides funds to permit Dr. Jay K. Kochi, Department of Chemistry,
University of Houston, University Park, to pursue with Dr. Kyungbyung Yoon,
Department of Chemistry, Sogang University, Seoul, Korea, for a period of 24
months, research on charge- transfer complexes in zeolite supercages. Zeolites,
which are often used as catalysts, are crystalline aluminosilicates with small
uniform microcrystalline cavities and pores. Internal catalytic sites are
available only to molecules whose dimensions are less than pore size and only
molecules which can leave through the pores can appear as final products. Thus,
zeolites can serve as shape-selective catalysts. Shape selectivity will be
examined by employing various reactivity probes specifically designed for a
parallel study of the access to and mobility of substrates within the zeolite
supercage. The PI and his Korean collaborator are ideally suited to combine
their talents for mutual benefit. Dr. Yoon's laboratory is better able to carry
out the difficult synthesis of doped zeolites which are essential to the
proposed research and which otherwise would be unavailable to Dr. Kochi. Dr.
Kochi's laboratory, on the other hand, has developed the laser- based
spectroscopic instrumentation which is essential for making the measurements
described in proposal. Drs. Kochi and Yoon are highly respected chemists who
have collaborated successfully in the past and have published extensively in the
field of this project. The present project will allow them to combine their
talents and the resources of their respective laboratories in cooperative
research on a problem of mutual interest and potential benefit to the United
States and Korea. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual interest and benefit. Dr. Yoon's participation in the
project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).