* 9113623
* Adaptive Critic Networks for Real-time Fault Diagnosis in   Electric Power Production
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Benito Fernandez, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 01/31/1995
* USD 198,437.00

This project will develop a architecture for real fault diagnosis of electric
power generating systems. It will focus on fossil fueled and nuclear power
plants, characteristic of complex, large-scale systems amenable to analysis. The
fault diagnosis architecture is a network of neural networks: At the signal
processing level of the hierarchy, a recurrent multilayer perceptron network is
used to recursively identify the nonlinear plant dynamics, whereas another
neural network with similar structure is used for state and parameter estimation
purposes. At the decision making level of the hierarchy, an adaptive critic
network is used for detecting and isolating potential faults. The adaptive
critic is composed of three neural networks, a faulty system model, a
performance optimizer (critic), and a classifier (action) which selects and
reports the time, location, magnitude, and nature of the faults. The resulting
diagnosis procedure exhibits generic and therefore portable architecture. In the
presence of real-world operating conditions characterized by noisy sensor and
actuator measurements, as well as process noise and drifts, the proposed
approach would be capable of detecting, isolating, and accommodating system
faults which have not been encountered or anticipated during operation. It is
anticipated that successful completion of the proposed project will
significantly impact the electric power industry, and complex, large-scale
nonlinear systems in general.