* 9113677
* Grant for Exploratory Research: Synthetic Proteins for      Electron Transfer using Macrocyclic Templates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Kristin Bowman-James, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 01/31/1993
* USD 35,000.00

This Grant for Exploratory Research in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Program is awarded to Dr. Kristin B. Mertes of the Chemistry
Department, University of Kansas, for work on metalloproteins. Some of the work
will be conducted at the California Institute of Technology. A polyammonium
macrocycle containing a 24-member ring will be used as a template for attaching
peptide chains. These chains consist of 14 residues and are expected to form in
the desired motif, the 4-alpha-helical bundle. Bimetallic centers of copper or
manganese will be incorporated into the metalloproteins. A luminescent ruthenium
complex will be reacted with the imidazole of a terminal histidine, and a flash-
quench technique will be used to investigate long-range electron transfer rates
between ruthenium and the bimetallic centers. %%% This project will study long-
range electron transfer in a synthetic protein of known topology. Since control
of the topology of synthetic proteins is possible, this project will test the
feasibility of investigating long-range electron transfer in polypeptides as a
function of shape and distance. Since electron transfer of this sort is crucial
to many biochemical reactions, this project is potentially relevant to the
design of enzymes.