* 9113880
* Dynamics of Policing Across National Borders
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1992,09/01/1992
* Gary Marx, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Shelton White
* 09/01/1992
* USD 45,701.00

In an increasingly interdependent world, current social, economic, and technical
changes are weakening, blurring, or eliminating legal, spacial and temporal
borders. In recent years, there has been an acceleration of the
internationalization of crime and mechanisms for its control. Yet, little is
known about the social structures and processes involved in law enforcement
across international borders. This project focuses on the organizational
dynamics, interactions, and dependencies involved in international policing.
Systematic studies will be conducted in cooperation with European scholars in
England, Belgium, France, Germany, and the Netherlands. Rather than taking the
nation-state as the static unit of analysis, the project focuses on dynamic
interdependencies involving organizational behavior, and process aspects of
cross-national policing. The six case studies involve (1) new cross-border
policing organizations and the weakening of borders; (2) the import-export of
democratic policing; (3) social control technology across borders; (4) legal
mobilization such as enforcing EEC rules against fraud; (5) private police
organizations across borders; (6) order-maintenance and international groups.
The methods of investigation involve observation, interviews, and the analysis
of documentary data in all of the countries involved. Through these studies,
concepts and hypotheses required for understanding cross- border policing will
be developed. This project has considerable potential to yield knowledge about
the organizational, behavioral, and process aspects of formal social control
systems and the structure of nation-states themselves as they change and adapt
to an increasingly global context. Not only can awareness of cross-border
influences help in understanding the dynamic nature of crime and enforcement
patterns, but also the research will call attention to the systemic aspects of
many forms of law-related behavior across juridical borders.