* 9113199
* Kinetics and Mechanism of Iron-Ligand Exchange Reactions in the Presence of Surfactants and/or Crown Ethers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Alvin Crumbliss, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 06/30/1995
* USD 199,000.00

The principal goal in this project is to elucidate the mechanism in microbes
whereby iron is released from its extremely stable carrier at the appropriate
time and location. Model experiments which use micelles designed to probe
possible effects of the aqueous/cell interface on the labilization of iron from
siderophores and other polydentate chelators will be performed. The influence of
the aqueous/micelle interface on the kinetics of iron/ligand exchange between,
for example, the hydrophilic siderophore ferrioxamine B and a micelle bound
hydrophobic chelator, benzohydroxamic acid, will be tested. Phenanthroline will
also be incorporated into the micelle in some experiments, as preliminary data
show that phenanthroline accelerates iron/ligand exchange into the micellar
pseudo-phase via a redox mechanism. Supramolecular assemblies in aqueous
solution will be investigated in order to evaluate second coordination shell
effects on iron(III)-ligand dissociation kinetics. Hydrophobic crown ethers may
permit these supra- molecular assemblies to form on micelle "surfaces". These
assemblies may be used as models for cell surface receptor complexes. The
kinetics of ligand exchange within these supra- molecular assemblies (e.g.,
ferrioxamine B-crown ether- surfactant) and the influence that ternary complex
formation has on these kinetics will be measured. %%% In this project in the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organo- metallic Program of the Chemistry Division,
Dr. Alvin L. Crumbliss of Duke University will model the way in which iron is
released in microbes at the appropriate time and location. Bacteria contain
molecules which bind and transport iron so efficiently that some are used as
drugs in chelation therapy. The results of these bioinorganic experiments will
enhance our understanding of microbial iron transport mechanisms and mechanisms
related to metal extraction processes.