* 9113267
* Theoretical and Empirical Dimensions of the Emerging        International Regulatory Order
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1997
* John Braithwaite, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 74,968.00

With the internationalization of trade and capital, national regulatory agencies
have encountered mounting problems of transnational corporations evading
international law. Many assume that the era when business can be effectively
regulated is past since it would be difficult to create an international system
of law with enforceable sanctions. While this concern may be well placed, we can
understand more about the potential and limits of law if we consider it in the
context of other aspects of a global regulatory culture. The purpose of the
research being undertaken by Dr. Braithwaite is to develop a theory of the
emerging international regulatory order based on a model of legal pluralism in
which multiple actors and institutions, working through a variety of formal and
informal mechanisms, can affect regulatory outcomes. Data from four nations (the
United States, Australia, Papua New Guinea, and Poland) for nine areas of
regulation (companies and securities regulation, the regulation of competition,
financial regulation, taxation, corruption, environmental protection, the
regulation of hazardous products, affirmative action, and the regulation of air
travel) will be used. Analysis focuses on ten different types of organizational
actors that exert regulatory influence in the emerging international regulatory
order, the relationships among them, and the different mechanisms that mediate
their influence. Formal and informal sanctioning, modeling, external regulation,
and self regulation are all hypothesized as important. The theory aims to define
and specify how the interaction between mechanisms and actors works in shaping
an international regulatory system. The results of the research will not only
enhance our understanding of regulatory processes beyond the nation-state but
also will contribute substantially to knowledge about diffusion processes and
transnational ordering. From a scientific perspective, the study holds promise
of generating new theory that fuses national and international perspectives on
regulation. From a policy perspective, the lessons of the theory that is
developed can be applied to the specification of new means and possibly more
effective means by which transnational business may be regulated.