* 9113802
* Intelligent Material Handling Systems: Behavior-Based       Control for Autonomous Tending of Manufacturing Workcells
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Subbiah Ramalingam, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 07/31/1995
* USD 300,000.00

This material handling project addresses behavior based control for autonomous
tending of manufacturing workcells. Automation systems assume that all objects
are where they are supposed to be and that sensors and machines function as they
are meant to. Failure to satisfy these assumptions can often result in
catastrophic failure. Methodologies that facilitate the integration of sensors,
computers and machines in order to autonomously accomplish complex tasks, i.e.
sensing and dealing with the unexpected, are not well developed at all. This
project proposes a behavioral control strategy to accomplish these tasks. The
idea is based on observations of naturally occurring examples of autonomous
systems, such as animal behavior. The strategy is based on the implementation of
multiple behaviors taking advantage of multiple sensors and actuators
functioning concurrently. Such ideas have been tested on robots, and the result
has been to provide a successful strategy for robust operation in dynamically
changing, unstructured environments. This project proposes to use this approach
in the tending of machine tools used for low volume batch manufacturing,
including the transfer of tool and parts among stations on the shop floor. With
the experience gained in this research, progress is expected towards the long
term goal of developing a general methodology for designing and building an
hierarchical structure of integrated behaviors which can be use to address many
generic material handling issues.***//