* 9113294
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Acoustic Optimization  of Composite Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1992,12/31/1992
* John Lamancusa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1992
* USD 8,180.00

This award provides partial support for a long term visit by Professor John
Lamancusa of Pennsylvania State University to the University of Siegen, Germany,
where he will collaborate with Professor Hans Eschenauer of the Research
Laboratory for Structural Optimization. The objective of their research is to
develop methods and computational tools for designing quiet mechanical
structures constructed of advanced composite materials. Dr. Lamancusa and his
research group bring to the collaboration expertise in the fields of acoustic
propagation, prediction and structural vibrations. This is complemented by the
German group's multidisciplinary expertise in optimization. They have developed
innovative methods for shape optimization of large, composite structures with
static and dynamic performance criteria. The long term cooperative research
visit by Dr. Lamancusa will facilitate a sharing of expertise in structural
acoustics and the science of optimization between two of the premier
international institutions in those fields. Recent advances in structural and
acoustic analysis techniques now make it possible to predict the acoustic
performance of complicated structures before fabrication. Meanwhile, improved
computing resources and optimization methods have made structural optimization
feasible for complex structures with many variables. These techniques have not
been applied yet to the acoustical design of structures of non-traditional
materials. This project will address the feasibility and special problems
inherent in the optimal design of composite material structures for acoustical
performance.