* 9113023
* Second School on Non-Accelerator Particle Astrophysics;     Trieste, Italy; June 3-14, 1991
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1991
* James Stone, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Berley
* 11/30/1991
* USD 5,000.00

The Second School on Non-Accelerator Particle Astrophysics will be held at the
International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste, Italy from June
3-14, 1991. The School is directed by J. Stone, Boston University, USA., G.
Giacomelli, University of Bologna, Italy, and E. Bellotti, University of Milano
and Laboratorio Nazionale del Gran Sasso, Italy. The principle purpose of the
school is to provide lectures on a number of theoretical and experimental topics
in non-accelerator particle astrophysics as an educational forum for graduate
students and young postdoctoral fellows pursuing research careers in this field.
The School is partially sponsored by ICTP through UNESCO which supports the
participation of students from developing nations and the Istituto Nazionale
Fisica Nucleare (INFN) which supports the participation of Italian scientists.
Funds from this project will support the participation of American graduate
students and postdocs. An independent review panel of three persons with
knowledge of the field will be assembled to select School applicants from the
United States to be granted project funds to support their travel and
subsistence expenses. Selection criteria will be based on the applicant's
personal statement, letters of recommendation, and academic record and/or
research publications.