* 9113261
* Organic and Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1996
* Robert Bergman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 10/31/1996
* USD 767,000.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program provides
continued support for research by Dr. Robert G. Bergman of the Chemistry
Department, University of California at Berkeley in the area of organometallic
chemistry. Synthesis and reactions of heterobimetallic compounds composed of
early-late transition metals linked by a variety of bridging groups will be
studied. One of the investigations concerns soluble compounds with bridging
methylene and alkylidene ligands and metals centers of tantalum and platinum or
tantalum and cobalt, which have been found to act as catalysts for the
hydrogenation, isomerization, and hydrosilation of alkenes, as well as for the
coversion of carbon monoxide and hydrogen to methane and the conversion of
methanol and carbon monoxide to acetic acid. The mechanism of these catalytic
processes will be determined, particuarly with regard to stereochemistry, and
the effectiveness of other combinations of metals tested. %%% The goal of the
project is to develop methods for the systematic synthesis of new molecules
containing two transition metal centers and to explore the details of their
reactions with organic molecules. The two metals will be an early (e.g., Zr or
Ta) and a late (e.g., Ir or Co) transition metal, and will have different
electronic properties. They are connected by bridging groups containing carbon,
oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur, which can react with organic molecules in novel
ways because of the influence of the bimetallic environment. The findings of
this research are relevant to reactions in complicated multi-metal systems such
as catalytic surfaces.