* 9113285
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Seismology of StarsFrom the Main Sequence to White Dwarfs.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1994
* Donald Winget, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1994
* USD 16,250.00

This award supports Dr. Donald Winget and others (including graduate students)
of the University of Texas at Austin to collaborate in astrophysics research
with Dr. Michel Breger and his group at the Institute of Astronomy, University
of Vienna. The two research groups have been operating two independent
international telescope networks for measuring features of stars of very
different ages: the Delta Scuti Network (Austria) and the Whole Earth Telescope
Network (Texas). The networks are similar in their goal of completely resolving
the brightness variations of complex pulsating stars into their component
frequencies for seismological study of stellar interiors. However the networks
are currently completely different and complementary in the frequency domains
that they cover. The goal of the collaboration proposed for support here is to
integrate the two networks and software, personnel, and analytical methods. The
participants will then be able to measure simultaneously several selected stars
in extreme states of stellar evolution. The work that provides the basis for
this proposal has broken new ground in the field of stellar physics through
studies of the Sun. The techniques and approach being employed have opened a
whole new level of study of stellar dynamics and evolution, by probing the
internal structure of stars using networks of observations and applying
seismological theory. The expanded collaboration offers a unique opportunity to
advance this research.