* 9113293
* Research Training Group in Ecological and Social Science    Challenges of Conservation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1991,05/31/1997
* Timothy Fahey, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 05/31/1997
* USD 1,283,301.00

This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research Training Group in
Ecological and Social Science Challenges of Conservation at Cornell University.
The faculty group is a mixture of senior and junior investigators who come from
a variety of disciplinary backgrounds, but share a common interest in the
ecological, economic and social aspects of conservation. The funds will provide
stipends for graduate students and will defray part of the cost of the trainees'
research and of needed technical assistance. In addition, funds will be used to
purchase equipment to be used by trainees and to bring investigators from other
research and academic institutions to the campus for an annual workshop on
conservation. Institutional commitments will allow the participation of
additional numbers of graduate students and of undergraduates, and will also
defray a portion of the costs of equipment, of technical assistance and of the
workshop. One of the serious problems for conservation efforts is the recurring
cycle of poverty and environmental degradation found in many regions of the
world. Common elements of the cycle are population expansion which stimulates
agricultural expansion onto marginal lands, expanded fuelwood requirements, and
consequent soil degradation and species extinction. This training program will
focus on two contrasting socioecological settings in the Dominican Republic and
Costa Rica and will make use of existing institutional arrangements and research
activities. These activities examine demography and population growth, the
interaction of natural and agricultural systems, soil conservation, education
and management in biosphere reserves, and related ecology studies.