* 9113609
* Research Training Group in Evolutionary Primatology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1998
* John Robinson, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 1,580,800.00

This award provides funds to establish a multi-institutional Research Training
Group in Evolutionary Primatology. The faculty group includes 20 evolutionary
and behavioral biologists at five institutions in New York City: the American
Museum of Natural History, City University of New York, Columbia University, New
York University and The New York Zoological Society. The funds awarded will
provide stipends for graduate students and postdoctoral trainees, and will
defray part of the cost of the trainees' research. In addition, funds will be
used to purchase specialized research equipment to be used by trainees and to
bring investigators from other research and academic institutions to give
research seminars and in some cases, to participate in longer term training
activities. Evolutionary primatology draws its theory, methods and empirical
data from many areas within the biological sciences, anthropology, and geology.
The research programs of the participating faculty focus on human and non-human
primates from the perspectives of morphology, paleontology, systematics,
molecular and population genetics, behavior, ecology, and conservation biology.
Thus the training provided by this group will equip students with the broad
background necessary for integrative studies in this challenging and interesting
area.