* 9113500
* Correlation between the Surface Properties and the BreakdownPhenomena of Alumina Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Tangali Sudarshan, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 12/31/1995
* USD 225,000.00

This project aims to identify the insulator surface properties, at the
microscopic level, that control the electron multiplication process leading to
surface breakdown under electric excitation. The surface properties of single
crystal (defect free) and polycrystalline alumina (99.9% Al2O3) will be
systematically altered by mechanical, thermal, and chemical treatments.
Different treatments are intended to modify, in a deliberate and controlled
manner, such surface physical and chemical properties as a microdamage, residual
stress, surface dielectric constant, oxidation state, surface potential, and
density of localized (defect) levels in the band gap. Phase I consists of three
subsections: (a) Mechanical treatment, (b) Thermal treatment, and (c) Surface
annealing. Phase II will consist of (d) Chemical treatment, and (e) Surface
cleaning. %%%% This project is a comprehensive study of high voltage flashover
phenomena, which have high merits in scientific contents. The planned materials
variables are based on preliminary work, and can be expected to yield
significant results. The results can be useful to the electrical equipment and
electronic industries. They should extend the understanding of surface discharge
processes, not only for vacuum gaps but also for general gas insulation
problems.