* 9113704
* Engineering Faculty Internship: Intelligent Computer Aided Design (CAD) System for Fixture Design
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Anthony De Sam Lazaro, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 08/31/1992
* USD 22,711.00

Current research has established the validity of the approach to automated
fixture design whereby knowledge for a single operation is represented in an
expert system. The objective of the research is to extend the knowledge to
incorporate a more realistic scenario, namely, fixturing for a sequence of
operations. The internship is based on established work by the principal
investigator in automated design of fixtures (AutoFix). It plans to redesign the
system to carry out fixturing for a finite sequence of operations. The work will
commence with knowledge acquisition from practitioners in industry. A system
structure to handle multiple-optioned sets of heuristics (strategy, meta, and
knowledge rules) will be developed. Knowledge on design of fixtures for multiple
operations will be represented in a rule/frame structure. An existing computer-
aided design (CAD) system interface will be incorporated. In automated design,
this work will present a method of representing and handling complex design
knowledge. This method may then be extended to other systems for mechanical
design. The contribution to manufacturing research is more significant as this
will greatly reduce fixture design and machine set-up times. It will lay the
foundation for future research in this field of fixturing for a flexible
manufacturing environment.