* 9113215
* Particles in rf Plasma Processing Discharges: Generation,   Transport and Plasma Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Mark Kushner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 01/31/1995
* USD 227,492.00

Glow discharge radio frequency (rf) discharges, as used for plasma materials
processing, are inevitably contamined by particulate matter. These particles, or
"dust", result from gas phase nucleation, polymerization or sputtering of
surfaces. At one extreme, the yield of microelectronic devices and thin films
fabricated in contamined plasmas are known to be poor. Particles, however, are
also intentionally produced in discharges for starting materials to fabricate
nonphase solids. The methods of generation, transport and the effects of
particles on plasma dynamics are largely unknown. We propose to computationally
investigate the conditions with lead to formation of particles, the effects of
particles on the characteristics of rf discharges, and how particles from the
plasma contaminate surfaces. In doing so, we will also investigate methods
whereby the formation of particles can be intentionally enhanced as in the
synthesis of nanocrystals. The single greatest cause of reduced yields of
microelectronic devices prepared by plasma processing is particle contamination.
Therefore, understanding the method of generation, transport and effects on
plasma parameters of particles will have an important impact on microelectronics
fabrication and the specialty powders industries.