* 9113517
* Dissertation Research: The Dynamics of Grinding Technology  and Prehistoric Mogollon Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1994
* USD 8,365.00

Under the direction of Dr. Raymond Thompson, Ms Jenny Adams will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation in Anthropology. She will continue her study of
prehistoric ground stone implements to gain insight into the functions which
they served. Employing concepts derived from tribology she will replicated tools
used by prehistoric Southwestern U.S. groups and employ them in different tasks
such as grinding corn, seeds and bone. These will be repeated with different
types of lithic raw material. The polish and abrasion which results on the stone
surfaces will be examined with both macro and microscopic techniques in an
attempt to match use with wear type. Preliminary work with sandstone implements
has yielded positive results. In conjunction with this research, Ms Adams will
review the ethnographic literature to determine the range of uses to which
ground stone implements have been put. She will also use the experimental
results to analyze a large series of prehistoric tools recovered in
archaeological excavations of the Point of Pines site. Over the last several
decades, archaeologists have made great strides in the analysis of flaked stone
artifacts. Through study of edge damage and experimental replication, they have
determined the uses to which many prehistoric tools were put and these insights
have permitted more detailed reconstructions of technology and lifestyle. Almost
no work, however, has been done on ground stone even though such artifacts are
routinely recovered in many parts of the world. Ms Adam's project will help to
fill this gap. This research is important for several reasons. It will develop a
methodological tool which will be used by archaeologists in many different
situations. It will provide new insight into prehistoric Southwest adaptations
and will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.