* 9113203
* U.S.-Germany Collaborative Research in the Study of Alkyl   Propargyl Biradicals
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* William Agosta, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1995
* USD 8,950.00

This award supports Professor William C. Agosta of the Rockefeller University
for continued collaboration in organic chemistry with Professor Paul Margaretha
of the Instiute for Organic Chemistry of the University of Hamburg, Germany.
Their joint research focuses on three problems in the chemistry of alkyl
propargyl biradicals. One is a mechanistic study of the influence of spin state
on the behavior of vinyl carbene intermediates. Another is an extension of their
recently discovered (3+2) reaction between alkenes and
3-alkynyl-2-cycloalkenones to intramolecular systems. The final is an
exploration of the photochemical cycloaddition of 2-alkynyl-2-cycloalkenones
with alkenes, both inter- and intra-molecularly. The two laboratories have
complementary strengths and characteristics. Professor Agosta's interests are in
the design and synthesis of particular substrates to probe mechanisms and to
search for new processes. His small group at The Rockefeller University is
composed of postdoctoral workers. Professor Margaretha has particular expertise
in chemical theory and radical theory. His research group in Hamburg is much
larger than Professor Agosta's and is composed of doctoral students, which makes
it better able to carry out studies requiring greater manpower. The long term
goals of the above research are to understand better the conditions under which
alkyl propargyl biradicals are formed and to define the mechanism of conversion
of these biradicals to vinyl carbenes and from them to stable products.
Professors Agosta and Margaretha discovered alkyl propargyl biradicals in 1981.
Their current and proposed work all involve either new chemistry or novel
mechanistic studies in this general area.