* 9113904
* RUI: Dispute Settlement and the Maintenance of Community in      a Context of Cultural and Legal Pluralism
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1993
* Peter Just, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 06/30/1993
* USD 62,000.00

The analysis of legal systems, like the analysis of social systems, requires at
its base an understanding of the categories of meaning by which participants
themselves comprehend their experience and orient themselves toward one another
in their everyday lives. The day to day sharing, or contesting, of basic
understandings are crucial aspects of the creation of moral communities that
form the cultural basis of social life. Nowhere is the significance of these
understandings brought into sharper focus than in the arena of disputing. In the
social study of law, law is part of culture and is understood in cultural terms.
This project is an ethnographic study of dispute settlement in three
neighborhoods of contrasting social composition and religious orientation in the
Indonesian city of Yogyakarta, Java. The study looks at dispute settlement at
its least institutionalized levels, especially mediation by community and
religious leaders. Through interviews, extended case-study methods, and
participant observation, the following issues are explored: (1) indigenous
conceptions of dispute and disputing, order, and amity; (2) strategies and
tactics employed by Javanese in resolving disputes; (3) institutions and
techniques available for the resolution of disputes and the choices made for
settling disputes; (4) effect of the choices on subsequent rhetoric of
disputing; and (5) how communities create and maintain moral cohesion and how
social differentiation informs these issues. The research will result in
substantial contributions to our understanding of the ways in which communities
are created and maintained, particularly in a context of cultural and legal
pluralism; of the evolution of legal systems; and of Javanese society. By
extension and implication, the results will have relevance to any of the world's
socially and legally pluralistic societies, especially developing and developed
countries facing social transformation.