* 9113681
* A Comparative Study of the Atmospheric Sulfur Budget in     Different Natural Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1996
* Harald Berresheim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 03/31/1996
* USD 281,700.00

The P.I. plans to conduct field studies focused on (a) the biosphere-atmosphere
exchange of carbonyl sulfide (COS) and carbon disulfide (CS2) over continental
areas, and (b) the photochemical oxidation of dimethylsulfide (CH2SCH3, DMS) in
the marine troposphere. Both processes are important components of the
biogeochemical sulfur cycle with potentially large implications for global
climate regulation. Exchange rates of COS, CS2, and carbon dioxide (CO2) between
plants (and soils) and the atmosphere will be measured on a diurnal and seasonal
basis in different natural environments including a loblolly pine forest, an
oak-hickory forest, and different agricultural biomes with various types of
crops (wheat, corn, soybeans, sorghum). A combination of different methods will
be used including the gradient flux technique and enclosure chambers (using
ambient air or sulfur-spiked zero air as sweep gas). Studies of the chemical
transformation of DMS over coastal and open ocean waters will also be made on a
diurnal and seasonal basis. A major part of this program will consist of
collaborative measurements involving new, highly sensitive techniques for
continuous real-time detection of DMS, major oxidants such as the hydroxy (OH)
and hydroperoxy radicals (HO2), and the major DMS oxidation products
dimethysulfoxide (DMSO), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and gas phase methanesulfonic
acid (MSA) and sulfuric acid. The goal is to enhance our understanding of the
atmospheric cycles of COS, CS2, and DMS, in response to biological and
meteorological factors.