* 9113373
* Allegheny College's Program to Help Minority Students       Develop Scientific Research Careers
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1996
* John Reynders, Allegheny College
* Continuing Grant
* William E. McHenry
* 03/31/1996
* USD 147,152.00

Allegheny College requests $332,736 from the National Science Foundation to
support a program to encourage minority students to enroll at Allegheny and to
pursue a degree in the natural sciences or mathematics. Allegheny is a private
undergraduate liberal arts institution with an enrollment of 1750 men and women
students. Located in the extreme northwestern corner of Pennsylvania, Allegheny
enrolls students primarily from Pennsylvania, New York and Ohio. Allegheny has
established a reputation for being the best liberal arts college in the region
and is also well-known for its exceptionally strong science and mathematics
departments. Each year, from 25 to 30% of our students graduate with degrees in
the natural sciences and mathematics. When Behavioral Science is added to this
total, the percentage increases to 37. To capitalize on this traditional
strength and to increase the percentage of minority students on this campus,
Allegheny is proposing a program that will increase the likelihood of these
students pursuing a degree in the sciences and, eventually, scientific careers.
Through a four-year, multi- disciplinary program, Allegheny will provide
students (up to eight a year) with the attention to their academic and study
skills, career goals, and scientific research skills that will ensure their
success in the sciences. Students' research skills will be developed through a
faculty mentoring relationship. Each student will be paired with a faculty
mentor in his area of scientific interest and together they will work on
research that will culminate in the requires Senior Comprehensive Project.
Working collaboratively, many of these students will produce work that they can
present at national conferences or that can be published. Our science faculty's
history of such joint presentations and publications and publications
demonstrates that high-quality projects can be achieved through
"apprenticeships." Mr. John C. Reynders will director our "Research Careers for
Minority Students" program Mr. Reynders is special assistant to the provost and
director of the Educational Enhancement Program at Allegheny. He will work with
a group of at least eight faculty mentors, chosen from all of the science and
mathematics departments. Faculty and administrators will report regularly to
Provost Andrew T. Ford. Provost Ford fully supports implementing this special
program. At the end of the proposed five-year cycle for this program, the
provost and the president of the College, Dr. Daniel F. Sullivan, will decide
whether to continue our program.