* 9113953
* Calculations of Photonic Band Structure
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Kok Leung, Polytechnic University of New York
* Continuing grant
* Virginia M. Ayres
* 09/30/1995
* USD 182,826.00

There has been great progress recently in the creation of artificial three-
dimensional dielectric structures which are to photon waves as semiconductor
crystals are to electron waves. That is, these photonic crystals have a photonic
bandgap, a band of frequencies in which electromagnetic waves are forbidden,
irrespective of propagation direction in space. A face-centered-cubic photonic
crystal has recently been introduced, fabricated, and studied experimentally and
theoretically. The experimental findings for the photonic band structure and for
the attenuation length within the band gap are in excellent agreement with our
calculated results. Photonic bandgap materials inhibit the spontaneous
absorption and emission of photons of the frequencies concerned and have many
potential applications in device physics. Examples are zero- threshold
semiconductor lasers, highly efficient heterojunction bipolar transistors and
highly reliable light-emitted-diodes. Moreover, very compact high- Q resonators
can be made with these materials for applications from millimeter to ultraviolet
wavelengths by introducing defects into the structure. We will continue to
search for photonic band gap materials with specific photonic band gap
structures tailored to particular applications. We will also calculate the
effects of these materials on a variety of optical, atomic and chemical
processes.