* 9113209
* An Economic Analysis of Welfare Administration
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Louis Wilde, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 07/31/1993
* USD 53,183.00

During fiscal year 1988, 3.75 million families received AFDC payments (Aid to
Families with Dependent Children). There were 10.9 million total recipients, two
thirds of whom were children. The total cash payments were approximately $17
billion. The total costs of administering the AFDC program were $2.29 billion,
or around 13 percent of total cash payments. On a per recipient basis, there was
substantial variation across the states in the cost of administering the AFDC
program. In 1988, for example, per recipient administrative costs ranged from
lows of $53.64 and $85.92 in Mississippi and West Virginia, respectively, to
highs of $389.16 and 412.08 per year in Idaho and Massachusetts, respectively.
The impact of administrative procedures on AFDC programs has received limited
attention from economists, despite the lack of uniformity in benefits level,
eligibility standards, and the like among states. Add to these limitations of
the AFDC programs the important issue of fraud control. This study will undergo
the following four projects: (1) a theoretical model of the decision to apply
for welfare which incorporates both errors of stringency and errors of leniency;
(2) a game-theoretical model of the fraud control process which focuses on the
likelihood of "out-of-court" settlement (repayment) versus prosecution; (3) a
state-level time-series cross-section study of the effects of administrative
procedures, including fraud control, on the AFDC program; and (4) an aggregate
nested logit model of the fraud control process itself. This research will help
explain to welfare policy-makers what factors influence the level of fraud and
what might be done to better control the level of fraud. The empirical work will
also offer an estimate of the extent to which fraud control activities influence
welfare caseload and expenditures.