* 9113116
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Instabilities in   Flows with Strongly Temperature Dependent Viscosity
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Moshe Matalon, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/29/1996
* USD 16,600.00

This award supports Professor Moshe Matalon of Northwestern University to
collaborate in a study of fluid dynamics with Professor Philippe Metzener of the
Mathematics Department of the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL).
The goal of their research is to gain fundamental understanding of the basic
mechanisms of instability in liquids for which viscosity depends strongly on
temperature. They will examine in detail two important physical mechanisms of
instability: thermal instability that arises when a fluid layer is heated from
below, and shear instability. The collaborators bring complementary strengths in
applied mathematics to the proposed research, which involves mathematical
modeling, mathematical analysis and numerical calculations. Professor Matalon's
strengths are in mathematical analysis. He has expertise in asymptotic and
perturbation methods derived from work on combustion problems and the
mathematical modeling of chemically reacting flow problems. Professor Metzener
has extensive experience studying problems of convection; he and his research
group have strong computational and numerical skills. Most previous work on
instabilities in fluid flows has assumed a constant viscosity in the fluid.
While this has produced useful basic information, it is recognized that
instabilities will be modified if the viscosity varies with temperature. Such is
the case in many real world systems, ranging from the movement of magma below
the surface of the earth to the processing of industrially important polymers.
Thus the results of this research will have a broad range of applications.