* 9113366
* Mechanism of Acidification of Endosome in Dictyostelium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1992,05/01/1993
* Harish Padh, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/01/1993
* USD 29,700.00

Endocytic cargo traverses endosomal vacuoles before encountering acid
hydrolases in lysosomes. Both endosomes and lysosomes have an acidic interior
believed created by vacuolar proton pumps resident on their membranes. Lower Ph
in these endocytic compartments is crucial for lysosomal hydrolases, and the
sorting of ligands, receptors, and membrane components. Where these membranes
derive their pumps is unclear. Data from studies on Dictyostelium discoideum
indicate that endosomes and lysosomes have undetectable proton pumps on their
membranes. In addition, abundant proton pumps are present on a discrete and
easily separable vacuole, termed "acidosome." The data suggest that through
transient association, in the presence of cytosol and magnesium ions, the
acidosomes provide protons but not proton pumps to the endosomes. The proposed
transport of protons and counterions but not large molecules from the proton-
pumping ATPase rich acidosomes to the endocytic vacuoles might proceed through
small channels spanning their apposed membranes, perhaps akin to synaptophysin
pores in presynaptic ends or gap junctions. Experiments are proposed to
elaborate and test the hypothesis that proton transfer is the mechanism of
endosomal acidification. The acidosomes, endosomes, and cytosol factor(s) will
be purified. The reconstitution of proton transfer between organelles in vitro
using the purified preparations of acidosomes, endosomes, and the required
cytosol factor(s) should provide sound evidence for this hypothesis. In
addition, dynamic communication between these organelles and the required
factor(s) will be probed under differing modes of endocytosis. %%% Endocytosis,
the uptake of materials from the cellular environment by invagination of the
plasma membrane and pinching off to form a membrane-enclosed intracellular
organelle containing the material in question, is a crucial process in the life
of a eukaryotic cell. It is key to transport and assimilation of nutrients,
signal transduction, and biological defense mechanisms. This study will enhance
our understanding of the fundamental process of endocytosis.