* 9113767
* Macroeconomics Complementaries
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Russell Cooper, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1994
* USD 114,096.00

This project continues research on the dynamic behavior of model economies with
complementarities. The key to these models is that the "activity" of one agent
is an increasing function of the aggregate level of activity in the economy. For
example, in such models production by individual firms or search for jobs by the
unemployed for jobs depends on the overall level of economic activity. These
models have been able to provide insights into a variety of phenomena important
to understanding business cycles, growth and financial interactions. The
multiplicity of equilibria that arise in these models creates the possibility of
coordination failures in that the economy can become "stuck" at an inferior
equilibrium. No single agent, acting alone, can move the economy to a preferred
equilibrium outcome. This is consistent with observed, prolonged periods of low
activity, such as the Great Depression, where it appears that the economy
shifted to an alternative low activity equilibrium. This grant permits the
investigator to extend past theoretical and empirical work to focus on machine
replacement and changes in the seasonal pattern of production in the automobile
and related sectors during the 1920s and 1930s. The most interesting aspect of
the automobile producers experience during this period was an effort by the
Roosevelt Administration and the Automobile Manufacturers Association, in the
early 1930s to move the shutdown period for retooling from the end of the year
to the late summer. This could be an example of a coordination failure.
Automobile producers all synchronized retooling in December, but retooling
earlier in the year would permit greater production smoothing. The project will
also study the importance of entry and exit over the course of business cycles
in imperfectly competitive economies. The last area of work concerns the study
of the aggregate implications of bank runs and the problem of designing optimal
deposit insurance schemes.