* 9113899
* Direct Methods in Organic Electron Crystallography
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1995
* Douglas Dorset, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lesser Blum
* 05/31/1995
* USD 276,000.00

Dr. Douglas Dorset is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division and the Polymers
Program in the Division of Materials Research to perform electron
crystallography of organic and polymeric samples. Dorset will extend the direct
phasing methodology which has been widely used in X-ray crystallography to
organic structure determination by electron crystallography. These methods may
be based on the probabilistic estimate of phase invariant sums, as in X-ray
crystallography, or may also include phase information from high resolution
electron microscope "lattice images". Systems which have already been studied
include small organic molecules, n-paraffins, lipid lamellae, linear polymers,
and large fused ring systems. The methodology will be extended to the
investigation of other compounds and polymers for which no X-ray crystal
structures exist. If this research is successful then Dorset will have developed
electron crystallography as a reliable method for ab initio structure analysis
and refinement. %%% Molecular structures with atomic resolution continue to be
the primary test bed for ab initio electronic structure theories. They also
provide important insights on the molecular level interpretation of material
properties. Although X-ray crystal structures have been the primary source of
this information, not all chemical compounds form large enough crystals to be
studied by this technique. Dr. Dorset's approach which uses electron diffraction
is applicable to microcrystalline samples, and still provides vital atomic
resolution information on chemical structures.