* 9113829
* Planning Grant on Cross-Racial Eyewitness Identification in the Context of Multi-Racial and Multi-Cultural Change
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1993
* Roy Malpass, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 02/28/1993
* USD 14,619.00

Global forces are underway that result in opportunities for visibly different
ethnic groups to interact in public contexts on an increasingly equal basis. The
effects of increased social interaction and of changing social and legal
contexts on perceptions of and memory for individuals of other groups is a topic
of perennial scholarly interest. The accuracy of cross- racial eyewitness
identification is an important area of concern; yet, there is no consensus in
the scholarly community about the psychological mechanisms which affect these
judgments. This is an area in which there are interesting theoretical
developments that have implications for both formal and informal interactions
among people of different groups. This project is for a planning grant to
facilitate development of a research project that will assess factors associated
with global changes in racism, discrimination, and ethnic conflict. The project
being planned will focus, in particular, on the effects of social structure,
social experience, and attitudes on cross-racial identification in the Republic
of South Africa as the legal system of apartheid or "separateness" is
dismantled. At the core of the approach is the notion that the relative
heterogeneity of the social resources afforded by a particular group will
determine the ability of individuals to differentiate on the basis of facial and
other appearance. The more homogeneously another race is viewed in social terms,
the less likelihood of individual recognition. During this planning period the
investigators will (1) establish a multi-national, multi-discipline, multi-
racial research team that will participate in the research; (2) travel to South
Africa to discuss research plans and study materials; and (3) develop a
comprehensive plan for the subsequent research. This research addresses an
important dimension of racial and social conflict and has specific implications
for cross-racial eyewitness identification and reliability. The results of the
study will enable revising existing theory to accommodate multicultural
dimensions of racial bias. The research will also contribute to our
understanding of broader issues of social perception.