* 9113250
* Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems and Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1996
* USD 174,000.00

The investigator studies several interrelated questions concerning neural
networks, learning algorithms, and theoretical dynamical systems. A primary goal
is to discover how certain features of nonlinear dynamics, and in particular the
dynamic attractors (limit cycles, chaotic attractors, fractals) apparently found
in biological systems, can be useful for pattern learning, recognition, and
retrieval. To test the results, nets that recognize handwritten digits will be
built. The normal form projection algorithm, a new method of constructing
networks, will be used. A key feature of a net built this way is that its
underlying dynamics is explicitly isomorphic to any of a class of standard,
well-understood nonlinear dynamical systems. This system is chosen in advance,
independent of the patterns to be stored and the learning algorithm used. The
projection algorithm decouples certain dynamical features -- stability, basin
geometry, and rates of convergence -- from others that are more problem-
dependent, such as preprocessing, learning rules, and reconstruction of data.
Related theoretical issues in dynamical systems will be investigated. A neural
net is a network of relatively simple computational nodes, typically summing or
damping devices whose output depends nonlinearly on their inputs. The
connections between nodes may themselves be weighted so that certain inputs or
outputs are more influential than others. If one views a net as a dynamical
system, the rest points of the system are what the net "knows." The theoretical
knowledge and practical experience gained in this project may lead to greater
understanding of the design principles that underlie the superior performance of
biological systems in pattern recognition, robotics, and adaptive behavior, and
to greater insight into memory, learning, and motor control in biological
networks. Practical consequences arise in the applications of these ideas to
problems in pattern recognition, signal processing, process control, and general
interfaces between people and machines.