* 9114724
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on the Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Halocarbon Degradation Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Jeffrey Steinfeld, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1994
* USD 15,900.00

This award supports visits by Professors Joseph S. Francisco of Wayne State
University and Jeffrey I. Steinfeld of M.I.T., along with graduate students, to
Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, to work with Professors
Alan E.W. Knight, Keith D. King of the University of Adelaide and Warren D.
Lawrence of The Flinders University, on the spectroscopy and dynamics of
halocarbon degradation processes. The reactions of simple silicon-containing
molecules are of key importance in understanding deposition and etching
processes taking place at silicon surfaces, which are widely used in electronics
and photovoltaic technology. In this cooperative research program, the
complementary experimental and technical expertise of three university research
laboratories in the U.S. and Australia has been brought to bear on elucidating
this problem. With support from the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Program, graduate
students were exchanged for three- to six-month periods between the research
groups involved, and a three-day symposium, including the principal
investigators and junior research personnel, took place in June 1990. A workshop
on "Laser Applications in Molecular Dynamics and Molecular Structure Analyses"
held at Byron Bay, N.S.W., on 1-4 June 1990, included presentations by fifteen
participants from the U.S. and Australian groups.