* 9114280
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Concentrated PolymerSolutions in Strong Flows
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1995
* L. Gary Leal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1995
* USD 388,500.00

A critical need exists to develop the technology that will allow processing
polymers at faster speeds and that will result in polymeric materials with
higher degrees of molecular orientation. Such advances will make existing
processes more competitive and will increase the prospects for manufacturing
valuable new products. It is likely that these goals can be reached if
experimental techniques for studying polymers at high strain rates are improved
and the resulting information is used to develop a microscopic understanding of
how polymer liquids flow. This project is intended to provide this fundamental
knowledge. It describes experimental research work on the molecular and fluid
mechanics of polymeric liquids subjected to flow types that contain a mixture of
shear and extension typically found in commercial processing operations. The
experiments will investigate, using a range of techniques, the most important
parameters affecting the rheological response: entanglement density and
molecular-weight distribution. A data base of this type on materials that have
well-characterized molecular structures is the necessary starting point. The
molecular understanding so obtained will be used to continue the development of
models described in the project. The ultimate goal is to have a detailed
understanding of the highly nonlinear response that exits under these conditions
and to use this information to devise new processing procedures that will
optimize the macroscopic properties of polymers. This research is jointly
supported by the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials Research and the
Fluid, Particulate and Hydraulic Systems Program of the Division of Chemical and
Thermal Systems.