* 9114269
* An Operational 3-D Magnetospheric B-Field Model
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Thomas Hill, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 326,178.00

This is a renewal proposal for a three-year NSF grant. We propose to develop an
operational three-dimensional magnetospheric B-field model for Earth's
magnetosphere which responds to changes in the solar wind and interplanetary
field conditions, and to changes in the plasma conditions within the magnetotail
and ring-current regions. The new model approximately satisfies the MHD
equilibrium condition; it is time-dependent on the quasi-static time scale. We
aim at developing a user-friendly FORTAN code which can be used by the
scientific community upon request. The proposed work is important, because most
available three- dimensional B-field models for Earth's magnetosphere are rather
limited: they represent only "average" magnetospheric conditions (e.g., ordered
with respect to the Kp index). B-field models much more flexible are needed for
simulating critical magnetospheric situations, such as highly stretched tail
field lines in the late state of the substorm expansion phase, or "collapsed"
magnetotail field lines following a neutral sheet reconnection event. Also,
field-aligned Birkeland currents and boundary conditions of the "open"
magnetosphere need to be well represented. We propose to achieve such a goal by
developing a second- generation code of the so-called Hilmer-Voigt
magnetospheric magnetic field model ?Hilmer, 1989!; that model has been
designed, coded, and tested under the previous NSF grant (with the additional
help from other funding as well). A preliminary version of the Hilmer-Voigt
model is presently being used in connection with the "Rice Convection Model" and
the "Magnetospheric Specification Model". The experience gained through those
"applications" has led us to propose some major physical improvements which
include the following: (1) Replace the existing magnetopause by a flexible shape
which responds to the solar wind ram thermal pressures. (2) Include magnetopause
boundary conditions for an "open" magnetosphere. (3) Provide the computational
tools to include field-aligned Birkeland currents. (4) Use Stern's stretch
transformations to make the magnetotail and ring currents approximately
consistent with the requirement of quasi-static MHD force balance. The proposed
work is not a narrow or limited task| We claim that a user-friendly flexible
B-field model that responds to a variety of physical input parameters is a
significant achievement for magnetospheric physics, in that it provides us with
a versatile research tool for both data analysis and theoretical studies.