* 9114223
* U.S.-Australian Cooperative Research in Evidence for the    Younger Dryas Event in Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Paul Abell, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1995
* USD 13,100.00

This award supports two visits over a two-year period by Dr. Paul I. Abell of
the University of Rhode Island to the University of Western Australia, to work
with Drs. Karl-Heinz Wyrwoll, Jane C. Newsome, and George Kendrick. Mindful of
the current debate on whether global warming and the greenhouse effect, brought
on by various forms of atmospheric pollution, pose a threat to our global
environment, the investigators propose examining past climatic changes in
paleoclimates to map their temporal and geographic extent to give some warming
of the magnitude of climatically-induced catastrophes. Specifically, they will
investigate the extent of the Younger Davis reglaciation event of 10,000 years
ago, in western Australia, a region remote from its putative source (meltwater
diversion from glaciers in central Canada). The investigators will use
techniques of stable isotope ratios of oxygen in the aragonitic shells of land
gastropod shells (techniques pioneered by Dr. Abell in studies of climatic
change in central and southern Africa) to provide a proxy for climate change.
The isotopic studies at the University of Rhode Island will be paralleled by
pollen and sediment geomorphology studies by collaborators at the University of
Western Australia. Knowledge of what produced that event, how quickly it
achieved its maximum, and how long it lasted, are crucial in understanding what
to expect in future climatic changes.