* 9114181
* Organoaluminum and Organotitanium Mixed-Metal Amides and    Hydrazides and Their Application as Ceramic Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Frederick Sauls, King's College
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 01/31/1995
* USD 157,500.00

This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program is made to
Dr. Frederick C. Sauls of the Chemistry Department, King's College, for research
on precursors to mixed titanium and aluminum nitride ceramics. Titanium and
titanium-aluminum compounds with amide and hydrazide bridging groups will be
prepared and characterized using NMR, ESR, X-ray diffraction and electron
microscopy. Oligomeric and polymeric aluminum- and titanium-containing species
and mixed-metal compounds will be pyrolyzed to form the ceramics. The research
will be done in collaboration with Dr. Leonard V. Interrante of the Chemistry
Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. %%% Ceramic materials containing
titanium and aluminum nitride have potential as semiconductors and abrasives.
Although some materials of this type have been prepared by carbothermal
reduction and by sputtering techniques, they have not been obtained by pyrolysis
of an orgamometallic precursor, a method which has been shown effective in
preparing high purity non-oxide ceramics of controlled composition. In this
research, suitable precursors will be prepared and their behavior upon pyrolysis
will be studied. Fundamental information on bonding between titanium and
aluminum and nitrogen will also be obtained.