* 9114489
* Nonlinear Programming with Quadratic Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Faiz Al-Khayyal, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pius J. Egbelu
* 02/28/1995
* USD 82,909.00

Special cases of nonlinear programs with quadratic constraints that arise in
engineering applications are investigated. These applications include refinery
blending problems in petrochemical processes, component placement problems in
circuit design, minimax location problems in industrial engineering, and modular
design problems in production and manufacturing. The primary focus is on the
development of a new algorithm for obtaining (approximate) global solutions for
these problems. A paramount issue in applying an algorithm to a given problem is
the question of existence of a solution when the feasible region is not empty.
New conditions will be derived for quadratically constrained applications and
techniques for checking these conditions will be developed. Two general
approaches will be explored in developing algorithms: outer approximation and
branch and bound. Outer approximation includes, but is not limited to cutting
(plane) methods. Bounding will be accomplished by the use of convex envelopes
and by nonlinear duality theory. The results that are anticipated from this
research effort should contribute significantly to the efficient (real time)
solution of a larger class of quadratically constrained problems than currently
possible. Many of the ideas and constructions that will be reported are not well
known and have the potential to be extended to problems beyond the scope of this
study and, hence, should contribute to a better understanding of the
practicality of solving real instances of nonlinearly constrained optimization
problems.