* 9114710
* Cooperative Agreement: Research in Precision Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1997
* David Trumper, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ming C. Leu
* 09/30/1997
* USD 985,234.00

The research activity is geared to developing solutions to problems in
Precision Engineering and Manufacturing. A multi- disciplinary, large group
effort is to be concentrated on such problems as machine tool and production
metrology; ultra-precision, diode laser based interferometry for positional
feed-back; design and development of new-material based machine elements for
ultra high precision equipment and atomic scale machining and modelling. A
balanced perspective of fundamental and applied effort is to be maintained. The
focus of the entire effort is designed to research and develop the equipment and
processes for the next generation, ultra-high-precision applications. This
effort will be coordinated with other large groups involved with research in
manufacturing processes and equipment in the United States and the domestic
industry, with a high degree of interaction with academic institutions overseas.
This will ensure research activity of the highest standards while supporting
education goals and technology transfer in the area of manufacturing. The area
of precision engineering and manufacturing is of significant strategic and
commercial value in the next decade. Research activity of this nature will have
an impact on the nation's ability to remain competitive in this field of
activity.