* 9114106
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the  Mathematical Science - Hamiltonian Graphs; May 26-30, 1992
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1992
* Michael Jacobson, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1992
* USD 23,370.00

The study of cycles in graphs has long been a central theme in graph theory and
combinatorics research. A problem that traces its roots to the 1850's is that of
determining when a graph G contains a cycle which traverses all the vertices of
G exactly once. Named after William Hamilton, those cycles are better known as
Hamiltonian cycles. Not only is this a structurally interesting problem, but
also Hamiltonian cycles, and cycles in networks in general, have important
applications in scheduling, sorting, and even facility design. This project will
support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on
Hamiltonian Graphs to be held May 26-30, 1992 at the University of Louisville.
Professor Roland Haggkvist of the University of Umea (Sweden) will be the
principal lecturer. To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research,
the National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional
Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference
features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of
important current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical
sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon
these lectures, which is normally published by the American Mathematical Society
or the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the
American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Certain features differentiate these conferences from typical research
conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single important and timely area of
research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation
through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and
timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.