* 9114738
* Synthesis and Analysis of Gas/Polymer Solutions for Ultra-  Microcellular Plastics Production
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Nam Suh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1995
* USD 270,000.00

The PI has invented and patented a process for making a new class of polymeric
materials which he calls microcellular plastics. The process consists of the
formation of a gas/polymer solution and the inducement of its thermodynamic
instability to nucleate a very large number (1015 cells/cm3) of microbubbles or
cells which are on the order of 10-6m in diameter. These cells are smaller than
the flaws that preexist within polymers and thus do not compromise the polymer's
specific mechanical properties. This can be done at room temperature as well as
at higher temperatures. The technology has been further developed and
commercialized by industry. The goals of the proposed research are to determine
the fundamental mechanisms of super gas concentration in polymers and to develop
a new class of materials, which the PI is calling ultra-microcellular plastics,
which are characterized by cell sizes on the order of 10-7m in diameter and cell
densities of the order of 1018 cells/cm3 of parent material. Understanding the
physical phenomena governing super gas concentration in polymers can be used to
affect the performance-structure-property-processing relationship of these
materials and help design procedures to manufacture the new, even more densely
packed foams that the PI is planning to produce. Ultra-microcellular plastics
have potential advantages over the parent material and over other foams such as
transparency, high-impact strength, increased strength-to- weight ratio, and
improved thermal and dielectric properties. On a broader scale, understanding
the fundamental phenomena involved in the synthesis of these materials could be
used to develop industrial technologies for example for environmentally-safe
foaming technologies, filters, optical materials, insulation materials, and
substrates for photographic films.