* 9114314
* Conference:  1991 International Conference on Education in  Optics to be held in Leningrad, USSR, on Sept. 28 - Oct 1,  1991.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1992
* Brian Thompson, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 10,644.00

The Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), together with the
Optical Society of America (OSA), and the International Commission for Optics
(ICO) will present, in cooperation with the Leningrad Institute of Fine
Mechanics and Optics (LIFMO), and the D.S. Rozhdestvensky All-Union Optical
Society of the USSR, the 1991 International Conference on Education in Optics in
Leningrad, USSR, 28 September - 1 October 1991. The purpose of this conference
is to bring optics educators from around the world together in the Soviet Union
to share education and training methods in modern optics. The conference intends
to establish an on-going forum for the sharing of international and inter-
cultural teaching and learning mechanics and philosophies. The project is
proposed over a 16-month period beginning November 1990 with its organization
and public promotion to its end in February 1992 at the publication and
distribution of the conference Proceedings approximately 5 months after the
conference. The technical program is organized by academic representatives of
international university optics programs and is structured around 19 invited
talks by highly respected optics educators. Contributed papers are presently
being solicited to supplement the invited program. An exhibit of IBM- and
Macintosh-compatible software and displays by university optics programs will
complement the technical agenda. The intent of this conference is to further
serve the optics community to which SPIE, the OSA, and the ICO are dedicated.
The recent changes in world politics present a unique opportunity on all sides
to exchange information, to teach and learn, and to further the cause of this
branch of science to the benefit of all nations.