* 9114207
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research on Symmetric Chaos
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Martin Golubitsky, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1995
* USD 19,650.00

This award supports three visits by Dr. Martin Golubitsky and three by Dr. Ian
Melbourne, of the University of Houston, University Park, over three years, to
the University of Sydney, Australia, to work with Dr. M.J. Field on several
problems in both the theory and application of bifurcations in the presence of
symmetry. They will study the iteration of symmetric maps (symmetric chaos) and
its manifestations in systems of ordinary and partial differential equations,
and the stability of heteroclinic cycles (which occur naturally in symmetric
systems). Although many have studied the effect of symmetry on both the dynamics
and bifurcation of systems of differential equations, few have paid attention to
discrete dynamical systems with symmetry (where the new phenomenon of symmetry-
increasing bifurcations forced by the collision of conjugate chaotic attractors
and drifting along group orbits seems to occur rather frequently). The
researchers will investigate the possibility that symmetry increasing
bifurcations are related to the existence of coherent structures in certain
fluid dynamical systems where symmetry (on average) is observed. For example,
turbulent Taylor vortices are observed in the Couette- Taylor experiment (in
which fluid flow between two independently rotating concentric cylinders is
studied). This fluid state demonstrates rather dramatically the coexistence of
turbulent motion with distinctive patterns on average which may well be related
to the coexistence of chaotic dynamics with the symmetry on average of symmetric
attractors. Heteroclinic cycles are associated with the existence of
intermittency and bursting phenomena, thus providing interesting dynamics.
Except in isolated cases, there are few optimal results concerning the
asymptotic stability of such invariant sets. The researchers propose to
investigate the possibility that the techniques used so far can be unified to
give a more coherent theory.