* 9114246
* Electroactive Self-Assembled Monolayers on Gold Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Harry Finklea, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* David J. Curran
* 02/28/1995
* USD 172,100.00

In this research, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in
the Chemistry Division, electroactive organized thiol monolayers will be
fabricated on gold electrodes. The layers will be studied both
spectroscopically, by wetting contact angle goniometry, and electrochemically.
The dependence of electrochemical kinetics on thin film structure and
environment will be determined. One goal is the elucidation of the applicability
of Marcus rate theory and electron tunneling theory to thin film environments.
Characterization of the permeability of the films will provide information on
porosity of the film, which might otherwise compromise the quality of the data.
%%% Electron transfer reactions at surfaces occur in such diverse situations as
neurotransmission, photosynthesis, electrolysis to form many bulk materials
(aluminum, chlorine), and sensor transduction (species-selective electrodes).
This research seeks to understand the dynamics of electron transfers in
membranes adjacent to metal surfaces. In general, coating an electrode with a
membrane modifies the rate of electrochemical reaction. In this project, the
distance dependence of electron transfer rates and the changes in membrane
chemistry due to the transfers are of primary interest.