* 9114050
* Design of Chemical Processing Structures and Operating      Procedures for Safety and Reliability
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1995
* Gary Powers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1995
* USD 213,121.00

Operating procedures have a strong impact on the performance of chemical
processing systems. These operating procedures must ensure safe and reliable
operation by incorporating features such as verifiability of procedure steps and
satisfaction of quality constraints. Operating procedure synthesis needs to be
complemented by the availability of appropriate flowsheet structures which
provide the necessary infrastructure for processing that satisfies the required
specifications. Relevant structural characteristics may be equipment redundancy,
presence of auxiliary equipment, bypass and purge lines and other structures
whose function is to allow safe and reliable transitions from one operating
state to another. This project is aimed at the simultaneous design of both an
economically viable chemical manufacturing process and the operating procedure
for its safe and reliable operation. The PI's strategy introduces structural
actions (operators) as options for producing high integrity sets of operating
procedures for chemical processing systems, allowing synthesis of operating
procedures in otherwise infeasible situations. The incorporation of "stationary
states" in the original flowsheet is used to increase process flexibility and
add modularity and verifiability to the operating procedures. The methodology
requires as input: the initial flowsheet description, local and global
constraints, the initial and goal states, possible procedural and structural
actions, a unit model library, and safety/reliability and economic evaluation
functions. It produces sets of process flowsheets and corresponding operating
procedures. The methodology will be checked against actual industrial test
cases.