* 9114109
* TOGA: Process-Oriented Diagnostic Modeling for TOGA-COARE
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Richard Somerville, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/1996
* USD 135,000.00

This research uses an innovation diagnostic modeling approach together with
TOGA-COARE data sets to test and validate critical aspects of physical process
parameterizations. The model is a computationally efficient and economical one-
dimensional (vertical) model, resembling a single GCM grid cell, to be applied
to sites in the TOGA-COARE domain. The present version of the model contains a
full set of modern GCM parameterization of subgrid physical processes. It
includes vertical transport by convection and turbulent mixing, radiative
transfer with interactive clouds, and a complete hydrologic cycle. The ocean
model is currently a simple mixed layer, synchronously coupled to the atmosphere
through a surface energy budget computation. To force the model, the advective
terms in the budget equations will be specified observationally from TOGA-COARE
observations. The model is diagnostic rather than prognostic. Its input is an
initial state, plus the time-dependent advection terms in the conservation
equations, provided at all model layers. Its output is a complete heat and water
budget for the coupled ocean- atmosphere column, including temperature and
moisture profiles, clouds and their radiative properties, diabatic heating
terms, surface energy balance components, and hydrologic cycle elements, all
specified as functions of time. Sample integrations of the model for test cases
are presented and verified against observations. These diagnostic analyses
suggest that this type of model may be useful in TOGA-COARE for applications
including interpretation of results from multi-dimensional models, validation of
surface flux data, and estimation of sensitivity to alternative physical
processes. The proposal describes a coordinated program of model development,
diagnostic modeling, and linkages with GCM experiments and with observations.
This research is important because it is one of the TOGA-COARE studies that
investigates air-sea interactions in the context of the physical processes that
impact climate variability, in an especially climate sensitive region of the
world, the western Pacific Ocean, the field site of TOGA-COARE.