* 9114818
* Mental Illness, Violent Criminal Behavior, and the MediatingInfluence of Homelessness
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1994
* Daniel Martell, Research Foundation For Mental Hygiene Inc
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 04/30/1994
* USD 116,095.00

Across the country there are data suggesting that, among the mentally ill,
homelessness is associated with increased criminal behavior. The research
literature to date suggests that neither mental disorder nor homelessness alone
adequately accounts for an increase in risk for violent crime. Studies, however,
linking the homeless mentally ill with violent crime raise the possibility that
homelessness and mental disorder interact in some volatile way. What might
explain this relationship? It is possible that factors associated with
homelessness may place the mentally ill at increased risk for violent criminal
behavior. Alternatively, the homeless mentally ill may simply receive
differential treatment by the criminal justice and forensic mental health
systems. Criminological theory suggests that it is not increased risk of
dangerous behavior, but an increased vulnerability to arrest that accounts for
these patterns. Using a case-control design, this study seeks to explore this
issue systematically. Two sub-studies are planned. The first project examines
"risk" by exploring the contribution of homelessness to violent criminal
behavior in the mentally ill. Data from 150 homeless and 150 domiciled mentally
disordered offenders will be examined. The second project explores
"criminalization" by discriminating between two groups of homeless mentally ill
persons: 150 who have a history of criminal behavior and 150 matched control
persons who do not. The data will be derived from court records, hospital
records, patient and family interviews, and standard diagnostic instruments.
This study promises to add substantially to our knowledge of the role of
homelessness in mediating the link between mental illness and violent criminal
behavior. It will not only break new ground but also lay the foundation for
future prospective studies of the causes of violence in society.