* 9114814
* Annual National Symposium on Frontiers of Science,          November 7-9, 1991, Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center,        Irvine, CA
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Norman Metzger, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Nathaniel G. Pitts
* 01/31/1993
* USD 80,002.00

The first National Symposium on Frontiers of Science meeting was held in March
1989 at the Beckman Center in Irvine, California. A second meeting was held
November 1-3, 1990. The meetings are designed to bring together a selected group
of young U. S. scientists to discuss exciting advances and opportunities in
their respective fields in a format that encourages, and allows adequate time
for, informal one-on-one discussions among participants. Interaction of the
future leaders of U. S. science is intended, inter alia, to stimulate future
collaboration in research and the transfer of new techniques and approaches
across fields. Speakers focus their talks on current cutting-edge research in
their field to a scientifically sophisticated but non-specialist audience and
provide a sense of the experimental data--what is actually measured and seen in
the various fields. They provide information such as: What are the major
research problems and unique tools in the field? What are the current
limitations on advances as well as the frontiers? Topics for the November 7-9,
1991 meeting include: aging, AIDS and AIDS transmission, biological structure,
immunology, materials chemistry, protein structure and folding, evolutionary
biology, particle physics, nuclear physics, the Sun, dark matter, cosmic wave
background, planetary science, mass extinctions, oceanography, global change,
earthquake science and prediction, artificial intelligence, combinatorial
algorithms, computational geometry, micromachining, laser atom trapping,
scanning tunneling microscopy, and accelerator mass spectrometry.