* 9114015
* Multiquantum Interactions in Atom-Surface Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1995
* Joseph Manson, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/1995
* USD 144,000.00

Research will be conducted to extend and develop the theory of scattering of
small mass particles by surfaces, with emphasis on interactions in which many
quanta of energy are exchanged during the collision. A fundamental and quantum
mechanical approach will be used initially, and then the theory will be extended
to semiclassical limits at various levels in order to investigate the transition
from the quantum mechanical to the classical regime. Initial results indicate
that the diffusely scattered intensity, due to multiple phonon interactions is
insensitive to fine details in the phonon density of states, and this will be
further investigated for realistic surface models. This lack of sensitivity in
the phonon spectra implies that the multiphonon contribution to the intensity
will give directly the form factor, or transition matrix, for the atom-surface
interaction potential. Analysis of available data will give the form factor as a
function of exchanged energy and momentum, which will in turn lead to a
determination of better models of the interaction potential. The data analysis
will involve visits and some collaboration with the major experimental groups in
the area of helium-surface scattering. The work will lead to applications in
other related areas of gas- surface interactions including calculation of
accommodation coefficients, sticking and desorption, electron-hole pair creation
during collisions and scattering from disorder. %%% Theoretical research will be
done on the interaction of small particles scattering from surfaces in which
there are many exchanges of quantized energy and momentum. These calculations
will lead to more accurate determinations of the forces which exist between the
impinging particles and the surface and will develop a powerful formalism to
deal. The work will be closely correlated with various experimental groups.