* 9114484
* Autonomous System for Cylindrical Plunge Grinding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Kourosh Danai, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/1995
* USD 295,148.00

The aim of this research project is to develop and evaluate a prototype
autonomous grinding system for cylindrical plunge grinding. The system will
adjust the operating parameters of the cycle from part to part to reduce cycle
time while satisfying part- quality constraints in response to in-process and
post-process measurements which characterize the processing conditions and part
quality. In order to cope with quantitative uncertainty of the process, the
cycle time reduction methodology will employ if-then rules derived from a
simulation of the grinding process. Only two in-process sensors will be used, a
power monitor and a size gage, which can withstand a harsh production
environment. It is shown that information derived from these sensors, together
with post-process measurement (inspection) of part quality (i.e., finish and
roundness), can be used to characterize the state of the grinding process
through process models. The cycle time reduction methodology will be designed
and evaluated in simulation. Practical implementation and testing of the
autonomous system will be on a commercial internal grinder, retrofitted with
electrical drives and sensors and interfaced to a personal computer for data
acquisition, system identification, and machine control. The result of this
investigation will provide the scientific and technological basis for commercial
development of a new generation of grinding systems as well as retrofitting
(upgrading) of older grinders.