* 9114108
* Growth Dynamics of Thin Metal Films on Compound             Semiconductor Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1994
* John Hermanson, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/1994
* USD 108,000.00

A fundamental understanding of the formation of metal overlayers on compound
semiconductor surfaces will provide valuable insight into a variety of complex
metal-interfacial phenomena crucial to the intelligent design of electronic
devices. This work will focus on developing a quantitative model of the kinetic
processes associated with the formation and development of ordered structures
for metallic films on compound semiconductor surfaces. Initial efforts will
focus on the adsorption of group V and metals on the surface of III-V compound
semiconductors. %%% In the first phase of the research, a newly developed time-
dependent Monte Carlo model will be combined with tight-binding and first-
principles pseudopotential total energy models to investigate the growth of
antimony and bismuth on gallium arsenide in the sub- monolayer to one monolayer
regime. The desciption of fundamental chemical processes such as chemisorption,
migration, incorporation, and desorption, will contribute to a comprehensive
understanding of the elementary surface reactions. In the second phase of the
research the growth of antimony and bismuth in the range of two - twenty
monolayers will be examined where factors controlling pseudomorphic growth and
the transition to three-dimensional island growth take place. Future work will
address the issue of film defect formation, such as the nature of two-
dimensional island growth during deposition, and identification of the
conditions important for defect formation. The grant supports a postdoctoral
associate and is done in collaboration with researchers at Battelle Pacific
Northwest Laboratories.