* 9114536
* Industry-University Cooperative Research: Flow of Polymers  in Complex Geometries
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* William Graessley, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Alexander Garris, Jr.
* 07/31/1995
* USD 218,316.00

The flow of molecularly well-characterized polymer liquids in a wavy channel
will be investigated quantitatively and in considerable local detail. This model
geometry provides a complexity of flow approaching that encountered in the
commercial processing of polymer materials, and yet also allows the effects of
non-Newtonian behavior on the stress and velocity fields to be determined by
non-invasive optical techniques. An apparatus to accomplish this was developed
and tested under a previous grant (CBT-88-19660). The use of nearly-monodisperse
model polymers will now allow comparisons with the predictions of constitutive
equations based on molecular theory. Researchers at Exxon Corporate Laboratories
will participate in the work, supplying the model materials and collaborating in
characterization, analysis and interpretation of results. Viscoelastic effects
dominate the flow behavior of polymers in many commercial processing operations.
Viscoelastic properties also depend strongly, and essentially universally, on
the large scale molecular architecture (molecular weight, distribution,
branching) of the polymer. Molecular theories can now successfully account for
many of these architectural effects, but are still relatively untested, even for
qualitative guidance, in the complex flow histories that typify a real
processing situation. This research will supply such tests with model materials,
allowing thereby a direct contact with the predictions of molecular theory. It
will also provide a detailed body of information (the velocity and stress
fields) for use in testing the computational methods of non-Newtonian fluid
mechanics. The purposeful design of polymeric architecture (e.g., molecular
weight distribution) for optimal processing behavior and for final product
properties is a long-time goal throughout the polymer industry. Differences in
behavior frequently correlate with differences in architecture, but molecular
theories of polymer rheology are still untested in processing flow regimes.
Moreover, detailed data for evaluating the computational methods of non-
Newtonian fluid mechanics are very limited even for commercial polymers, where
the architecture is uncertain and where molecular theories to account for the
effects of molecular weight distribution are only now being developed. The wavy-
wall study, utilizing model materials, offers a way to close some of these gaps
in the connections between molecular architecture and the processing behavior of
polymers.