* 9114114
* Experimental Investigation on Vibration Screening           Effectiveness of In-filled Trench Barriers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Shahid Ahmad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* MEHMET T. TUMAY
* 12/31/1993
* USD 75,000.00



*** 9114114 Ahmad Ground vibrations generated by machine foundations or traffic
can have an adverse effect on nearby buildings, equipment, and people, ranging
from annoyance or discomfort to structural damage to the facilities. Therefore,
for prevention of damage to adjacent structures and equipment nearby, in many
cases it is necessary to significantly reduce the transmission of such
vibrations. For high frequency vibrations, this objective can be achieved by
placing a wave barrier between the source of vibration and the area to be
protected. In-filled concrete and soil-bentonite trenches have been used in
practice for many years as wave barriers.

The primary objective of the completed research was to conduct an experimental
investigation on the influence of various geometrical and material parameters on
vibration screening effectiveness of in-filled trench barriers and then utilize
the experimental data to verify and calibrate the analytical findings. To
achieve this objective prototyped model tests were conducted in field in a
remote area near the north campus of SUNY at Buffalo. Both near field (active)
and far field (passive) vibration screening by concrete and soil-bentonite in-
filled trenches were studied. An electromagnetic vibratory oscillator was used
as a vibration source to set out continuous wave trains at selected frequencies.
Measurements of ground vibration at selected pickup points were made 'with' and
'without' the in-filled barrier in place. The effectiveness of the barriers was
computed as the ratio of the ground motion 'with' and 'without' the barrier.
These results were then compared with analytical solutions. Detail of this
investigation has been presented in technical conferences, and will be published
in ASCE's Journal of Geotechnical Engineering.As a result of this research, the
present level of knowledge among engineers and scientists on vibration screening
by in-filled trenches will advance considerably. ***