* 9114567
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Reproduction in the    Brown Tree Snake, Boiga Irregularis
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1997
* Robert Mason, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 11/30/1997
* USD 32,150.00

This award supports visits over a three-year period by Dr. Robert T. Mason of
Oregon State University to the University of Queens- land, Australia, to work
with Dr. Joan Margaret Whittier on reproduction in the tropical colubrid brown
tree snake, Boiga irregularis, which is native to Australia, New Guinea, and the
Solomon Islands. During World War II, the snake was introduced onto Guam, where
it clearly established itself as a serious threat to native fauna and to humans.
This snake is responsible for the extinction of three species of native birds on
Guam, and the serious declination in the populations of most, if not all,
remaining small vertebrates on the island. B. irregularis is a prolific
colonizer and it has now been found on several additional islands, including
Hawaii. Little is known of the biology in general of these snakes. Of particular
importance in terms of managing this emerging threat to Pacific island fauna is
the investigation of the reproductive potential of female brown tree snakes in
their natural range in Australia. Specifically, the investigators will (1)
characterize histologically the cycle of egg and sperm production, and sperm
storage; (2) determine by radioimmunoassay sex steroid hormone secretion in both
sexes; and (3) investigate the chemical ecology of these animals by isolating
and chemically characterizing potential sex attractant pheromones produced by
females.