* 9114401
* U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research in Spectral Theory (Applied Mathematics)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1996
* Palle Jorgensen, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1996
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports Professor Thomas P. Branson and Palle Jorgensen of the
University of Iowa and Peter Gilkey of the University of Oregon to collaborate
in applied mathematics with three strong research groups in Germany and Denmark.
Their partners are Gestur Olafsson, University of Gottingen, Reinhard Werner,
University of Osnabruck, Bent Oersted, Odense University and Henrik
Schlichtkrull, Danish Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University. Their
collaboration is framed around six topics within the general area of "spectral
theory." These problems are motivated in part by questions in mathematical
physics and also in conformal geometry, and will be approached with methods from
modern analysis and partial differential operators. This field is one of great
activity in Europe, with many strong groups and a long tradition of research
that offers diverse opportunities for U.S. participation. In this cooperative
project, the U.S. participants offer technical power in the "hard analytic" and
geometric aspects, while the European groups bring great strengths in invariance
group methods. Spectral theory is the mathematical underpinning of all
scientific work involving a spectrum, ranging from the theories of light and
electromagnetism to chemistry. In mathematics, spectral theory is a major tool
in work in several areas in geometry and analysis.