* 9114403
* Mathematical Sciences:  NSF/CBMS Regional Conferences in theMathematical Sciences; 'Hopf Algebras and Their Actions on  Rings'; August 11-15, 1992
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Jeffrey Bergen, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1993
* USD 24,022.00

There has been renewed interest in Hopf algebras in the last several years
because of the major example of quantum groups. General knowledge about Hopf
algebras may be useful to those interested in quantum groups; conversely,
quantum groups have introduced some new purely algebraic ideas into Hopf
algebras. Independent of any connection to quantum groups, there have been many
new developments in Hopf algebras, including the solution of two old
conjectures. There has also been much work extending facts about group actions
to actions and coactions of Hopf algebras. In addition, in light of the interest
in Hopf algebra techniques in ring theory, operator algebras, and combinatorics,
the field would appeal to an audience of Hopf algebraists, ring theorists,
combinatorists, and operator algebraists. This project will support an NSF-CBMS
Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Hopf Algebras and
Their Actions on Rings to be held August 11-15, 1992 at DePaul University.
Professor Susan Montgomery of the University of Southern California will be the
principal lecturer. To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research,
the National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional
Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference
features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of
important current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical
sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon
these lectures, which is normally published by the American Mathematical Society
or the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the
American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Certain features differentiate these conferences from typical research
conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single important and timely area of
research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation
through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and
timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.