* 9114689
* An InP/InGaAsp Based Thyristor for Optical Amplification    and Power Switching Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Jian Zhao, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 01/31/1994
* USD 79,937.00

We propose a project directed towards exploring an ultra high power thyristor
based on InP homojunctions and the related heterostructures. With higher
resistivity and direct band gap InP homojunctions the thyristor is expected to
greatly out perform those commercial Si thyristors in power handling capability
and switching speed. A new device based on InP related heterostructures is
proposed which combines both electrical and optical power switching and lasing
action into a single device. The lasing action is realized by introducing a
heterostructure laser into the thyristor structure. This new device could be a
basic building block for a wide range of applications such as power integrated
circuits, ultra high power switching, and optical amplification and
communications because the proposed device can be easily scaled up or down
depending on the structure of the thyristor. The proposed project will
investigate how to best utilize, in a single device, the band discontinuity
advantage for optical performance (lasers) and to suppress the disadvantage for
electronic performance (thyristors) by utilizing the unique capability being
developed by ETDL and some industrial partners to grow graded, lattice matched
InGaAsP thin films. The proposed research will also contribute to the knowledge
base related to heterointerfaces.