* 9114210
* Workshop on Future Directions in Text Analysis, Retrieval &amp; Understanding, Chicago, Illinois, October 11-12, 1991
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Jitender Deogun, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 05/31/1993
* USD 25,105.00

The objective of the workshop is to consider the current state- of-the-art in
text analysis, retrieval and understanding, and to draw a plan for how the field
of information retrieval can meet the opportunities and challenges of the
nineties and beyond. To achieve this objective, the workshop will bring together
designers and users of information retrieval systems from academia, industry,
and government agencies. The attendees are drawn from the information retrieval,
natural language processing, and various research communities that represent the
emerging technologies like hypertext/hypermedia, large text databases and
dictionaries. The workshop is expected to identify the most significant
technology pull factors that will serve as the driving forces behind the future
text processing technologies. Furthermore, basic research that should be
fostered to fully exploit these technologies will be identified. The workshop
will lead to the preparation of an advisory report containing recommendations
for the research community, industry, and funding agencies. It is planned to
publish this report in widely disseminated journals like SIGIR Forum. In
addition, each participant will be required to submit a position paper. The
position papers will be published as the workshop proceedings.