* 9114873
* Primitive Mechanisms of Epitaxial Growth of Germanium       Silicon Using an Accurate Quantum Mechanical Total Energy   Expression
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,04/30/1995
* Furrukh Khan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/1995
* USD 138,045.00

A newly developed method which incorporates a parametrized, quantum mechanical,
nearest neighbor total energy expression for silicon into a "ficticious
Lagrangian" molecular dynamics scheme developed by Car and Parinello will be
expanded to model the germanium- silicon solid solution system. A novel full
range, parametrized total energy expression for the germanium-silicon system
based on the local density approximation with complete transferability will be
constructed. This total energy expression is parameterized against a large data
base which is derived from experiment and state of the art local density
approximation calculations. Computationally, it will only be slightly more
demanding than the calculations for silicon alone, and finite temperature
simulations of hundreds of atoms could be performed in tens of Cray YMP hours, a
factor of about 50 more rapidly than the best local density approximation
calculations. The study of the epitaxial growth of germanium-silicon will be
done by breaking the problem into smaller components which can be studied
individually; namely, relaxation of surfaces, steps and kinks, sticking and
diffusion of an atom on this surface, dynamics of atoms near a relaxed kink, and
growth of kinks into steps. %%% Computational techniques will be developed to
model the total energies of germanium-silicon mixtures - an important material
for the electronics industry. The proposed technique will accelerate the
calculation of important properties. The proposed techniques have the potential
to have a major impact on the way that these properties are calculated and can
be applied to other materials of scientific and commercial interest.