* 9114439
* Fracture Problems in Nonhomogeneous Material Systems:       Tailored Materials, Graded Interfacial Zones and Bonded     Layers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1996
* Fazil Erdogan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Oscar Dillon
* 01/31/1996
* USD 240,000.00

Fracture mechanics of functionally gradient materials and material interfaces
and layered orthotropic materials will be studies. The emphases in the program
will be on the fracture related issues in new material systems in which
strength, toughness, fatigue and corrosion properties along with the residual
stresses may be controlled by controlling the composition profile during
processing. Functionally gradient materials are essentially fine composites or
nano composites which are synthesized to achieve a desired thermomechanical
property variation in the material by grading the volume fractions of the
constituent materials through the thickness. This new process of grading the
properties of the interfacial regions and coatings by gradually varying the
material composition through the thickness appears to have some very important
advantages. First, the process smooths the stress distribution and drastically
reduces the stress concentration factors thereby reducing the likelihood of
failure due to residual and thermal stresses. Secondly, it improves the bonding
strength, in most cases quite considerably. The third advantage of the new
technique is the improvement one obtains in fracture toughness and fatigue and
corrosion crack growth parameters of the material. The second part of the
program deals with the investigation of the influence of material orthotropy,
particularly the structure and thickness of interfacial zones in bonded layers
on the crack driving force in delamination and fracture penetration problems.