* 9114766
* Global Perspectives on the Emergence of Water Rights
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Susan Buck, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 02/28/1993
* USD 31,000.00

In Western legal institutions, the evolution of water rights seems to follow
stages of management regimes from open access through communal control to
exclusive use. This progression occurs as consumption increases in water-rich
areas. While there is empirical and theoretical support for such a pattern, to
date this observation has been made in western and well resourced contexts. Drs.
Buck and Gleason hypothesize that an alternative regime of correlative use--that
is, having some rights, but not absolute ones--develops where resources are
scarce, experience with central authority strong, and public goods predominate.
Their study tests this hypothesis in an arid region with Asian legal traditions:
the Amu-Darya and Syr-Darya river basins of Soviet Central Asia. The research
includes analysis of extant information on water rights in the central Asian
republics of the USSR, in-depth interviews with water users and managers in
these field locations, and primary data collection on legal, institutional, and
environmental changes in the region. Studying the emergence of water rights
arrangements in Soviet Central Asia can enhance our understanding of the meaning
of property rights and resources in the context of global change. Also, there
have been few efforts to use collective goods theory comparing the experience of
communist and non-communist countries. The fact that the Soviet system is
currently in tremendous flux in terms of legal, political, and economic
transformations only adds to the importance of this project. The devolution of
centralized authority in the Soviet Union and the uncertainty surrounding newly
emerging governing arrangements make for a particularly timely and critical
research focus.