* 9114009
* Intelligent Material Handling Systems: Integrated Modelling and Control for Intelligent Material Handling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Karan Harbison-Briggs, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 02/28/1994
* USD 380,000.00

This award is in the joint ENG/CISE Research Thrust in Intelligent Material
Handling Systems. The objective is to develop and demonstrate a novel
intelligent material handling system approach that allows very rapid automation
of any new material handling requirements and that can deal with uncertainties
in the environment. The approach incorporates four basic components for
intelligent materials handling with applications to automated kitting and
fixturing. The Component Program for Autonomous, Adaptable agents emphasizes the
specification of flexible manufacturing cells, including manipulators and
fixtures, to adapt to dynamic environments and to cooperate with other systems.
The Component Program for CAD-Based Material Representation utilizes 3-D
feature-based models which include features for both material handling and
vision recognition. through a process of reverse engineering using vision and
range sensors with interactive graphics. The Component Program for Material
Handling Control addresses the design and selection of real-time control
strategies for material handling, including robust, adaptive, and learning
schemes with integrated sensor feedback. A high level path and trajectory
planning system are used to guide the control system based on the feature-based
CAD information. The fourth Component Program is responsible for the Systems
Integration Methodology to support the design and development of cooperating,
distributed agents, and allows transition from human- intensive activities to
more autonomous activities.