* 9114144
* International Conference on Separation Technology to be     held in Hawaii, U.S., October 20-25, 1991
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1991,05/31/1992
* George Keller, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 05/31/1992
* USD 12,500.00

The International Conference on Separations Technology will be held in Hawaii,
U.S., October 20-25, 1991. The conference, sponsored by the Engineering
Foundation, will bring together scientists and engineers drawn about 50% from
the United States and 50% from the Pacific Rim countries, Europe and the rest of
the world. The format of the conferences is eight half-day oral sessions,
covering five days, along with the poster sessions. About 32 invited papers will
be presented orally, along with at least as many posters. The objectives of this
conference are threefold: 1) to disseminate the latest research results; 2) to
define the direction of future separations research; and 3) to promote U.S. and
other countries dialogues and collaboration in various important separation
research areas. The conference is of considerable importance to the U.S. for a
least two reasons. First, separations are crucial to a number of the most
pressing needs and opportunities for the U.S., including development of
alternative sources of energy and chemicals; protecting and improving the
environment; commercial development of biotechnology; reduced dependence upon
foreign sources of critical minerals and metals; and achieving the high degrees
of purification needed for electronic materials, food, and pharmaceuticals.
Secondly, there is much forefront research in Japan, Australia and in Europe on
separations, and the conference affords, and the conference affords U.S.
scientists and engineers the opportunity to learn about and utilize these
developments.