* 9114446
* Intelligent Material Handling Systems: Intelligent          Distributed Control of Material Handling
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1993
* John Canny, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Howard Moraff
* 11/30/1993
* USD 308,000.00

This is the first year of a two-year continuing award in the joint ENG/CISE
research thrust in Intelligent Material Handling Systems. This research effort
involves simulation, control, and implementation of an experimental integrated
material handling systems. The following research issues, felt to be critical to
the success of intelligent material handling systems, are studied: Distributed
software architecture using a variety of expert software packages, with robust
communication protocols; Object-oriented software for simulation of material
handling systems at various levels of abstraction; Planning of safe motion and
part acquisition using a variety of sensing methods; Real-time sensor processing
algorithms for intelligent control of operations; Methods for dealing with
uncertainty due to a variety of sources; Testing and validation of concepts in
two "microfactories;" and Rapid prototyping of custom end-effectors and fixtures
to handle particular parts. The research involves integration of a number of
specialist programs, running on a variety of processors, using a versatile
interface protocol. The specialist include a package for handler modeling and
motion simulation and control, two real-time multiprocessors for control and
sensor processing, a vision package, a mechanical design package, and an NC
machine code generator. These systems will communicate via the CPU interprocess
communication protocol, which has been successfully demonstrated with many of
the systems. In addition, the BLOCS object-oriented simulation package, which
was developed at Berkeley, will be used to model the actual system at several
levels and to validate and improve the design in terms of information flow,
material flow, and error tolerance. Eventually, BLOCS will perform some high-
level monitoring and control of the actual material handling systems.