* 9114440
* Fault-Tolerance and Locality in Distributed Network         Algorithms
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Baruch Awerbuch, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Dana S. Richards
* 07/31/1994
* USD 163,468.00

This proposed work is on two algorithmic topics in asynchronous numerics: fault-
tolerance and locality. The practical significance of theoretical work in fault-
tolerance is often limited because of particular assumptions made about possible
fault patterns. In some applications, making unjustifiable assumptions could
have grave consequences. The major goals of this research are to develop a basic
theory of fault-tolerant communication protocols, that will be free of
unnecessary assumptions, and to apply this theory to real network tasks. As a
general approach a novel self-stabilization framework is proposed. Self-
stabilization is a basic robustness property that enables the system to return
to correct operation after an arbitrary pattern of failures. Traditional network
management protocols use locality requiring all sites to maintain full
information about the network topology. This task becomes very complex in large
networks. In a high-speed environment, the required rate of global state change
may be much faster than the propagation delay, thus making it impossible to
obtain an accurate picture of the global state of the network. Fault- tolerance
and locality properties are crucial to ensure graceful degradation of the
overall system under conditions of extreme stress. A universal network
decomposition approach is proposed, that allows such properties for a variety of
network tasks. There is already a wide range of important applications for which
this approach has proved to be successful, including network routing,
distributed directories, online tracking of mobile users, resource allocation
and load balancing, network synchronization, shortest paths, deadlock avoidance,
and others. For these tasks our approach yields, for the first time, almost
optimal solutions.