* 9114636
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop on Nonlinear Optical Materialsand Devices; Orlando, Florida
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1993
* David Hagan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1993
* USD 4,292.00

This award supports a follow-up workshop in the U.S. of a previous workshop in
Australia on "Nonlinear Optical Materials and Devices" sponsored jointly by the
Center for Research in Electro-Optics and Lasers ıCREOL! of the University of
Central Florida and the Optoelectronics Division of the Surveillance Research
Laboratory ıSRL! in Salisbury, South Australia. This award provides funds to
rent a suitable venue with conference facilities within the Orlando area for a
five-day period in early 1992 as well as to provide local travel support for
CREOL participants. Nonlinear optics and laser science are fundamental to
optics-based technologies which will assume increasing importance in the next
century. These technologies, involving optical computing, information
processing, displays, communications, manufacturing industry and medicine, could
eventually rival the present day technologies based on electronics and silicon
in these areas. This workshop will focus on three areas for further
collaboration: (1) optical limiting understanding and technology (with
collaboration between Drs. E.W. Van Stryland, D.J. Hagan and Mansoor Sheik-Bahae
in the U.S. and Drs. J. Hermann and P. Chapple in Australia); (2) multiple
quantum well ıMQW! growth and characterization (with collaboration between Dr.
A. Miller at CREOL and Dr. R. T. Hartley of the Australian Defense Science &amp;
Technology Organization ıDSTO! who runs two molecular-beam epitaxy ıMBE!
machines for growing HgTe-CdTe MQW superlattices on GaAs and CdZnTe substrates
for infrared detector applications, where DSTO's growth facilities for MQW's
complement CREOL's characterization facilities); and (3) growth of nonlinear
crystals and laser host materials (with collaboration between Dr. Bruce H.T.
Chai at CREOL and Drs. Bob Seymore and Peter Picone at DSTO).