* 9114483
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the  Mathematical Sciences "Turbulence of Nonlinear Waves With   Applications to geophysics and oceanography, May 25-29,1992"
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1993
* David Gurarie, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 10/31/1993
* USD 23,582.00

The search for satisfactory models of turbulence is still one of the major
problems of mathematics and physics. Because of its importance in diverse areas
such as aeronautics, geophysical fluid dynamics, atmospheric sciences,
magnetohydrodynamics, and astrophysics, tremendous effort has been devoted to
its study over the last few decades. A broad spectrum of mathematical tools from
partial differential equations, stochastic processes, statistical mechanics,
dynamical systems, renormalization theory, statistics, and functional analysis
has been employed in an effort to elucidate its nature. This project will
support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on
Turbulence of Nonlinear Waves with Applications to Geophysics and Oceanography
to be held May 25-29, 1992 at Case Western Reserve University. Professor
Vladimir Zakharov of the Landau Institute of Theoretical Physics (Moscow) and
the University of Arizona will be the principal lecturer. To stimulate interest
and activity in mathematical research, the National Science Foundation each year
supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical
Sciences. Each five-day conference features a distinguished lecturer who
delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current research in one sharply
focused area of the mathematical sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an
expository monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally published by
the American Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association and the
Institute of Mathematical Statistics. Certain features differentiate these
conferences from typical research conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single
important and timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued
effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for
quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider
audience.