* 9114829
* Zeolite Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Mark Davis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 09/30/1995
* USD 294,997.00

Inorganic membranes have the potential for high selectivity and the ability to
operate at elevated temperatures and reactive atmospheres. This makes these
membranes suitable for applications outside the range of the well-established
organic polymer membranes. One application, for example, is in membrane reactors
where an equilibrium-limited reaction such as hydrocarbon dehydrogenation is
carried out with simultaneous hydrogen separation in order to increase the
yield. Zeolite membranes have the potential of highly selective separations for
a variety of gas mixtures. They can operate at ambient temperatures to carry
out, at steady state, separations which are currently performed by unsteady
pressure or temperature swing adsorption. Or they can be used at elevated
temperatures in catalytic membrane reactors to increase the reaction yield or
selectivity. To realize this potential, the zeolite membranes must be prepared
as thin but mechanically stable layers supported on porous tubes or other
support elements. In this project, techniques for synthesizing thin zeolite
layers within the walls of porous tubes will be investigated. The general
approach is to deploy the reactants in such a way that conditions favorable to
zeolite crystallization prevail only over a thin region inside the porous
support. Three specific techniques will be investigated for delimiting the
crystallization region. The first will be based on counterdiffusion of reactants
between two aqueous solutions, the second on fixing the reaction front at the
interface between an aqueous and an organic phase, and third on the localized
precipitation of a precursor gel. The formation of the zeolite will be
ascertained by X-ray diffraction (XRD), solid state nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR), infrared and physical adsorption, while scanning electron microscopy
(SEM- EDX) will be used to define the location and thickness of the layer.
Permeation rate coefficients and separation factors will be measured for several
gases at ambient and elevated temperatures. Finally, the use of zeolite
membranes as membrane reactors will be explored in a few catalytic reactions
such as the dehydrogenation of isobutane and the alkylation of cumene.