* 9114424
* Exploratory Research on the Use of "Heat Shock Gene"        Expression to Investigate Organismic Response to TemperatureStress Associated with Global Warming
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Alina Szmant, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1993
* USD 49,756.00

A particular concern about the predicted global mean temperature increase of 1
to 5 Degrees C by the year 2050 is that in the tropics, where many organisms
live near their upper thermal tolerance, even a small increase in temperature
could result in wide-spread mortality of ecologically and/or economically
important species with a consequent change in the composition and character of
tropical ecosystems (Peters and Darling 1985). Over the last decade there has
been an increased incidence of so-called coral bleaching (Williams and Williams
1990, Langreth 1990, Glynn 1991), due to the loss by scleractinian corals of
their algal symbionts or Hoegh-Guldberg and Smith 1989, Kleppel et al. 1989,
Szmant and Gassman 1990). Many of the geographically extensive incidences of
bleaching have followed periods of elevated seawater temperatures (Glynn 1991)
and bleaching has been attributed to temperature stress to either the coral
animals and/or their zooxanthellae (which of the two is not known for certain).
The bleaching events have been taken by some to indicate that global climate
warming has already begun (Roberts 1990), and temperature-sensitive coral reef
cnidarians are being touted as potential important as indicators of small but
real recent increases in seawater temperatures. Our ability to causally
associate coral bleaching with global temperature increases is hampered by our
lack of understanding of the fundamental causes and processes of the bleaching
(Gladfelter 1988. Little is known about the particular conditions that trigger
adaptive response to temperature increase. This information is needed to able to
interpret coral bleaching from a global warming perspective, as well as to
predict the long-term consequences of such warming. I hereby propose that the
detection of heat-shock gene expression in tropical cnidarians and their algal
symbionts may be a viable method for learning more about the temperature
tolerance, physiology and adaptation of these organisms, and potentially as a
monitoring tool for detecting climate change.