* 9114646
* First-Principles Calculation of Ternary Phase Diagrams
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1995
* Juan Sanchez, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1995
* USD 237,000.00

A first-principles electronic theory of alloy phase stability is used to
investigate the thermodynamic properties and the temperature-composition phase
diagrams of binary and ternary systems. The emphasis of this study is on the
development and testing of computational schemes - based on quantum mechanical
calculations of binding energies, vibrational entropies and configurational
entropies - in order to predict solid state phase stability. Electronic
structure calculations of the total energy of ordered compounds are carried out
using the Linear Muffin-Tin Orbital and the Local Density Approximations. The
Liner Muffin-Tin Orbitals total energy calculations are used to obtain multiatom
effective chemical interactions, equilibrium lattice constants, bulk moduli,
Debye temperatures, Gruneisen Constants and expansion coefficients of
configurationally ordered compounds. These calculations provide all information
necessary for the computation of equilibrium phase diagrams. Ternary equilibrium
and metastable phase diagrams will be calculated for a number of important
alumindes to establish trends which may offer predictive results. %%%
Calculations of accurate alloy phase diagrams have usually been based on
experimental input and phenomenological models. The resulting phase diagrams
were sometimes lacking in predictive capability. The research proposed here will
calculate phase diagrams based on first-principles; essentially providing only
the properties of the atoms making up the alloy. The calculation of first-
principles phase diagrams is an important step in the design of new materials
having desired properties. The present work will develop techniques to do these
calculations for the more difficult case of ternary alloys.