* 9114574
* U.S.-Australia Joint Seminar: Changing Paradigms for Desert Diets and Diabetes among Australian Aborigines and Native   Americans; Alice Springs, Australia, November 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Gary Nabhan, Native Seeds/SEARCH
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 02/28/1994
* USD 26,625.00

Under the direction of Gary Paul Nabhan of Native Seeds.SEARCH, and Australian
organizer, Janette C. Brand of the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Sydney, eight U.S. specialists (plus additional NIH-supported U.S. participants
in the field of molecular biology) in various aspects of nutrition, population
biology, ecology and anthropology will travel to Alice Springs, Australia in
November 1992 to meet for a week with Australian counterparts to discuss the
effects of changing dietary habits on the incidence of non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) in indigenous desert populations in both countries,
the Pima- speaking Indians of the U.S. Sonoran Desert and the Arandic-speaking
aborigines of the Central Australian Desert. Over the five days of meetings, the
participants will evaluate various hypotheses proposed to explain the rapid
post-World War II rise in NIDDM, trying: to determine which factors of
aboriginal diet and lifestyle formerly protected these genetically susceptible
populations from developing diabetes; to elucidate patterns of parallel
evolution which can account for the similarities in genetic responses to
nutritional-ecological resources and constraints characteristic of the two
deserts; and to consider which elements of traditional lifestyle, diet and
medicine may serve as effective interventions aimed at preventing or controlling
NIDDM among contemporary indigenous peoples. The seminar is important not only
for the basic information it should develop and the future cooperative research
plans it will promote, but also for helping native desert populations to modify
their diets to avoid this type of diabetes.