* 9114080
* Design and Operation of High Performance Chemical Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 01/31/1995
* USD 250,000.00

This project continues the principal investigator's experimentation with
algorithmic methods for the design of complex processes that are difficult to
operate and control; that is, processes that are often overdesigned because
process engineers are reluctant to design near or within regimes of complex
operation, where these processes are often economically optimal. To achieve
better designs, work will continue to investigate development of design
methodologies that involve the coordination of design, operations, and control
optimizations. The prototype software system, PRODOC, will be extended to permit
experimentation with new methodologies for eliminating overdesign in a broader
class of chemical processes. In these new methodologies, models for design and
control are refined in a coordinated fashion as the design evolves. A Model
Predictive Controller (MPC) developed previously, enables the improved control
needed to operate near or within complex nonlinear regimes. MPC optimization is
coordinated with economic optimization to efficiently evaluate the
controllability of the most promising designs as the economic optimization
proceeds. The project is concerned with two typical chemical processes for
experimentation with the new algorithms and design methodologies. It extends and
perfects the optimization techniques for locating all solutions, including the
global optimum, of complex nonlinear programs, such as arise when implementing
the new design methodologies. The contributions, which can be expected to
advance the state-of-the-art for all design engineers, are beginning to have an
impact on chemical process engineers, who are gaining the ability to reliably
design more highly-integrated chemical processes that are more energy- efficient
and profitable.