* 9114787
* Antarctic Surveying and Mapping Program
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1991,08/31/1998
* Jerry Mullins, UNITED STATES DEPT OF GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
* Interagency Agreement
* Scott Borg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 2,231,911.00

Production and publication of maps of Antarctica serve four U.S. policy
objectives. Maps are essential for research, which currently is the principal
expression of U.S. interest in the region. They are essential for operations and
logistics in support of research or other activities (including search and
rescue). Maps provide a knowledge base for support of the range of future U.S.
antarctic interests. And, by their authoritative coverage of large portions of
the continent, maps serve to maintain the active and influential presence of the
United States in Antarctica. Surveying and mapping comprise a variety of
activities necessary for the successful operation of a multifaceted scientific
and exploration effort in Antarctica. Year round data acquisition, catalog, and
data dissemination activities will continue in the Scientific Committee for
Antarctic Research (SCAR) Library for Geodesy and Geographic Information. Field
surveys are planned as part of a continuing program to collect data suitable for
future satellite mapping programs and to densify extant data for 1:50,000-scale
mapping programs. These maps will provide a base to portray scientific
information, such as geologic data, in a specially accurate manner for expert
analysis. They will also support future expeditions with a base to design
scientific investigations and data collection activities. The U.S. Geological
Survey has been selected to perform the Nation's antarctic mapping because it is
the designated agency for mapping of the United States and because it possesses
the necessary expertise, antarctic experience (developed since 1959), and
institutional continuity. A 1991 Memorandum of Agreement between the United
States Geological Survey and theFoundation establishes the purpose and tasking
for the antarctic mapping.