* 9114675
* US-Czechoslovakia Research on Effects of Growth Rate on     Gonadal Differentiation in Common Carp and European Tench
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* William Shelton, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 02/29/1996
* USD 10,160.00

This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project between Dr. William L. Shelton of the
University of Oklahoma and Dr. Otomar Linhart of the Fisheries Research
Institute, Vodnany, Czechoslovakia, will determine how gonadal differentiation
of common carp (Cyprinus carpio) and the European tench (Tinca tinca) is
affected by growth rate, controlled by density dependency and temperature. The
basic relationship determined in these studies will be applied to protocol
optimization of androgen-induced sex reversal. Functionality of the phenotypic
sex is emphasized as a component of a breeding program to produce all- female
progeny for aquaculture. U.S. and Czechoslovakian scientists will collaborate on
this research, and conduct the investigation on carp and tench in their own
countries. They will stock progeny of each species at various densities in
different habitats (ponds, tanks, net enclosures) during year one, and examine
the time/size-related chronology of gonadal differentiation histologically. In
year two, they will develop a temperature/size-time relationship of gonadal
differentiation. During the third year, they will integrate the density-
temperature mediated gonadal differentiation with efficacy testing of functional
sex reversal with methyltestosterone. This investigation merges the dichotomy of
a basic question and a pragmatic problem. This project in aquaculture and
ecosystem dynamics fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to
combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.