* 9114533
* The Mechanics of the Generation and Propagation of          Thermoelastically Generated Lamb Waves in Plates and        Panels
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Christian Burger, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jerome Sackman
* 07/31/1994
* USD 262,045.00

An experimental/numeric study will be carried out for acquiring the
understanding of the basic mechanics of the generation and propagation of
thermoelastically generated Lamb waves that is needed to exploit these waves for
nondestructive evaluation of wafers, plates and panels. Since Lamb waves
propagate in the plane of a plate and affect the whole thickness, they are
excellent for determining the extent and severity of defects such as surface
cracks, delaminations and local changes in material properties. Broadband
transient Lamb waves will be generated by irradiating a small area on the
surface of a plate with a short duration fiber guided laser pulse. The resultant
thermal shock generates a wave which is then sensed by a fiber-optic
interferometer. Data analysis will be in the frequency domain where the imprints
that defects leave on the wave are most clearly evident. The numeric and
experimental methods will be combined to study the basic parameters involved in
the generation and propagation of these waves and in the ways in which they are
influenced by defects. The resultant knowledge will be used to design efficient
means for generating waves with desirable characteristics and to optimize the
overall system for identifying and characterizing defects both for quality
control and safety assurance.