* 9114476
* Fracture of High-Performance Quasibrittle Materials:        Effects of Loading Rate &amp; Fatigue
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Zdenek Bazant, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 03/31/1996
* USD 284,902.00

Fracture mechanics of quasibrittle materials, which include high performance
materials such as high strength concrete, has emerged during the last few years
but one key aspect is still ignored- the effects of leading rate (beyond the
dynamic range), load cycling and fatigue. Experiments and theory, focused on
concretes and also covering rocks will be conducted. The tests of notched
fracture specimens will include: 1) load-deflection curves at various constant
displacement rates, 2) load relaxation tests in the post- peak softening range,
3) fatigue tests and 4) renotching tests. Part of the testing will be carried
out in cooperation with industry, Material Service Corp., Chicago. The
theoretical formulations, in the order of improving approximation but decreasing
simplicity, will include: 1) Rate generalization of R- curve approach; 2)
Cohesive line-crack model with viscoplasticity in the bulk of the specimen and
viscoplasticity in the relation of bridging stress to opening displacement,
solved by means of a singular integro-differential equation based on smeared-tip
superposition of cracks: 3) nonlocal finite element model with cracking damage,
creep and rate-dependent nonlinear triaxial constitutive model for the fracture
process zone; and 4) generalization of the random particle model simulating the
microstructure of concrete. Resolution of this problem will pave the way for
development of better materials; for their more effective and safer utilization;
for better and safer designs of special or very large concrete structures beyond
the range of existing experience; for more reliable predictions of long-time
cracking in concrete structures; and for more realistic predictions of the
failure of rock slopes, excavations, underground openings and boreholes.