* 9114499
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Optical Isomer       Resolution by Novel Aqueous Two-Phase Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1993
* James Hsu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 05/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

Many drugs are chiral, that is, they exist in right-and left- handed molecular
forms called enantiomers. Although structure is almost identical, enantiomers
can differ considerably in their pharmacological effects. For drug development,
it is crucial to investigate the pharmacokinetics effects of individual pure
enantiomers during preclinical and clinical trials. However, the lack of
sufficient quantities of individual stereoisomers drugs for carrying out these
trials, and the expensive separation techniques for optical isomer resolution
currently represent a bottleneck. The objective of this project is to use a
variety of newly discovered novel aqueous two-phase systems for the resolution
of optical isomers. Because the phase-forming compounds in these novel aqueous
two-phase systems are relatively cheap, they will provide an inexpensive
technique by which the chiral separation can be carried out. In order to fully
utilize their potential, a fundamental investigation of optical isomer
partitioning in these new systems is done with the goal of enhancing the
separation factor by varying environmental conditions. This is a Small Grant for
Exploratory Research (SGER) jointly supported by the Separation and Purification
and the Interfacial, Transport, and Thermodynamics Programs.