* 9114167
* Code Scheduling Under Varying Parallel Resource Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Susan Eggers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 07/31/1993
* USD 49,999.00

One of the major unsolved problems in high-speed computing is designing highly
parallel machines that can exploit the latent parallelism inherent in
applications. Current high-speed computers do not achieve their full potential,
in part because of inefficient code scheduling that leaves hardware resources
underutilized. The goal of this research is to obtain better execution speedup
on high- performance parallel hardware by improving code schedules. The research
will develop efficient code schedulers for parallel machines with multiple
instruction streams and non-blocking memory references that have long and widely
varying latencies. The difficulty of scheduling for machines of this type is
that, while code scheduling is a static activity, the availability and latency
of the hardware that is being scheduled varies during execution time. The PI has
devised four different scheduling algorithms, with varying complexity(i.e., they
generate schedules with varying efficiencies) and compilation costs. They differ
in whether they schedule across instructions with data dependencies and whether
and in what way they take into account variances in memory latencies and
multiple instruction streams. The algorithm will be evaluated when combined with
the Aiken/Nicolau software pipelining algorithm and assuming a highly parallel
hardware configuration. The metrics for the performance study will be code
schedule size, code schedule density, execution time and hardware utilization.