* 9114352
* Mathematical Programming Under Uncertainty: Risk and        Recourse Revisited
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1995
* Suvrajeet Sen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Donald Gross
* 02/28/1995
* USD 246,556.00

With increased competition in the marketplace, many sectors of the American
economy are acknowledging the need for improved resource planning. By way of
example, note the growing acceptance of the Just-In-Time philosophy in many
manufacturing firms, the move toward dynamic routing capabilities within the
telecommunication industry and adaptive signal control in urban traffic
planning. In each of these areas, resources (e.g., productive capabilities and
network capacities) are acquired well in advance of their need, and utilization
is improved by adaptive allocation as precise system requirements are
identified. Since precise information regarding system operation is not
available at the time of planning, the resource planning problem involves
decision making under uncertainty. This project focusses on modeling and
solution of planning problems for systems that allow adaptive resource
allocation. These methodologies are based on stochastic decomposition.
Computational experience with stochastic decomposition indicates that it is
ideally suited to the solution of large scale problems involving optimal
planning under uncertainty. It is particularly useful when the variability of
system requirements can only be assessed via simulated scenarios. The project
involves three phases, involving the mathematical development and verification
of these methods, computer implementation of the resulting algorithms, and
testing of these algorithms on models based on case-studies which will be
developed in conjunction with industrial collaborators.