* 9114073
* The Vertical Structure of Low-Frequency Atmospheric Flows
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Julia Nogues-Paegle, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 12/31/1995
* USD 260,954.00

The Global Weather Experiment (GWE) of early 1979 deployed augmented
observational systems that offered, for the first time, truly global coverage at
least on the largest (planetary wave) scales of the atmospheric circulation.
Analysis techniques were subsequently developed that merged these observations
with the output of continually running numerical models to obtain data sets
consistent with the physical and dynamical laws built into the models. Research
with these data sets has provided new insights on planetary-scale circulation
features which vary slowly over intra- seasonal to seasonal periods. Dr. Nogues-
Paegle will use a 10-year data set, which was prepared with state-of-the-art
techniques for assimilating observations into numerical model solutions, to look
at the vertical structure of such circulation features. The vertical structure
detected will provide an indication as to the relative roles of local and remote
energy sources in the excitation and maintenance of the quasi-stationary waves
composing these features. The results should guide the development of general
circulation models so they simulate seasonal and intraseasonal changes more
accurately. Such improved predictions will have enhanced credibility and utility
in the framing of environmental policy and economic resource allocation
decisions.