* 9114455
* Mathematical Sciences:  NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences--Uncertain Reasoning
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Lonny Winrich, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1993
* USD 26,645.00

Attempts to duplicate expert problem solving behavior and concomitantly to deal
with uncertain and incomplete information and knowledge have focused special
attention on the mathematics of uncertain reasoning. Techniques for treating the
uncertainties which arise in expert systems have come from a spectrum of
mathematical theories ranging from classical probability to heuristic rules
based on empirical observations of expert behavior. This project will support an
NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Uncertain
Reasoning to be held June 1-5, 1992 at the University of North Dakota at Grand
Forks. Professor Glenn Shafer of the University of Kansas will be the principal
lecturer. To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the
National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional
Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference
features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of
important current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical
sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon
these lectures, which is normally published by the American Mathematical Society
or the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the
American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Certain features differentiate these conferences from typical research
conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single important and timely area of
research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation
through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and
timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.