* 9114427
* Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the  Mathematical Sciences - Number Theory and Dynamical Systems;June 1-5, 1992
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1992
* Rudolph Najar, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1992
* USD 23,376.00

It is known that there are connections between certain problems in diophantine
approximation and problems in mechanics. For example, asteroid orbits having
certain rational periods of the orbit of Jupiter are missing in the asteroid
belt, while others are present. Such connections occur both in Hamiltonian
systems and in "mode-locking" phenomena in dissipative systems. In the last few
years these connections have been made more precise using renormalization
schemes for studying various routes to chaos. On the number theory side,
"arithmetic fractals" with exact self-similarity properties have recently been
constructed. In addition, diophantine approximations in both one and several
dimensions can be studied using dynamical systems. This project will support an
NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Number
Theory and Dynamical Systems to be held June 1-5, 1992 at California State
University, Fresno. Dr. Jeffrey Lagarias of AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories will be
the principal lecturer. To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical
research, the National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-
CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day
conference features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a
topic of important current research in one sharply focused area of the
mathematical sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository
monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally published by the American
Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or
jointly by the American Statistical Association and the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics. Certain features differentiate these conferences from
typical research conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single important and
timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued effect and
local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality,
breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.