* 9114948
* Conference on International Comparison of Prices            and Productivity - Miami, FL    Fall 1992
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* Jorge Salazar-Carrillo, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/1994
* USD 29,555.00

International comparisons of prices, real income, output and productivity have
attracted considerable interest over the last two decades. Much of the research
in this area was initiated through the International Comparisons Project (ICP),
with funds from the World Bank. Currently, the Project is continuing its work
under other governmental auspices, notably, the statistical offices of the
United Nations and the European Economic Community. Its output is being used by
a growing number of researchers as well as decision-makers, but general
understanding of the concepts and processes involved in producing these
international indicators of economic performance remains modest. The present
proposal seeks support for conference on international economic comparisons to
be held in the fall of 1992. The meeting will take place at the Center for
Economic Research of Florida International University in Miami, Florida. Its
purpose is to elucidate recent methodological trends in the area of quantitative
economic comparisons across countries and to expand the interaction of academic
researchers with governmental as well as non-governmental specialists. Papers
will be presented under six broad topics: economic theoretic approaches to
international comparisons, aggregation methods, consistent temporal spatial
comparisons, sectoral productivity comparisons, regional comparisons, and
applications and policy issues. The distinguished group of participants in the
proposed conference can be expected to contribute new insights and new momentum
to an important area in international economics. Their discussions also promise
to enhance general understanding of the current "state of the art".