* 9114989
* Committee on Earth and Environmental Sciences (CEES) Task   Group on Global Change Education Workshop, W. Alton Jones   Campus, University of Rhode Island, July 14-17, 1991
* BIO,BIO
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Lynne Hanson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* W. F. Harris
* 12/31/1992
* USD 35,850.00

Global Change research will require scientists trained in multidisciplinary
approaches to research and technological development over the next decade. It
will also require an informed and literate public to make wise resource use
choices through the utilization of the results of the scientific research. Human
resources development, therefore, will need to be multidisciplinary and include
the human dimensions of global change. Many of the federal agencies are
addressing these needs through development of agency specific educational
opportunities but with no long-term framework or strategy for coordination and
cooperation. The role of the CEES is to provide the coordinating mechanism for
cooperative program planning and development. As a result, the University of
Rhode Island, in cooperation with the CEES Task Group on Glocal Change
Education, is proposing a Global Change Education Program Coordination Workshop
for July, 1991. The first objective of the workshop is to develop a long-term
framework and strategy for the CEES Education Task Group. The long-term plan
will include educational opportunities and alternatives for K-14 (precollege and
early college), upper level college and graduate programs, and informal, public
education. All of the education and training programs of the Task Group are
intended to complement the science priorities of CEES. The second objective is
to provide a cooperative and coordinated approach for all federal govenment
agency global change education programs. Such a cooperative approach would help
to avoid emphases on one area to the detriment of other important foci. The
workshop planned for the W. Alton Jones Campus of the University of Rhode Island
on July 14-17, 1991 will result in at least two tangible products: 1) A long-
term educational strategy plan including prioritized options; and 2) Draft
implementation strategies.