* 9114083
* Miocene Continental Paleoclimate and Fossil Horse Evolution:Trace Element and Stable Isotope Geochemistry of Enamel-    Phosphate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1992
* Malcolm McKenna, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 06/30/1992
* USD 36,071.00

We propose to explore the potential for linking mid-Miocene paleoclimate and
horse evolution by establishing the systematics of trace elemental and isotopic
preservation in the bone and tooth phosphate of North American fossil horses. We
will test whether enamel phosphate provides quantitative information about
changes in paleoenvironment (temperature, hydrology), paleodiet (graze vs.
browse), and evolution (the mid-Miocene radiation of horses), or if bone and
tooth phosphate is diagenetically opaque. This preliminary work could catalyze
new avenues for unraveling Miocene continental paleoclimate changes, an
important period of global climatic deterioration with scant quantitative
paleogeochemical information from continental records. Fossil horses are
particularly suitable for study because they are geographically widespread and
common in fossil assemblages from the Eocene to late Pleistocene and have modern
analogues. Horses underwent an explosive adaptive radiation and presumed dietary
shift in the middle Miocene (16-12 Ma) perhaps responding to paleoclimatic
changes and the spread of savannah grasslands. This climatic shift is inferred
from paleoceanographic data; the dietary shift, from studies of the functional
morphology of teeth. We wish to determine if a paleodietary shift is evident in
the chemistry of the fossil teeth; if the continental paleoclimate record
corroborates the marine record in magnitude, direction, and timing; and if
paleoclimatic change occurred concurrently with paleoenvironmental and
evolutionary changes. In this preliminary venture, we will explore the effects
of diagenesis, inter- and intraspecific variations, and characterize the del
18Opo4 of fossil horse teeth and bones from the Burge Quarry, one of the richest
and best-preserved middle Miocene (-12 Ma) horse faunas. Diagenesis will be
evaluated with trace element, SEM, and XRD analyses of enamel phosphate and
compared to modern horses. If diagenesis proves to be negligible, del 18Opo4 of
tooth-enamel in modern and fossil teeth will establish the suitability of
reconstructing the continental paleoclimate record.