* 9114750
* Examination of the Mathematical Models Used in Atmospheric  Source Apportionment Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Philip Hopke, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 05/31/1995
* USD 284,500.00

During the past 2 decades, there has been increasing use of multielemental
analytical methods to characterize airborne particulate matter and collected
precipitation. With the availability of these large multivariate data sets and
new multivariate statistical methods that have been made practical by the
continuing increases in computer size and speed, there is an enhanced
opportunity to extract information about atmospheric processes from data
characterizing collected particles or precipitation. The original objective of
this on-going research program was to continue the examination of the
statistical problems associated with the source identification and mass
apportionment of urban aerosols. During the current grant period, the program
has changed its emphasis toward larger scale phenomena and the development and
testing of statistical methods to extract information from analyzed samples
obtained on a larger spatial and temporal scale. Specifically, the PI proposes
to validate the Potential Source Contribution Function (PSCF) analysis and Total
Potential Source Contribution Function (TPSCF) analysis Techniques both by
applying PSCF to small-scale data sets and applying PSCF to the Across North
America Tracer Experiment (ANATEX) data where the location and quantities of
source emissions are known, to study and further develop three- way modeling via
the application of existing methods to additional data sets and an investigation
into alterations that may be necessary to these methods in the presence of
constraints, and the further study of empirical orthogonal functions and their
use in studying ozone transport.