* 9114876
* Multiple Studies of Wind and Wave Patterns
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Charles Seyler, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 12/31/1995
* USD 435,000.00

The proposed research effort is aimed at the further understanding of the
interaction between the various regions of the earth's atmosphere. One central
thrust is to study the interaction between atmospheric waves generated in the
dense lower atmosphere with the plasma in the ionosphere. These waves. create
considerable structure on the bottom of the ionosphere from which many radio and
communications systems reflect signals. The resulting distortion is well known
but not so well understood. In addition much fine scale structure results which
cause even higher frequency signals to "twinkle" much as starlight does due to
atmosphere turbulence. We hope to gain new insights into just how these waves
affect the mid-latitude ionosphere on all these scales by conducting an
intensive campaign in the Puerto Rican sector where the NSF is clustering a
number of state-of-the-art instruments. We will add to this instrumentation by
taking our portable radar to the nearby island of St. Croix for the campaign. In
addition to gravity waves we are interested in how lightning may affect the
ionosphere and plan some joint observations with the Millstone Hill Observatory
to see if short wavelength electrostatic waves can be detected preferentially
over thunderstorms. Upward striking lightning has been detected from the space
shuttle and ionosphereic effects seem quite likely. Another topic of interest is
the turbulence induced in the ionosphere by the flow fields in and around the
aurora. This turbulence may be sufficiently intense that the present
interpretation of incoherent scatter radar data is in error.