* 9114318
* Influence of Anamalous Eurasian Spring Snow Cover on the    Indian Summer Monsoon
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* Anandu Vernekar, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/1994
* USD 116,808.00

There is strong empirical evidence that the areal extent of Eurasian spring
snow cover is negatively correlated with the following summer rainfall over
rainfall over India. The purpose of this research is to study the validity of
this empirical relationship from a series of experiments with a general
circulation model (GCM). The GCM is a global spectral model with rhomboidal
truncation at wave number 40 horizontal resolution with 18 layers in the
vertical. The physical processes include: surface biophysical processes, diurnal
cycle, shallow and deep convection, cloud-radiation interaction and effects of
large-scale and subgrid- scale orography. Three experiments are proposed with
varying areal extent and depth of the Eurasian snow cover in the spring to study
its influence on the summer monsoon circulations. All three experiments will
simulate ensemble global circulations in an annual cycle mode from March 1
though September 30. The difference in these simulations are only due to the
prescribed snow extent and depth over Eurasia on March 1. All other prescribed
quantities will come from climatology. The first experiment is to determine the
impact of a negative anomaly in the snow extent on the monsoon circulations by
prescribing a minimum snow extent similar to that observed during the spring of
1970. In this experiment the PI will use average snow depth. The second and
third experiments are designed to investigate the impact of a positive anomaly
in the snow extent similar to that observed during the spring of 1972. In the
second experiment the PI prescribe a minimum snow depth in order to isolate the
effects of the surface albedo. In the third experiment he will prescribe a
maximum snow in order to study the effects of albedo as well as the effects of
melting and evaporation. The results of these anomaly experiments will be
compared with the control simulations to test the statistical significance of
these results..This research is important because it seeks to improve our
understanding of relationships between important components of the climate
system, surface boundary forcing and monsoons.