* 9114616
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research:  Pine Sawfly Outbreak      Distribution Patterns in Western U.S. and China:  Role of   Plant Quality
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Michael Wagner, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 11/30/1995
* USD 64,351.00

This research proposal addresses the fundamental ecological cause of outbreaks
of damaging forest insects in China and the United States. In this proposal
experiments are outlined that will test the role of forest stand conditions
(age, density, genotype) in predisposing pine forests to outbreak by an
economically important group of forest defoliators - pine sawflies (Hymenoptera:
Diprionidae). Despite extensive literature implicating stands conditions as a
major factor in forest insect outbreaks little is known about the fundamental
mechanisms responsible for this universal phenomenon. Nearly identical pine
sawfly outbreak patterns occur in Pinus ponderosa forests of the western United
States and Pinus yunnanenis forests of central China. Pine sawfly outbreaks are
restricted to low density stands of a restricted age class. A strongly
experimental approach is proposed to rigorously test the importance of stand
conditions in predisposing trees to sawfly outbreaks in both China and the US.
Stand manipulations will be conducted to experimentally create stand densities
that replicate the densities of stands known to support pine sawfly outbreaks.
The importance of two hypothesized mechanisms for the observed outbreak patterns
will be tested. The basic experimental design is to conduct parallel studies in
Sichuan Province, China and Arizona, USA. Specific research activities to be
conducted include a 1 month visit by Dr. Wagner and 4-6 months of field research
each year by a doctoral student and research technicians from Northern Arizona
University. This research will assisted by a scientists and research staff of
the Experiment Center of Sichuan Provincial Academy of Forestry Science.
Similarly a scientist from the Sichuan Forestry Academy will conduct research in
Arizona for 4-6 months each year for two years. Short term visits by Chinese
scientists to research facilities and study areas in the US will also be
supported. Dr. Wagner and Mr. Hend Xiao both have extensive previous experience
working with pine sawflies on pine species. This project will improve our basic
understanding of the causes of forest insect outbreaks, improve the training of
US and Chinese scientists, and enhance scientific and cultural exchange between
China and the United States.