* 9114459
* Rationality and Problem Structuring in Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Omer Akin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* John Scalzi
* 06/30/1995
* USD 215,937.00

The primary aim of previous research has been to describe, using a constraint
based planning strategy, the restructuring of architectural design problems. The
present project aims to study the rationality of designer' behavior in
structuring and especially restructuring design problems. The research will be
performed in five steps. First, a model of problem structuring in space planning
will be developed using optimization. To overcome problems inherent in space
planning, such as, continuity of values and size of problem space, dynamic
programming techniques will be exploited. Using model developed in the first
step, optimal solution paths for the given problem structures will be
determined. Protocol data of subjects and simulation program called HeGeL, from
previous research, will be used to show factors that explain subjects' behavior,
whether it be optimal, pareto optimal or non- optimal. A new version of HeGeL,
HeGeL-II will be developed incorporating dynamic programming capabilities
developed earlier. The optimality, Pareto optimality or other forms of
"rationality" in the paths and solutions used by subjects will be compared
against results obtained in the initial modeling step, using HeGeL- II. Finally,
bounded rationality techniques and strategies for space planning which can be
integrated into the designers' process will be proposed.