* 9114095
* An Object-Oriented Approach for Integrated Project          Management Software
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1994
* Boyd Paulson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 10/31/1994
* USD 140,020.00

This proposal outlines a new approach to developing software for project
management that is expected to offer a wide range of improvements to both the
software development process and the characteristics of the resulting
applications. The overall objectives are to construct systems that offer greater
flexibility, higher intelligence, and significantly better integration. The
proposed approach does not replace either traditional project management
application or advanced application such as expert systems; rather, it offers a
more efficient and uniform methodology for implementing these programs and a new
integrated environment in which these application can reside. The basic approach
of the proposed research which relies heavily on the concepts of object-
oriented programming, is to create a set of standardized software objects that
represent the fundamental elements of the project management process. For
example, objects would be created to represent a building's physical components
(e.g., beams and columns), the basic construction activities needed to produce
these physical components, and the resources required to perform the activities.
These basic "building block" objects could then be pieced together , according
to general design and development guidelines, to form the core of various
project management application programs.