* 9114399
* The Structures of and Processes of Building Provision:      A Case Study of Master-Planned Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Paul Knox, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1994
* USD 54,688.00

Advanced economic systems have undergone radical transformations in recent
decades. Heavy emphasis on manufacturing and other forms of tangible production
has given way to rapid growth in activities dealing with the collection and
handling of information. Considerable scholarly attention has been given to
documenting and analyzing these shifts in different economic sectors, but
relatively little notice has been given to the ways that these economic shifts
have altered other aspects of modern life. This project will examine the
emergence of a relatively new form of urban residential development, the
privately planned "new town." The project will focus on new communities
established in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area between 1975 and 1990.
Changing forms and patterns of investment, construction, and sales related to
these new towns will be analyzed through interviews with developers, designers,
and planners. Questionnaires also will be used to elicit information about the
values, attitudes, and motivations of residents who settle in these communities.
This project will provide detailed information about the crucial actors who
collectively produced new forms of residential communities in recent decades. It
also will generate new insights about the complex ways that private and public
leaders interact with one another. Conclusions from this research should
generate new insights about the dynamics of modern residential development, and
they should provide a valuable new perspective on rapid transformations in
American economic behavior. More focused information of direct utility for urban
planners also will become available.