* 9114519
* Understanding Science and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1998
* Ronald Giere, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 02/28/1998
* USD 826,248.00

Science and technology have been dominant and pervasive influences in modern
culture; yet they have never been generally well understood. The Minnesota
Center for Philosophy of Science, the Program in History of Science and
Technology, the Charles Babbage Institute for the History of Information
Processing, the Department of History of Medicine, and the Center for Biomedical
Ethics at the University of Minnesota have joined together in a coordinated
effort to understand the operation of science and technology in our society. The
collaborative research efforts among historians and philosophers of science and
technology center on four areas: (I) models, theories, and reality; (II) the
history and philosophy of physical science; (III) the history and philosophy of
biological sciences; and (IV) interactions among science technology and society.
In area I, historians and philosophers are examining scientific models or
theories and their relation to "reality." They are examining the nature of
scientific representations; the issues of realism, idealization, and
experimentation; the application of mathematics and logic in the empirical
sciences; and issues in the philosophy of cognitive science. In area II,
historians and philosophers are concentrating on questions in the history and
philosophy of quantum mechanics, the nature and status of nuclear models, the
nature of light, and the interaction of theory and experiment in physics. In
area III, they are examining the interrelationship between biomedical and
physical sciences; the institutional organization of biomedical science; and
issues in biology, medicine and values including theories and controversies in
biomedicine, genetics and society, the enterprises of natural history and
evolutionary biology, theories of disease and public health, and the design of
clinical research. Finally, in area IV, they are investigating scientific and
technological institutions, ethical issues of science and technology, the
interaction of theory and experiment, and the role of government in science-
technology interactions. This grant over five years supports postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students who are participating in research and training in
each of these lines of research.