* 9114862
* Dissertation Research: The Emergence of Chiefdoms:          Guatavita Valley, Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1993
* USD 9,850.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Carl Langebaek will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological survey and
excavation in the Guatavita Valley located in a highland plateau ca. 25 km north
of Bogota, Columbia. When the Spanish first arrived in this region, they found a
hierarchical society with clear differentiation between chiefs and commoners.
Although the archaeology of the region is not well known, available data trace
settlement back to ca. 600 BC and indicate that before Spanish arrival, regional
specialists produced salt as well as blankets and gold ornaments. To increase
knowledge of this region Mr. Langebaek will direct a surface survey of the
valley. The location of all sites will be mapped and surface materials
collected. Limited excavation will also be carried out. On this basis, it should
be possible to construct a detailed ceramic chronology and to trace changes in
settlement pattern over time. Because excellent soil maps exist, this process
can be placed into a detailed ecological context. Following the development of
agriculture and pastoralism in many parts of the world, one can trace changes in
social organization which lead, ultimately to the rise of states. Early in this
process, chiefdoms arose and anthropologists still do not understand the
mechanisms through which this happened. Some argue that population growth,
permitted by a more stable subsistence base, provided the driving force while
others point to factors such as the development of long distance trade. Mr.
Langebaek's research addresses this issue. It will provide an independent data
base which covers this transition. The Guatavita Valley is relatively small and
thus offers a manageable unit. It is also unusual because good ethnohistoric
documentation (provided by the Spanish) is also available and thus gives a solid
point from which one can work back in time. This research is important because
it will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our
understanding of how complex societies arise and will assist in the training of
an extremely promising young scientist.