* 9115337
* Support for Publication Costs, American Society of Limnologyand Oceanography Symposium, What Controls Phytoplankton ___ Production in Nutrient-Rich Area of the Open Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* C. Susan Weiler, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 01/31/1993
* USD 30,000.00

The apparent paradox of high nutrients/low phytoplankton populations in some
areas of the open ocean has challenged oceanographers for many years. Hypotheses
to explain it include the regulation of productivity by light, temperature,
zooplankton grazing, and trace metal limitation and/or toxicity in these
regions. To date, none of the hypotheses, or combinations thereof, has emerged
as a widely accepted explanation for why the nitrogen and phosphorus are not
depleted in these areas of the oceans. Recently, new evidence has supported the
hypothesis that iron deficiency limits phytoplankton growth in Subarctic and
Antarctic waters. This evidence has stimulated discussions of the feasibility of
fertilizing parts of the oceans with iron, and thus sequestering additional
atmospheric CO2 in the deep oceans where it would be bound over the next few
centuries. The economic, social, and ethical issues surrounding such a
proposition, along with the outstanding scientific issues, justify rigorous
discussion, debate, and publication on the topic of regulation of productivity
in these regions. To this end, The American Society of Limnology and
Oceanography (ASLO) held a symposium on the topic of "What controls
phytoplankton in nutrient-rich areas of the open sea?" ASLO now seeks funding to
cover the costs of publishing a special symposium issue of Limnology and
Oceanography, to provide a written record of the symposium proceedings.