* 9115417
* Development of Process Control for Microwave Joining of Ceramics
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Guy Beale, George Mason University
* Continuing grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1995
* USD 179,912.00

The researcher will develop a process control system for the microwave joining
of advanced ceramics. Ceramics have the chemical and physical properties
necessary for advanced engines and industrial and chemical process systems, but
brittleness and the lack of reliable in-process methods to detect critical flaws
make manufacturing of ceramic components very difficult. Joining is thus a
critical technology impeding the widespread commercial use of ceramics. It has
been demonstrated that direct heating of the joint interface with microwave
energy produces strong bonds in a fraction of the time necessary with
conventional methods. Precise control of the heating process is necessary to
exploit this result, because the dielectric loss factor of ceramics increases
with temperature, leading to positive feedback and thermal runaway. Control over
the joining process will be achieved through development of the following
automated feedback loops: (1) control of the power to the (magnetron) microwave
source based upon measurements of the surface temperature of the samples being
joined, and subsequent calculation of the interior temperature via solution of
the thermal diffusion equation; and (2) control of the resonant frequency of the
microwave cavity applicator and the coupling of the microwave power to the
loaded cavity based upon measurement of the amplitude and the rate of change of
the reflected power. The controllers will be based upon linearized models
derived from numerical solutions to the coupled electromagnetic and thermal
diffusion equations. If inexpensive, reliable methods for joining ceramic can be
developed, it may be possible to manufacture ceramic components will tailored
properties and then join them together, as is currently done with metals. Such a
method may greatly expand the application of ceramics to machine components.