* 9115368
* Facilities support for the CARICOMP network of cooperating  Caribbean marine laboratories
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1995
* John Ogden, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* David Schindel
* 02/28/1995
* USD 174,159.00

Dr. John Ogden is Director of the Florida Institute of Oceanography, and
currently serves as co-chair of the Steering Committee of the Caribbean Coastal
Marine Productivity Program (CARICOMP), a consortium of more than 30 marine labs
located in more than 20 Caribbean countries. The consortium was established in
1985 and has received NSF and UNESCO support for workshops that initiated
planning for a basin-wide information network dedicated to collecting and
maintaining standardized long-term environmental (oceanographic, meteorologic,
and ecosystem) observations. A Data Management Center will be established with
UNESCO support at the University of the West Indies, Kingston, to operate the
network. Dr. Ogden proposes initiation of the data network by installing
personal computers, submersible water quality data loggers, remote automated
weather stations, and networking hardware and software at five representative
marine labs, located in Venezuela, the Yucatan Peninsula, Jamaica, St. Lucia,
and Barbados. The CARICOMP network will facilitate pure and applied research
into the tropical ecosystems of the coastal zone (reefs, mangrove wetlands,
seagrass meadows). The proposed effort will provide important benefits to
research on global change and the impacts of society and economic development on
tropical coastal zones.