* 9115456
* Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Survey in the OlmacHeartland, Veracruz, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1993
* USD 7,000.00

Under the guidance of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Robert Kruger, a graduate student
in anthropology at the University of Pittsburgh, will collect data for his
doctoral dissertation. Mr. Kruger will conduct an archaeological survey of an
approximately 100 square kilometer area situated between the sites of San
Lorenzo and El Macayal which are located in the Gulf region of Mexico. Both
these large sites are attributable to the Olmec and Mr. Kruger's survey will
yield valuable data on the rural population which surrounded and sustained them.
The surface survey will be augmented by limited stratigraphic testing and
materials such as potsherds will be collected and identified. The Olmec was the
first complex stratified society to arise in Middle America and Olmec peoples
constructed impressive ceremonial sites with monumental-scale stone sculptures.
While these large sites have been the subject of archaeological scrutiny, very
little is known about either the hinterlands which surround them (where the
majority of the farming population likely lived) or the process which led to the
development of this complexity. Several theories have been proposed and these
vary from postulated intergroup competition and warfare to the development of
internal status differention within single groups. Mr. Kruger believes that
through analysis of settlement pattern and how it changes over time it should be
possible to select among alternative scenarios. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to a large number of Middle
Americanist archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of the processes
which lead to the development and maintenance of complex societies and assist in
the training of an extremely promising young scientist.//