* 9115278
* Cluster of Clusters: Synthesis and Structural Systematics   of High Nuclearity Au-Ag Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1991,06/30/1995
* Boon Teo, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 06/30/1995
* USD 306,323.00

A series of large metal clusters containing gold and silver will be synthesized
and structurally characterized. This series follows a well-defined growth
sequence based on vertex- sharing, a feature that will be extended in this
project. The effect of changes in (typically) phosphine and halide ligands on
the stereochemistry of the clusters will be systematically studied. Clusters of
high nuclearity but containing metal combinations such as Pt-Au, Pt-Au-Ag, Pd-
Au, and Pd-Au-Ag will be prepared by synthetic routes analogous to those
developed for the Au-Ag system. Synchroton or rotating anode X-ray
crystallography will be used for the structural determinations of the large
clusters. Since these clusters will be intermediate in size between individual
atoms and extended lattices, it is possible that the results of these studies
may be relevant to the nucleation and growth of fine particles, quasi-crystals,
and amorphous materials. %%% In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organo- metallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Boon K. Teo will
synthesize, structurally characterize, and study the growth systematics of large
clusters containing up to seventy- five metal atoms. These species are near the
interface between large clusters and colloids, where interesting new materials
having potential applications as electronic and magnetic materials and as
catalysts may be anticipated.