* 9115469
* Dissertation Research: Ceramic Chronology in the James and  Potomac River Valleys
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1993
* USD 8,624.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jeffrey Hantman, Mr. Michael Klein will conduct
research for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze ceramic materials
collected from 43 Native American sites located in the James and Potomac Rivers
region of Virginia and Maryland and will focus on the period between 500 - 1600
AD. The goal of the project is to develop a ceramic chronology - to understand
how ceramics changed in form over time - and the selected sample which derives
entirely from radiocarbon dated sites will make this possible. On this basis, an
archaeologist will then be able to take pottery from undated sites in the region
and determine its age through comparison to the controlled sequence. Since most
pottery in the Chesapeake region is neither decorated nor painted, Mr. Klein
will focus on attributes such as sherd thickness and the tempering material
used. Ceramics which form the basis of this research are housed in East Coast
museums and Mr. Klein will make a series of trips to visit them. The Chesapeake
region is unusual because of the richness of the resources available to
prehistoric peoples and relatively little is known about how technologically
simple societies developed in such environments. Archaeological evidence
indicates that during the 1100 year span which Mr. Klein's study includes,
societies were transformed from small scale hunting and gathering groups to
large centralized chiefdoms which relied on agriculture. Before one can
understand the process which underlies this transformation, it is first
necessary to place archaeological sites in time and Mr. Klein's research will
help to achieve this goal. This research is important for several reasons. It
will increase our understanding of prehistoric Native Americans and the
processes which led to the emergence of cultural complexity. It will provide a
tool useful to many archaeologists and will assist in the training of an
extremely promising young scientist.