* 9115641
* Use of Sedimentary Nitrogen and Carbon Isotopic Composition for Reconstruction of the Past History of the Equatorial    Pacific Upwelling Region
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Roger Francois, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/1994
* USD 270,460.00

Preliminary results obtained from a north-south transect in the equatorial
Pacific suggest that the &amp;15N in the surficial sediments of this region is
strongly affected by the nitrate concentration in the overlying euphotic zone.
Similarly, carbon isotopic composition of phytoplankton reflects ambient
ıCO2(aq)! and evidence exists that &amp;13C in sedimentary organic matter is a
measure for this parameter in the equatorial Pacific. This raises the
possibility that &amp;15N and &amp;13C of sedimentary organic matter might
respectively record past nitrate and ıCO2(aq)! distributions in surface waters.
There is evidence for glacial to interglacial changes in both the magnitude and
latitudinal distribution of production in the equatorial Pacific that might have
influenced the global carbon cycle. Sedimentary isotopic composition (&amp;15N
and &amp;13C - both bulk and fractions thereof) will be used for the
reconstruction of past changes in the distribution of nitrate and CO2(aq) in
equatorial Pacific surface waters over the last 160 kyrs, as a means both to
confirm and to delineate the mechanisms for these past changes in productivity.
Studies will be made of water column and early diagenetic processes which
control the isotopic composition of buried organic matter. Also sediment
analyses will be used to reconstruct paleoceanographic nutrient and CO2(aq)
distributions in surface waters.