* 9115569
* Phosphorous Geochemistry in Marine Sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1994
* Robert Berner, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/1994
* USD 251,039.00

Research to date has resulted in a number of significant findings. (1) By means
of a modified selective extraction technique, separate solid forms of phosphorus
have been distinguished, and their concentrations determined, in sediments from
a number of locations, with emphasis on the Amazon Delta. Results indicate that
previously unrecognized mechanisms for the removal of P from seawater (as
dispersed authigenic apatite and P associated with hydrous ferric oxides) may be
important on a global basis. Also, differences in relative proportions of P-
containing phases from place to place agree with independent geological
reasoning which serves as a check on the method. (2) Organic phosphorus in
marine sediments has been investigated in terms of C/P ratios and its chemical
nature using 31P NMR. Principal forms are phosphate monoesters and diesters, and
phosphonate compounds, the latter having been identified in marine sediments for
the first time. Phosphonate, where C is directly bonded to P, is especially
important because of its resistance to bacterial decay. (3) An experimental
study of the kinetics of nucleation and crystal growth of fluorapatite from
seawater-like solution has resulted in the hypothesis that phosphorite in
upwelling areas forms as the consequence of the buildup of very high
concentrations (&gt;400 uM) of interstitial dissolved phosphate at shallow
depths. The high concentrations enable the precipitation of metastable Ca-
phosphate phases which serve as necessary nucleating agents for fluorapatite
precipitation. This study will be continued by (1) analyzing in detail for
different forms of solid phosphorus in sediments from three major rivers and
their marine deltas: the Amazon, the Yangtze (Chang- jiang) and the Yellow
(Huang-he). (2) Extending laboratory precipitation studies to include the role
of specific nucleating agents, such as collagen, and the effect of changing
dissolved carbonate levels on apatite precipitation.