* 9115940
* The Missing Nitrogen: The Role of Dissolved Organic Nitrogen(DON) in the Nitrogen Cycle of Surface Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1995
* Bess Ward, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1995
* USD 330,000.00

Several lines of research on the nitrogen cycle of surface waters point to the
importance of dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) in microbial nitrogen
transformations. The disappearance rate of dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN)
often exceeds the assimilation rate of DIN into particles in tracer experiments.
The "missing" 15N is a common phenomenon of such experiments and has been
reported for all forms of inorganic nitrogen (nitrate, ammonium, etc). The
missing nitrogen and the missing 15N are evidence for the existence of another
labile compartment in the nitrogen cycle of the euphotic zone: dissolved organic
nitrogen (DON). The evidence suggests that the missing 15N, the missing nitrogen
and the new DON of Suzuki et al. (1985) are all related. This study will
quantify the role of DON in nitrogen cycling in the euphotic zone by tracing the
pathways of DIN through the food web using 15N tracer techniques. Using size
fractionation, time course and conventional experiments, this study will
investigate the concentration, production rate and isotopic enrichment of the
DON pool. The experiments are proposed for the low nutrient surface waters of
the Southern California Bight and for the more productive Monterey Bay, but the
phenomenon is of wide generality and we expect that the results will be useful
far beyond these geographical locations.