* 9115268
* A Laboratory for Scientific Visualization and Experimental  Machine Learning
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Patrick Mantey, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/28/1997
* USD 1,199,735.00

This infrastructure award is for the development of a visualization and machine
learning laboratory. The laboratory consists of powerful graphics workstations,
a parallel processor, a large file server, a fiber optics high speed data
network, and support personnel to maintain the laboratory. The research
supported by this equipment includes: statistical data analysis, pattern
recognition, and machine learning; visualization of sample volume data;
interactive steering of simulations; high speed switching;concurrent systems;
and applications of electronic libraries. A major bottleneck to the utilization
of scientific information is the massive amount of data now collected.
Scientific visualization is the term that covers an emerging collection of new
techniques for transforming multidimensional numeric data into understandable
graphic images. These images can then be manipulated and explored by scientists
and engineers who, sitting at their workstations, create models and draw
inferences from them. Machine learning includes a wide variety of techniques
from the fields of pattern recognition, signal processing, statistical decision
and control theory, and artificial intelligence that allow the machine itself to
participate in the process of creating models and drawing inferences from data.
It is anticipated that a new synergy between machine learning and scientific
visualization will arise from this award and that substantial collaborations
with scientists outside of the computer science department will occur.