* 9115590
* Laboratory Investigations of the Microphysics and Chemistry of Aqueous Particles Typical of the Lower Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1995
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 12/31/1995
* USD 156,800.00

Future activities of man, such as the expanded use of high- speed civil
aircraft, can be expected to perturb the chemical and physical conditions of the
lower stratosphere. The magnitudes of the effects of localized emissions of
nitrogen and sulfur oxides, water vapor, particulate matter, and other
substances on the natural trace gas life cycles and ozone depletion, especially
in the face of altered aerosol and cloud characteristics, are highly uncertain
at present. The work proposed here will provide important new data on the
origins and behavior of various aqueous aerosol particles and their roles in the
heterogeneous chemistry of the region. Laboratory experimentation will be
performed with individual and swarms of aqueous particles levitated
electrodynamically in an environment specifically controlled to simulate
conditions in the lower stratosphere or upper troposphere. The levitated
particles, as well as their growth and chemical reactions, will be interrogated
by a variety of methods. Raman scattering will help determine the size, phase,
and composition of the particles. Mass spectroscopy, and possibly resonance
fluorescence and absorption techniques, will be used to measure the changes in
the concentrations of the trace reactant and product gases. Other particle
characteristics such as weight, fallspeed, and shape will be measured by
techniques already used in our laboratories.