* 9115808
* Funds for an Ultramicrotome
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Clara Franzini-Armstrong, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 12/31/1993
* USD 17,807.00

This group of investigators is now requesting funds for the purchase of an
ultramicrotome for thin sectioning, and a dissecting microscope for block
trimming. The ultramicrotome is an indispensable instrument in standard electron
microscopy. It provides sections of suitable thickness from material embedded in
plastic. The users of the microtome will use a variety of approaches, from the
classical chemical fixation to ultrarapid freezing, to selective staining.
Tissue samples, cultured cells, single isolate muscle fibers and isolated cell
organelles will be used. The research projects will study muscle
differentiation; the architecture of molecules involved in activating the muscle
fiber and in the process of contraction; the mechanism of assembly of a
functional muscle fiber and the contribution of various molecules to myofibril
structure. These projects require different sectioning techniques and thus a
versatile microtome. When sectioning muscle fibers, the sections must be very
precisely oriented and it is of paramount importance that the microtome includes
a specimen mount that allows precise small angle changes. The instrument that we
request is particularly useful because it is readily capable of producing
excellent quality sections in a range of thicknesses, from ultrathin to
semithin, with precise orientation.