* 9115929
* ABR:  New Production in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific and  its Relation to Flux of Nitrogen and Carbon
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1994
* Richard Dugdale, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1994
* USD 159,557.00

This project represents an accomplishment based renewal for continuing studies
of upwelling new production processes. The major goals are to test hypotheses
developed from coastal and equatorial measurements and to modify current models
of upwelling system new production accordingly. The region selected for the
study is Monterey Bay where nitrogen uptake has been measured at 2 weeks
intervals for 2 years. The seasonal cycle shows an alternation between open
ocean and upwelling conditions allowing a comparison of the 2 regimes, one
expected to show open ocean, oligotrophic characteristics and the other
eutrophic coastal upwelling parameters. The project seeks to understand the
factors which trigger the transition from the one ecosystem to the other. The
basic hypothesis is that the process of nitrate incorporation into the primary
producers is the key factor in determining the trophic status of a marine
ecosystem. Further, previous results indicate that the critical factors in
development of new production of bloom proportions are nitrate concentration and
ambient irradiance. These 2 factors set boundaries for the acceleration process
between low new production conditions and high new production. The results of
this project will contribute to global models of new production and its impact
on carbon cycling. The results should be especially helpful in understanding the
role of upwelling ecosystems in global new production and carbon cycling.