* 9115921
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The Modeling and Control  of High Performance Mechanical and Robotic Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Steven Dubowsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1995
* USD 15,250.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in mechanical
engineering between Steven Dubowsky of the Massachusetts Institute for
Technology and Jean- Claude Guinot of the Laboratory for Robotics, Pierre and
Marie Curie University, Paris, France. The objective of their research is to
develop a series of accurate, integrated dynamic models and analytical tools for
the design of high performance, high speed mechanical and robotic systems. These
models will provide insights into the nature of degrading behavior in advanced,
high speed systems and could provide a foundation for predicting a system's
problems. The investigators will also develop control algorithms for highly
flexible robotic manipulators. Dr. Dubowsky brings to this collaboration
expertise in the development of methods for modeling the spatial dynamics and
control of high performance mechanical systems. He has developed new control
algorithms for robotic manipulators. This is complemented by the French
investigators' contributions in the area of spatial kinematics of complex
mechanical systems. They have developed extensive experimental capability in the
areas of manipulators and integration of sensors and computation for real time
control. This project will advance our understanding of design and control of
high performance mechanical systems. It will result in a predictive model and
effective control algorithms for degradation problems and improved robotic
systems.