* 9115981
* Lattice Vibration and Heat Transport in Dielectric Solids
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1997
* Robert Pohl, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1997
* USD 415,000.00

9115981 Pohl Disorder in thin metallic and dielectric films on polished
crystalline silicon substrates is investigated by measuring heat flow in the
substrate. Below several degrees K, the phonons will not be scattered in the
substrate; thus any scattering observed will be induced by the disorder in the
films. A second study focuses on the effect of dimensionality on the observation
of mechanical relaxation phenomena. Thin metallic and diekectric films will be
deposited on silicon paddle oscillators. The technique has been refined so that
it is sufficiently sensitive to detect amorphous films less than 1nm thick. One
of the questions to be answered is whether the relaxation which is
characteristic of all amorphous solids can also be observed in extremely thin
films, or only in extended, three dimensional bodies. % % % Thin films of metals
or electrical insulators play an increasingly important role in modern
technology, e.g. as components in integrated circuits in the semiconductor
industry. The current study focuses on characterizing such films by measuring
their thermal and elastic properties. A specific example are microcrystalline
films of fullerines (buckyballs). In addition to exploring their disorder, the
potential of such films for storing gases like helium or hydrogen will be
investigated. Preliminary measurements have sshown an extremely high solubility
for helium. If a similar solubility could be achieved for hydrogen, this could
have considerable practical applications for energy storage. ***