* 9115153
* Development of a Three-Dimensional Regional and Global      Model for Chemical/Dynamical Evolution of Ozone and         Nitrogen Oxides in the Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* M. Sanford Sillman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 08/31/1994
* USD 121,600.00

To date most models for global-scale photochemistry have included detailed
chemistry but have represented dynamics with a one- or two-dimensional treatment
with transport based on eddy diffusion coefficients. Models of this type
calculate photochemical production and loss terms based on concentrations of
nitrogen oxides and other species averaged over an entire latitude band. They
omit the geographical variation in nitrogen oxides concentrations which ranges
over three orders of magnitude. Models of this type cannot be used to evaluate
species concentrations in specific locations (e.g. the north Atlantic) that have
complex source-receptor relations. Even the calculation of global average
species concentrations may be flawed due to nonlinearities in the chemistry.
Photochemical production and loss rates are very different in polluted
environments or in regions of biomass burning than in remote continental or
marine locations, and rates also depend on local meteorology. Models for global
photochemical production and loss must account for these differences. This
project is designed to develop a realistic chemical module which, while capable
of simulating the complex nitrogen, hydrocarbon and ozone chemistry associated
with atmospheric pollution, will run efficiently and effectively in a global
chemical transport model. The chemical module will be developed and tested in
the GFGL global chemical transport model. Successful development of a chemical
module that realistically simulates photochemical production and loss of
nitrogen oxides and ozone and that economically operates in a global transport
model offers a number of scientific benefits. Accurate three imensional models
are an essential tool for evaluating photochemical evolution in the global
troposphere in a way that includes geographical variation and the episodic
nature of meteorological events. A three dimensional model also allows direct
comparison of results with observed species concentrations.