* 9115308
* Pattern Formation in Polymer Solidification
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Jerold Schultz, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 09/30/1995
* USD 245,000.00

The kinetics of crystallization are, in general, controlled by two competitive
phenomena, the thermodynamic driving force, which forces the crystal/noncrystal
interface forward, and the rate at which the heat of fusion and any
unincorporable components can flow away from that interface. Over a wide range
of conditions, this competition causes the interface to assume intricate
patterns. The aim of the proposed work is to develop an experimental base and a
theoretical framework by which such pattern formation in polymer systems can be
understood. This work will be directed at spherulitic crystallization in polymer
blends and at the development of microstructure in melt-spun fibers. An
experimental program for quiescent crystallization will be carried out. In this,
both constrained (by forced movement through a temperature gradient) and
unconstrained spherulite-like growth will be studied. In both cases,
microstructural parameters will be measured and compared to model predictions.
Likewise, a study will be made of the temperature and crystallite radius of
oriented polymer fibers crystallized by running them through a temperature
gradient. These will be compared to those of a model developed by the principal
investigator. It is expected that the work will also extend existing theory for
pattern development in polymers.