* 9115795
* US-Czechoslovakia Research On Solvation Of Artificial       Enzymes
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Carol Venanzi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/1995
* USD 37,643.00

This US-Czechoslovakia research project between Dr. Carol A. Venanzi of the New
Jersey Institute of Technology and Dr. Tibor Kozar of the Biophysics Institute
of the Institute of Experimental Physics, Kosice, Czechoslovakia will study the
solvent effects on the conformation of a set of artificial enzymes. Each group
will bring to this collaboration its own expertise. The Slovak investigators
will apply the random walk molecular mechanics method to the conformational
analysis of the artificial enzymes in the gas phase. Results will be used to
evaluate the technique in terms of the U.S. investigators' distance geometry and
molecular dynamics results. Both groups will study the solvent effects on
molecular conformation; the Slovak investigators will use the continuum solvent
model in conjunction with the random walk technique while the U.S. investigators
will use discrete solvent molecular dynamics simulations. The project should
yield a thorough evaluation of methods for searching for the conformational
potential energy surface of a molecule. This project in biochemistry fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents
and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.