* 9115716
* The Nature of Detritral Absorption: Relationships Between Particle Types, Chromophore Composition, and Particulate Spectral Absorption
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1994
* James Nelson, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/1994
* USD 154,070.00

This study will examine the sources of variability of light absorption by
"detrital" particles on bio-optical properties in both eutrophic and
oligotrophic waters. In a number of bio-optical studies "detrital" particulate
material has been observed to cause a pronounced increase in absorption from the
blue into the near- ultraviolet. This study seeks to better define the nature of
the dominant blue- to uv-absorbing particulate chromophores in waters with
different optical characteristics, and to identify the types of particle
(detrital and living organisms) with which such chromophores are associated.
These objectives will be addressed in combined laboratory and field
investigations. The study will utilize analytical approaches which consider the
question of detrital absorption at several levels: characterization of
individual particle types (by epifluorescence microscopy coupled to an image
analyzer); analyses of chromophore composition; measurements of particulate
spectral absorption (total and "partitioned"); and, in the field, optical
profiling. Laboratory studies will focus on the potential contribution of living
organisms (particularly heterotrophic bacteria and protozoans) to "detrital"
absorption, the chromophore composition of biogenic detritus produced by
microzooplankton, the relative importance of different biological chromophore
types, and the stability of chromophores in detrital particles. Field work
(within the South Atlantic Bight) will extend the results of the laboratory
study to compare turbid inshore coastal waters with oligotrophic waters beyond
the shelf break. The role of geopolymers versus biogenic chromophores in
detrital absorption will be assessed. The results of this study will be relevant
to several disciplines, including bio-optical oceanography and marine
photochemistry.