* 9115056
* Semiactive Control of Vibrating Systems Using               Electrorheological Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1992
* George Leitmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1992
* USD 20,000.00

This project is supported under NSF's "Small Grants for Exploratory Research
(SGER)" Program and jointly by the Structural Systems and Construction Processes
and Earthquake Hazard Mitigation Program. The objective of this project is to
explore the feasibility and applicability of electrorheological fluids (ER) as a
semiactive scheme for vibration control of structures. The approach is to use a
simple system whose control parameters, damping and stiffness coefficients,
dependent on the ER fluid, are varied in real time through control of the
electric field. a multidisciplinary approach is undertaken in which both
experimental and analytical tasks will conducted. The analytical model takes
into account the nonlinear dynamics of this problem. A nonlinear control scheme
will be developed, based on the constructive use of Lyapunov stability theory.
Such a controller is efficient in computation time (essential for real time
applications) and, in addition, handles nonlinear dynamics. ER materials
characterization and response will be measured using the experimental
arrangement. One important result of the research, in addition to demonstration
the advantages of semiactive control for structural vibration, is that it will
provide guidelines for the requirements of suitable ER fluids for such
applications. This investigation explores, for the first time, the feasibility
of ER scheme for use in controlling the dynamic structural response and assesses
its potentials in solving seismic, wind, or machine-induced vibration problems.