* 9115930
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Expert/Novice Conceptual Approaches to Calculus
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Ricardo Nemirovsky, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/29/1996
* USD 19,912.00

This U.S.-Mexico award will support a research in science education
collaboration between Dr. Ricardo Nemirovsky of the Technical Education Research
Center (TERC) in Cambridge, Massachussetts, and Dr. Ricardo Cantoral of the
Centro de Investigacion y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politecnico
Nacional (CINVESTAV) in Mexico City. The purpose of the proposed research is to
explore how students' intuitive calculus concepts as well as knowledge of their
conceptual difficulties could help in developing an enhanced approach to the
teaching of calculus. Calculus concepts are essential for understanding both the
physical sciences and many events in daily life. Preliminary results indicate
that calculus experts may retain intuitive conceptions of calculus operations
not identical with those of the formal calculus in which they are trained.
Researchers at CINVESTAV have found historically early conceptions of calculus
shared many commonalities with approaches of novice students to calculus-based
problems. By teaming up to explore both novice and expert conceptions of
calculus, the collaborators hope to better understand how calculus is
conceptualized and learned in order to develop a new model of calculus
instruction that recognizes and seeks to develop students' alternative intuitive
conceptions. The proposed cross-national collaboration will provide an efficient
coordination of research resources aimed at supporting a new approach to
calculus education.