* 9115605
* Marine Primary Producers &amp;gt;20uM from the Eastern Equatorial  Pacific:  Quantitative Estimates and Taxonomic Analysis for U.S. JGOFS
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1995
* Greta Fryxell, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/1995
* USD 193,553.00

The &gt;20 um size fraction of marine phytoplankton sinks faster than smaller
components and is an important size fraction to consider in global flux out of
the euphotic zone through the oceanic water column to the sediments. In order to
understand the abundance and biomass of the &gt;20 um phytoplankton in the
equatorial Pacific, multiple opening and closing net collections as well as
water bottle samples will be studied through this program from the seasonal
JGOFS EQPAC cruises. The priority will be to 2 seasonal time-series cruises
within 20 north and south of the equator in the area known to have the greatest
flux of material to the sediments. The netplankton will be concentrated from
different strata by a multiple opening and closing new system deployed at depths
chosen to complement a similar zooplankton sampling scheme as well as to
concentrate phytoplankton from the upper surface layers and just below the
euphotic zone in a depth region identified as very active biogeochemically. The
seasonal survey cruises will allow meridional interpretations of the larger
phytoplankton from water bottle samples and vertical net hauls. The larger
diatoms and dinoflagellates are excellent indicators of the different water
masses encountered, and the life histories and vertical zonation of the more
heavily silicified diatom species found in equatorial water will be used to test
a possible relationship between degree of silicification and growth-limiting
conditions seen in higher latitude waters.