* 9115706
* Marine Consortial N2 Fixation:  Ecological, Physiological   and Biogeochemical Implications
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1995
* USD 210,000.00

Biological N2 fixation is a biogeochemically unique and potentially important
"new" nitrogen input in chronically N deficient marine waters. Estimates of N2
fixation inputs (relative to ecosystem N demand) range from less than 2% in
planktonic to at least 20-30% in certain benthic systems. A persistent problem
with these assessments is our rudimentary knowledge of relevant and active
microbial diazotrophs (cyanobacteria, bacteria), their location and
interactions, the impacts of environmental constraints on and resultant spatial-
temporal heterogeneity of N2 fixation. In prior work Dr. Paerl and co-workers
applied immunochemical, electrochemical, cytochemical and microautoradiographic
detection and characterization of N2 fixers in diverse benthic and planktonic
habitats. Results indicate the presence and periodic preponderance of
microheterotrophic diazotrophs. This poorly recognized and underassessed group
exhibited relatively high rates of N2 fixation in oxygen-deplete surficial,
aggregate- associated microzones, including detritus, mats, reefs, biofilms and
epiphytic habitats. N2 fixation in these habitats appears to function in a
consortial manner; that is, the presence and magnitudes of N2 fixation are
reliant on specific intact microbial groups acting together in a highly
coordinated and interdependent manner. In this research, Dr. Paerl will
investigate the dynamics of and environmental controls on consortial N2
fixation. He will apply cell-specific immunochemical probing, microchemical
sensing and microautoradiography to: 1) elucidate physical, chemical and biotic
factors affecting the establishment and maintenance of consortial N2 fixation,
and 3) evaluate environmental controls on consortial N2 fixation in relation to
their impacts on "new" N inputs on larger scale ecosystem, and ultimately
global, levels.