* 9115464
* Diamond Film Deposition in a Radio-Frequency Thermal Plasma
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/1991,11/30/1995
* Steven Girshick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* George P. Peterson
* 11/30/1995
* USD 247,071.00

Among the processes which have been demonstrated for chemical vapor deposition
(CVD) of diamond films, the radio-frequency thermal plasmas approach is one of
the most promising in terms of high deposition rates, lack of contamination, and
good film uniformity over large substrate areas. The present work is directed at
development of a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms of diamond-film CVD
in an rf thermal plasma reactor and use of that understanding for definition of
process conditions which will enable high-rate deposition of high- quality
diamond films on various substrates of industrial interest. Experiments will be
conducted to characterize the effects of controllable process parameters on film
properties and deposition rates. On-line measurements of temperatures and
chemical species concentrations in the boundary layer adjacent to the substrate
and at the substrate surface itself will be obtained using optical pyrometry,
laser-induced fluorescence, and gas chromatography of samples gathered with
probes. Analyses of the deposited films will be obtained from optical
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and X-ray
diffraction. A numerical model which specifically corresponds to the
experimental reactor and conditions and which predicts film growth rates as a
function of process variables will be developed in parallel with the
experimental studies. Diamond is a superlative material with respect to
mechanical, thermal, optical, electrical, and acoustic properties. Deposition of
diamond films on various substrates (various materials and shapes) is a rapidly
growing field with a potentially huge market in such areas as machine cutting
tools, abrasives, bearings, lasers, lenses/mirrors, and microelectronic devices.
The ability to produce uniform pure diamond coatings at high deposition rates is
critical to future developments in this area. This program represents an
important step in exploration of the rf thermal plasma approach to such
production, and will additionally advance the knowledge and technology base for
other potential applications of rf thermal plasma CVD processes.