* 9115171
* Collaborative Research on the Use of Case-Control Methods   to Test Opportunity Theory
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,05/31/1994
* James Lynch, American University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 05/31/1994
* USD 25,294.00

Over the past decade, a major focus of crime etiology has been opportunity
theories of victimization. The appeal of these theories has been the idea that
opportunity, as much as criminal motivation, is a necessary element for crime to
occur. Despite the popularity of the opportunity theories, neither theoretical
nor empirical research has gone much beyond the original principles articulated
in the late 1970's. The development of the theory has been slowed by the over-
reliance on secondary data which has limited the refinement of concepts and the
testing of theoretical propositions. As a result, the theory is not sufficiently
developed to operationalize key opportunity concepts. This collaborative project
will expedite theory building by using a case-control design to refine and test
the theory as it applies to non-commercial robbery. A sample of 50 robbery
victims and 50 nonvictims will be interviewed using both structured and semi-
structured questions. Qualitative and quantitative information will be collected
on both the lifestyle and ecological contexts of each group. This information
will be used to determine (1) the situational and lifestyle circumstances
associated with becoming a robbery victim and (2) any discernable differences
between victims and nonvictims in terms of their ecological and lifestyle
patterns. The results of the research will enable refinements to the criminal
opportunity model as it applies to victimization. As importantly, it will
provide an assessment of the utility of the case-control design for testing
opportunity models. Beyond advancing theory and methodology in criminological
research, results of this research could have significant implications for crime
reduction.