* 9115509
* New Biopolymers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1993
* Charles Pidgeon, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1993
* USD 30,000.00

Lipids capable of forming head-to-tail linear polymers will be derived from
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) which contains a primary amine on the headgroup
and two long alkyl chains. PE analogs containing a terminal carboxyl group in
one or both alkyl chains are the prototype polymer forming material that will be
prepared. Head-to-tail polymerization will be via amide bond formation between
the PE head group amine and the terminal carboxyl groups (s) in he alkyl chains.
A terminal carboxyl group on one chain can form a linear bio- polymer, whereas,
a terminal carboxyl group on both PE alkyl chains will permit a branched polymer
to form (Scheme2). This new class of biopolymers will be tested for
biodegradation using phospholipase A1, phospholipase A2, phospholipase D, and
phospholipase C (see Scheme 3). The lipases enzymatically cleave phospholipids
at different sites and consequently these lipases may digest head-to-tail
phospholipids. The ability of lipases to degrade HTT polymers will depend on the
substrate specificity of each lipase. It is likely that lipase degradation will
significantly vary depending on the polymer conformation, size alkyl chain
lengths of the lipid, etc. Thus the exploratory work described in this proposal
is particularly high risk. However if we can establish feasibility , then the
potential pay off from the different polymers is enormous.