* 9115060
* U.S.-German Seminar on Bilateral Cooperation in Science and Technology; Berlin, Germany, September 9-11, 1991.
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Richard Getzinger, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1992
* USD 26,284.00

This award supports a group of twelve U.S. experts in international science and
technology (S & T) policy, and especially U.S.-German S & T relations, to
participate in a U.S.-German seminar on bilateral cooperation in S & T. The
meeting is co-organized by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation of Germany, and the German Union
of Technical and Scientific Societies. It will take place in Berlin from
September 9 through 11, 1991. The principal themes of the meeting are the
globalization of S & T, the comparison of national issues in Research and
Development funding, and addressing of public concerns about scientific
developments. The objectives of the meeting are particularly relevant to the
objectives of NSF's U.S.-German cooperative science program. They are to: 1)
Review major areas of German-American cooperative activities in S & T,
considering strengths and weaknesses in these efforts; 2) Exchange views on
future developments and new opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation;
3) Enhance relations between the two countries in S & T, focusing on pre-
competitive research; and 4) Examine U.S.-German cooperation in the context of
regional and international developments. The seminar findings and
recommendations will be disseminated widely to public and private organizations
in the U.S. and Germany, as well as other countries. These recommendations are
expected to have implications not only for the future of U.S.-German bilateral
cooperation but also for international science policy.