* 9115589
* Workshop on:  "Biotic Turnover Examined in a Phylogenetic   Context" PS/SVP Symposium at GSA; San Diego, CA;            October 23, 1991
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1992
* Sandra Carlson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1992
* USD 6,190.00

Dr. Sandra Carlson, a paleontologists at the University of California at Davis,
has organized a half-day symposium entitled "Biotic Turnover Examined in a
Phylogenetic Context". This symposium will be held in conjunction with the
annual meetings of Society of Vertebrate Paleontologists and the Paleontologic
Society in San Diego. The symposium would be the first joint meeting between
these societies in a long time, and the symposium would focus on a major
difference in the ways invertebrate and vertebrate paleontologists analyze
evolutionary patterns in the fossil record. Vertebrate paleontologists have, to
a much greater degree, embraced cladistic analysis and have labored to
reconstruct phylogenetic relationships and histories. In contrast, many
invertebrate paleontologists have censused diversity within major taxa per
geologic time interval and studied patterns of diversity change through time.
The degree to which these approaches are incompatible has been addressed by only
a few individuals, and the proposed meeting would bring the principals together
for an open discussion of the issue. This symposium will address an important
and timely controversy in evolutionary paleobiology. The results of this
symposium will find an interested audience among research scientists from
paleontology to evolutionary theory.