* 9115194
* Collaborative Project:  On The Origin of Stellar Activity:  Generation and Propagation of Wave Energy in the Surface    Layers of Late-Type Dwarfs
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1994
* Fausto Cattaneo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edward G. Schmidt
* 11/30/1994
* USD 55,000.00

Atmospheric turbulent energy degrades itself into smaller scales of motion until
its energy is converted entirely to heat, sound, and light. The convective
granular motions of the outer envelope of the Sun and other cool stars are
thought to convert their energy into acoustical energy, which is thought to play
a key role in the heating of the outer atmosphere (chromosphere) of the Sun.
Just how important this role may be is still controversial as an error has been
found in important assumptions that have been made in the past to evaluate
acoustical heating in the solar chromosphere. The Principal Investigator and his
collaborator, F. Cattaneo, plan an extensive set of computer numerical
simulations in which the excitation of acoustical energy will be computed from a
set of equations describing turbulence in a three-dimensional compressional
fluid. In addition, their experiments will include the effects of turbulence in
plasma containing tubes of magnetic flux, such as are thought to be important on
the Sun's surface. The computations of acoustic energy will be used to compute
heating from sound waves which can be directly compared to the cooling of the
chromopheres of the Sun and other stars from X-ray observations. It is
anticipated that this work will put the estimates of acoustical energy in star's
atmospheres on a firm, experimental basis and should permit estimates of the
minimum amounts of mass that stars can lose through a heating of their outer
atmospheres. In addition, it may lead to applications of the dissipation of
energy from loud acoustical sources on the Earth (e.g. jet engines).