* 9115805
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Plasma Processes in       Microelectronics Materials Preparation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Eugene Irene, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1996
* USD 14,778.00

This three-year award supports cooperative research on plasma processes in
microelectronic materials between Eugene Irene of the University of North
Carolina and Bernard Agius of the University of Paris (South), Orsay, France.
Plasmas are used extensively for the preparation of thin films for application
in microelectronic devices. In this proposal the investigators will study the
mechanisms for changes in plasmas during film growth and surface preparation and
develop methods for modifying plasmas in order to optimize desirable properties
and minimize damage during preparation of thin films. Using techniques developed
at the University of North Carolina, the U.S. investigator will focus on the
evolution of plasma damage processes, in particular, those properties which
produce damage, and the procedures which minimize damage. Samples will be
prepared and characterized using ECR (Electron Cyclotron Resonance).
Characterization of these materials will be performed simultaneously at both
Orsay and North Carolina. The project will benefit from these combined efforts,
the redundant experiments and the complementary facilities. This research will
advance our knowledge about plasma processes and its relationship to the
production of very thin films. The results of this research will be important to
the development of high performance electronic devices.