* 9115339
* The Application of a Real-Time Biophysical Model of         Photoplankton Photoacclimation in the Upper Ocean at Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Gerald Janowitz, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1995
* USD 266,482.00

A combined biophysical model developed by the principal investigators based on
the photoacclimation model of Denman and Marra (1986) and the physical model of
Price et al. (1986) will be taken to sea to run in real-time mode with the
ambient physical forcing input to the model. The real-time application will
provide a continuous view of the predicted water column while at sea, so that
physical and biological (especially photoacclimation state and photosynthetic
rate) samples can be collected at the appropriate depths to directly test model
accuracy. One version of the model will be initialized with preliminary
measurements of the required characteristics of the ambient environment using a
variety of physical sensors as well as a specially designed biological sensor. A
second version will be re-initialized physically every tow hours to ensure a
more precise prediction of the instantaneous state of the water column.
Validation data will include mixed layer depth and depth profiles rate. After
the cruise, model refinements will be developed based on subsequent reruns of
the model with recorded forcing to improve fits to the validation data by
considering changes in both model formulation and parameterization. The eventual
goal is to use the validated biophysical model as a tool to guide future field
applications of the developing photoacclimation technology and theory.