* 9115608
* Photochemical Oxygen Consumption in Marine Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Oliver Zafiriou, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/1994
* USD 301,362.00

Oxidative marine photochemical reactions are an important step in modifying and
remineralizing terrestrially-derived DOM, as shown in individual examples and
indirect mechanistic evidence. Important classes of marine-derived DOM probably
also enter this cycle. This project will quantify total photooxidative processes
as oxygen consumption, by (1) direct O2 uptake measurements where sensitivity
permits, and (2) using an indirect method sensitive enough for "blue water" and
for low-reactivity coastal water studies. The results will provide much-needed
quantitative evaluation of the role of photooxidation in oceanic carbon and
oxygen cycles. Oxygen consumption, closely related to DOM oxidation, will be
measured in coastal and estuarine waters and in organic matter concentrated by
hydrophobic adsorption. Direct O2 uptake will be measured using pulsed
polarographic electrodes with automated data acquisition. A sensitive new
indirect technique, calibrated empirically against direct measurements, will
quantify fluxes of the primary O2 -consuming species in "blue" and low-activity
coastal waters. Effects of variables such as wavelength, light intensity,
temperature, oxygen concentration, and prolonged photolysis on O2 consumption
rates will be investigated to understand their (bio) geochemical significance
and to identify the major mechanisms involved in O2 uptake/C remineralization.