* 9115617
* Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology Core Support
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1995
* Gary Dwoskin, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 01/31/1995
* USD 406,460.00

This award will provide partial core support for the continuing activities of
the Board of Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST) of the Commission on
Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources. It is supported jointly by the
Office of Special Projects in the Division of Chemistry and by the Division of
Chemical and Thermal Systems in the Directorate for Engineering. The BCST serves
as the focal point within the National Research Council (NRC) for concerns and
issues affecting chemistry in its broadest sense, including biochemistry and
chemical engineering. Board activities require extensive planning for ongoing
studies, potential studies, private sector fund raising, and broadly directed
efforts to communicate Board activities to the chemistry community. All of these
are core activities. The capacity to develop a new project while paying costs
partially or fully from core funds enhances the freedom and ability of the Board
to react responsively to important issues in the field of chemistry and chemical
technology. %%% Effective communication with the public, with other scientists
and with scientific organizations representing chemical sciences and technology
is important for maximizing the effectiveness of research in the chemical
sciences and chemical engineering. Partial support for the Board on Chemical
Sciences and Technology ensures that the National Research Council will be able
to take maximum advantage of the scientific talent available to it and be
appropriately aggressive in undertaking new tasks of importance to the
community. This support is highly leveraged with support from other Federal
agencies and the private sector.