* 9115543
* Mechanism of an Evolutionary Change in Development
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* William Jeffery, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 07/31/1995
* USD 375,000.00

Most invertebrate phyla contain species which include a larval phase in their
life cycle. In certain instances, however, there has been a tendancy to modify
or eliminate the larval phase. Little is known about how modifications in
development arise during evolutoin. In this proposal, a model system is
developed and exploited to study the mechanisms underlying evolutionary changes
in development. This model system consists of two closely related species of
ascidians that exhibit different larval forms and are capable of interspecific
hybridizatrion. Molgula oculata (the urodele species) develops a conventional
tailed (or urodele) larva, which contains brain pigment cells, a notochord, and
tail muscle cells. In contrast, Molgula occulta (the anural species) develops a
tailless (or anural) larva, which lacks brain pigment cells, a notochord, and
differentiated muscle cells. Hybrids produced by fertilizing eggs of the anural
speies with sperm of the urodele species develop a brain pigment cell and
notochrod but do not form differentiated muscle cells, suggesting that both
maternal and zygotic changes have occured during the evolution of anural
development. This proposal combines embryological and molecular approaches 1) to
characterize the maternal and zygotic changes involved in the switch from
urodele to anural larval development, 2) to examine the molecular mechanisms
responsible for lack of muscle cell differentiation in the anural species and 3)
to determine the phylogenetic realtionship of anural and urodele ascidians. The
results are expected to provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
mechanisms underying evolutionary changes in development.