* 9115432
* Synthesis and Verification of Combinational, Sequential     and Behavioral Logic
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Gary Hachtel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B Grafton
* 07/31/1996
* USD 1,958,915.00

Hachtel This a joint project with Colorado, (G. Hachtel, M. Lightner and F.
Somenzi), UC, Berkeley (R.K. Brayton, A.R. Newton and A. Sangiovanni-
Vincentelli), and Stanford (G. De Micheli). The research is a systematic
approach to synthesis and verification of logic at all levels, combinational,
sequential and behavioral, from HDL specifications. Objectives are: 1.
Performance oriented synthesis through realistic modeling and delay/area
tradeoff optimization; 2. Maximization of testability; and 3. Exploiting
partitioning to solve both chip and multi-chip module design problems. The model
is of sequential circuits based on a network of interacting, possibly non-
deterministic, finite state machines (FSMs), in which interconnections can have
unbounded delay attributes. In this model, the component machines may have
symbolic or encoded I/O and can degenerate to just combinational logic or just
latches. This enables uniform treatment of disparate objects such as RAMs,
controllers, ALUs, pipeline registers, etc. Research topics are: 1. algorithms
and theory for logic manipulation to support a variety of applications; 2.
design, synthesis, and formal approaches based on the theory and algorithms; 3.
design of embedded controllers, including hardware-software co-design; and 4.
application of logic techniques to "non-standard" areas such as machine
learning, theorem proving and combinatorics. A set of coordinated synthesis
tools is being produced. The tools operate at both high level or low level
depending on whether they operate above or below the FSM model.