* 9115773
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research: A Stirling           Micro-Refrigerator for Cold Electronics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,06/30/1992
* Lyn Bowman, Sunpower Inc
* Standard Grant
* mary chen
* 06/30/1992
* USD 49,952.00

The focus of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project is on the
development of a novel Stirling micro- refrigerator for cold electronics. This
silicon and glass machine is to be batch fabricated by micromachining techniques
developed in the silicon sensor industry. Despite its small size (approximately
one cubic centimeter), the micro- refrigerator will pump practical amounts of
heat by operating at much higher frequencies than previously thought possible
for Stirling cycle machines. Heat transfer and losses in Stirling cycle
machines, like those in other fluid dynamic systems, depend not on individual
operating quantities such as frequency or speed, but rather on dimensionless
groups of quantities, such as Reynold's number and Valensi number. These
dimensionless groups permit losses to be controlled by compensating for high
frequencies by means of small dimensions. Our analysis of a preliminary design
describes a machine that is 30 times smaller with 100 times more heat lifting
capacity than the most advanced miniature Stirling cryocooler yet described in
the scientific literature. In this research, two theoretical and practical
feasibility issues will be addressed. We will identify fundamental limitations
and opportunities by analyzing the complex heat transfer and friction factor
coefficients at high frequencies and small dimensions, and we will examine the
extent to which the proposed micro-refrigerator can be manufactured by existing
processes employed in the commercial silicon sensor industry. We will also
design a thermally and fluid- dynamically "similar" Stirling refrigerator in
larger dimensions and in conventional materials for later experimental
verification of analyses with conventional instrumentation.