* 9115880
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Reliability of Structures with Semi-Rigid Connections
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Reidar Bjorhovde, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 11/30/1995
* USD 12,650.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in civil
engineering between Reidar Bjorhovde of the University of Pittsburgh and Andre
Colson of the Ecole Normale Superieure de Cachan, France. The project addresses
a central issue in the analysis and design of steel structures; specifically,
the reliability of semi-rigid connections of structural frames. The
investigators will perform studies on a variety of structures from simple low-
rise to multistory high-rise buildings to industrial structures. The objective
is to establish criteria for determining the behavior of a variety of framework
connections. They will develop models which reflect the random nature of
connection elements. Dr. Bjorhovde brings to this collaboration significant
experience in steel research and probabilistic methods of analysis and design.
This is complemented by the French investigator's expertise in deterministic
studies on the strength and behavior of steel structures for semi-rigid
connectors. This research will provide complete data and a new methodology for
the deterministic and probabilistic behavior of semi-rigid connections. The
results could foster the use of semi-rigid connections by designers in the
United States and lead to cost- effective designs and improved safety of steel
structures.