* 9115462
* Interfacial Charge and Mass Transfer at Polymer Modified    Electrodes:  Diagnosing the Rate Limiting Step
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1995
* Stanley Bruckenstein, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* David J. Curran
* 11/30/1995
* USD 435,684.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of electrochemistry at polymer modified electrodes. Professor
Stanley Bruckenstein of the State University of New York at Buffalo and
Professor A. Robert Hillman of the University of Bristol in the United Kingdom
will collaborate on a comprehensive and definitive investigation of the kinetics
and mechanisms of interfacial mass and charge transfer at polymer modified
electrodes. Using quartz crystal microbalance techniques, these researchers will
diagnose rate limiting mass and charge transfer processes in electroactive
polymer films and study such processes as functions of polymer structure and
solution composition. The resulting correlation of polymer structure and
solution composition with mechanism of kinetic control should enable the
rational design of sensors and molecular electronic devices based on polymer
modified electrodes. This research will be conducted at the State University of
New York at Buffalo where Professor Hillman holds an appointment as Adjunct
Associate Professor of Chemistry. %%% This project will give rise to new
fundamental understandings of mass and charge transfer in complex
electrochemical systems, resolve many troubling questions which plague
electrochemistry at polymer modified electrodes, facilitate progress among many
research groups working in this technologically important area, and enable
international collaborative research in chemistry.