* 9115841
* Core Support for a Central Hybridoma Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Paul Gottlieb, University of Texas System Office
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 05/31/1995
* USD 72,507.00

This award provides transitional support for a hybridoma facility at the
University of Texas at Austin. The facility makes hybridoma and monoclonal
antibody production technology available to individual researchers at the
University, regardless of their departmental affiliation. The facility performs
immunization, cell fusion, cloning and antibody production. The individual
researchers are responsible for the specialized assays needed for hybridoma
screening and antibody characterization. Central facilities which provide both
service and expert advice with respect to specialized research techniques like
hybridoma production and the sequencing or synthesis of protein and DNA have
become important ingredients of modern research universities. The specialized
reagents they supply are needed for state of the art research in many areas of
the life sciences. The cost of the equipment and technical help necessary for
successful application of the techniques involved are generally far beyond the
financial resources of an individual research program, and often beyond the
combined resources of all users of the facility in the university, especially in
the first few years of the facility's existence. During this period, when the
user community is learning how to incorporate the new resource into its research
programs, some financial support beyond that provided by user fees is often
crucial to the facility's survival. In the past, the NSF has provided a large
measure of support for the facility; funds provided by this award will insure an
orderly transfer of financial responsibility to the University over the next few
years.