* 9115249
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Architectural Variability  and Community Organization at Xculoc, Campeche, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* James Boone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. James Boone, Mr. Christopher Dore will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will work in the Mayan village of Xculoc,
located in the Puuc region of Campeche Mexico and will collect information which
will allow him to link behavior to the built environment. The inhabitants of
Xculoc follow a traditional subsistence way of life and the results of this work
will be applicable to similar Mesoamerican villages, both past and present. Mr.
Dore will obtain aerial photographs and use them to construct a village map. All
structures will be noted. He will then list artifacts associated with each. To
complete this first part of his research, he will note the individuals who use
each structure and collect demographic information about them. This will include
such variables as socioeconomic status. The second stage of the research
consists of a behavioral analysis where a sampling technique will be employed to
relate behavior to the built environment. In this way it will be possible to
determine how these two variables interact. In Middle America, as well as many
other parts of the world, archaeologists often excavate prehistoric villages of
roughly the same scale as Xculoc. Remains of houses and other architectural
features, as well as artifacts are often recovered and with these data, an
attempt is made to reconstruct inhabitants' behavior. Assumptions are often
made: for example, it is usually stated that higher status people have larger
dwellings. However, no one has ever examined such issues in a controlled
circumstance where both behavior and structures can be directly observed. Mr.
Dore's research will begin to fill this gap. The work is important for several
reasons. Xculoc is located in a region with many large prehistoric sites and the
data Mr. Dore collects is directly relevant to their interpretation. On a
broader scale, the general methodological tools which he forges will be useful
in many archaeological situations where no direct historic link exists. Finally,
this project will assist in the training of an extremely promising young
scientist.