* 9115286
* Lattice Dynamics and Bistability of Electronically Labile   Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1995
* David Hendrickson, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 11/30/1995
* USD 345,700.00

With support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program, Dr. David N. Hendrickson of the University of California, San Diego
will undertake an investigation of electronically labile transition metal
complexes. These include systems that exhibit spin crossover (between two spin
states centered on the metal), valence tautomerism (transfer between the metal
and a coordinated ligand), and intervalence transfer in binuclear complexes
(transfer between two metal centers that have different oxidation states). These
studies will employ a broad range of Techniques for physical inorganic studies
as well as molecular mechanics calculations of substituent and lattice solvent
motions to aid in the determination of the factors affecting the rate of
electron hopping and the lifetimes of excited states. Such electronically labile
systems could provide the basis for optical switches, information storage
devices, and other electronic components. %%% Electron movement between orbitals
(states) in a variety of solid state, transition metal compounds will be
investigated. The goal of these studies is to understand the structural factors
that govern the rates of electron movement between states and the lifetimes of
higher energy (excited) states. Such an understanding is critical to
technological applications of such transition metal compounds for optical
switches, information storage devices, and other electronic components.