* 9115184
* Climate Influences Affecting Atlantic Tropical Cyclones     Variability and ENSO-QBO Relationships
* GEO,AGS
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1995
* William Gray, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 03/31/1995
* USD 320,000.00

This program consists of two research initiatives, one that focuses on
interannual and longer term variability of intense tropical cyclone in the
Atlantic region as related to West African rainfall and the other which examines
how the stratospheric QBO modulates intense equatorial convection and, thereby,
affects the longer term variability of the ENSO. The PI has shown that recurrent
variations of intense Atlantic hurricane activity are closely correlated with
concurrent variations of rainfall in the West Africa Sahel region. Ongoing
studies seek to develop a conceptual model of the physical processes linking
both hurricane variability and Sahel drought with observed global-scale climate
variations. The PI plans to examine the effects of local and regional feedback
processes in West Africa as well as larger scale factors affecting conditions in
the tropical Atlantic and in more remote areas. This portion of the program will
contribute to our understanding of the climatological variability of processes
governing the genesis,intensification, movement an longevity of Atlantic
tropical cyclones while also providing improvements to seasonal forecasts of
Atlantic hurricane activity. The second, but subordinant (about 35-40% of the
total effort) research initiative is directed to understanding an apparent
association between variable stratospheric QBO, induced wind shear and
temperature anomalies in the lower stratosphere in relation to concentrated deep
convection over the equatorial West Pacific. QBO induced convective oscillations
appears to have a strong physical link with ENSO cycle variations. This research
is important because it seeks to increase understanding of the interannual
variability of climate.