* 9115507
* Testing the Sun-Climate Connection with Paleoclimate Data and Models
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Thomas Crowley, Applied Research Corporation
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth H. Schatten
* 05/31/1994
* USD 110,000.00

The influence of solar changes on decadal-to-millennial scale climate
variability is a matter of some dispute. In a previous study the PIs correlated
atmospheric 14C records with a number of different indices of climate and found
that the correspondence was quite weak for many records. However, the
correlation was significantly higher for one record in China, and other studies
continue to provide some support for a sun-climate connection. The PIs therefore
believe it is appropriate to suggest a sun-climate connection that may be
statistically significant, but at the same time contributes only a modest amount
of the variance to centennial-scale climate change. Viewed from this
perspective, several objectives for further work suggest themselves; expanded
analysis of climate records in order to more systematically examine the sun-
climate connection, with special emphasis on trying to determine the amount of
variance explained by any significant correlations, and whether there is some
larger-scale coherence to regions of poor or good correlation. It is also
necessary to determine whether the proposed sensitivity of the climate system on
centennial-time scales is consistent with both solar and climate models. The PIs
therefore specifically propose the following: (1) refined statistical analyses
of a greater number of paleoclimate records, including climate correlations with
both 14C and 10Be solar indices; and (2) modeling the geographic response to
periodic solar constant variations. This research should help clarify the
significance of a sun-climate connection, and perhaps why some records seem to
show a connection while others do not.