* 9115733
* SGER/Collaborative Research:   Character Weighting of       Nucleotide Sequence Data
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Kelly Steele, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1992
* USD 15,091.00

Molecular data offer the possibility of helping to resolve relationships among
distantly related organism. Nucleotide sequence data have the potential to be
especially informative. But one difficulty is that there are only four character
states (representing the four different nucleotides) at any one position in the
sequence. If the molecule is changing rapidly or the time since divergence is
long, multiple substitutions at any particular position may obscure information
about relationships of the organisms. If we knew which positions were most
likely to have sustained multiple substitutions we might give that information
less weight in an analysis of relationships. This project will test one method
of determining which positions are more likely to have sustained multiple
substitutions. We will obtain sequence data of a particular chloroplast gene for
genera within one family of flowering plants and determine which nucleotide
positions vary within that family. We will then obtain sequence data of that
same gene from a number of divergent angiosperm families for which we have a
reasonable idea of the true relationships. We will use the information on
variation in nucleotide sequence within one family to help decide which
nucleotide positions provide accurate information on the relationships of the
divergent angiosperms. The similarity of results of analyses of relationships
using information on the likelihood of multiple substitution with the true
relationships will be used to evaluate the efficacy of the method.