* 9115642
* ABR:  Refining and Broadening of a Method for Estimating    Productivity of Coastal-Marine Eucaryotic Decomposer        Microbes
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Steven Newell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1996
* USD 91,906.00

The Pi of this project has devised a technique for estimating virtually the
instantaneous rate of production for eucaryotic marine microbial organo-
osmotrophs (eumycotic fungi), analogous to those previously available for
procaryotic organo-osmotrophs. This method, which is in in the Journal ECOLOGY,
represents a technological breakthrough; it promises to permit the first
estimates of fungal productivity in ocean-edge ecosystems, the portion of the
marine environment wherein fungi are likely to have their greatest impact on
carbon flow, from vascular plants to marine food webs. The technique
(abbreviated as Ac-ERG) involves measuring the incorporation of radio-labeled
acetate into the (nearly) uniquely fungal sterol, ergosterol. The Ac-ERG
technique is unseasoned; this project will polish it via experimentation with
several of its facets, to learn its strengths and weaknesses and better define
its inter-pretability and range of aptness. Two conspicuous limitations of the
Ac-ERG technique are: 1) restriction to submerged samples (much of the
decomposition of shoots of intertidal plants occurs while shoots are out of the
water); 2) in-applicability for marine oomycotes (very common protoctistan
decomposers of marine leaf litter; they do not synthesize ergosterol). This
project will attempt to try to expand the utility of Ac-ERG technique by
modifying it to remove these two constraints through: 1) presenting the radio-
acetate to the sample in a volatilized state; 2) finding neutral lipids peculiar
to oomycotes and following radio-acetate flow to them. The results of this
research should be a more powerful, more durable, and better understood means of
estimating marine eucaryotic organo-osmotrophic productivity.