* 9115135
* Construction of Laboratory, Equipment and Dormitory Space,  Addition of Weather Station
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Ronald Lawrenz, Science Museum of Minnesota
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1994
* USD 16,000.00

Ronald Lawrenz is the Director of the St. Croix Watershed Research Station,
which is located near St. Paul along the St. Croix River and operated by the
Science Museum of Minnesota. The St. Croix River is recognized under the
National Wild and Scenic Rivers Act, and is therefore an important resource for
research and public education. The Station was established in 1989 and has
undergone significant growth in the number of research projects and long-term
ecological monitoring programs facilitated by the Station. Mr. Lawrenz has
planned expansion of the Station's facilities to serve the growing use of the
Station by research scientists. These improvements include installation of a
meteorological monitoring station, and development of a clearer research
identity for the Station through workshops that bring together ecological
scientists in the regions. The planned meteorological monitoring station will
initiate a long-term data record that will be of value to countless future
research projects, ranging from wildlife management to global climate change.
The planning workshops will help to guide the future growth trajectory of the
Station. The St. Croix Watershed is an area with potential for research projects
with national and international implications. These improvements will promote
the Station's rapid growth and future success.