* 9115559
* NSF Collaboration Theory and Coordination                    Technology Grantee Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1992
* Thomas Malone, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 04/30/1992
* USD 73,690.00

This is a proposal to conduct a workshop composed of NSF grantees whose awards
were made in the two years of competitions under the Coordination Theory and
Collaboration Technology (CT2) Initiative. Three additional grantees whose work
is closely related are also included. The total number of grants involved is
twenty. The purposes of the workshop are: First, to provide a forum for the
exchange of knowledge in the form of perspectives, findings, methods and theory
for this young, interdisciplinary field. Second, to provide an opportunity for
the field to coalesce and grow. While certain subsets of the community of
researchers mingle at various professional meetings, as a whole, these
investigators do not have regular contact. The workshop provides an opportunity
to establish an identity for the area of work and to plan subsequent activities.
Third, this provides an opportunity for the research from these 20 projects to
be made more visible to the Washington based research funding and policy
community. This workshop represents a planning opportunity for the IT&amp;O
Program. The future research agenda for CT2 funding and community building is an
important part of the workshop program. The workshop is held on June 3-5, 1991
in Washington, D.C. A workshop report will be prepared and made available
through publications and in response to requests.