* 9115009
* Higher Plant Nitrate Reductase: Structure and Function of   Its Domains
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1995
* Wilbur Campbell, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 04/30/1995
* USD 161,600.00

Nitrate reductase is a central enzyme in plant metabolism. The PI will
investigate the biochemistry of the flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) domain and
the combined cytochrome b/FAD super- domain of corn NADH:nitrate reductase by
expressing them as recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli. The FAD domain has
already been expressed; it is similar to holo-nitrate reductase in biochemical
and immunochemical properties. Crystals of the recombinant FAD domain, which
diffract x-rays have recently been obtained by collaborators in Sweden and
analysis of its 3-D structure is underways. Based on the structural model being
derived, he will construct site-directed mutants of residues involved in binding
FAD and NADH. The cytochrome b/FAD super- domain, which is expected to catalyze
NADH-dependent cytochrome c reduction, will be expressed in E. coli, purified
and characterized. Purified recombinant super-domain will be supplied to
Professor Branden's group in Sweden for crystallization. Site- directed
mutagenesis will also be done on this recombinant nitrate reductase fragment.
These studies will provide new information on functional and structural
properties of nitrate reductase and may be useful for gaining insight into
cellular mechanisms involved in regulation of the enzyme's activity. %%% The
structural and functional properties of corn nitrate reductase will be
investigated by expressing portions of the enzyme in an E. coli system. Such
expression will allow production of sufficient quantities of the enzyme's
catalytic domains to allow crystallization. Crystals of the domains will be used
in X-ray diffraction studies to determine the three dimensional structure of the
functional protein. These experiments should provide significant new insights
into electron transfer properties of the enzyme which are essential to its
function in nitrate reduction.