* 9115892
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Oxygen and Hydrogen       Isotope Geochemistry of Laterites
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Jean-Pierre Girard, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/1996
* USD 12,350.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research involving Samuel
Savin and Jean-Pierre Girard of Case Western Reserve and Daniel Nahon of the
University of Aix-Marseille III. The investigators propose to apply isotopic
techniques to the study of laterites, which are tropical soils that cover a
substantial portion of the earth. The objectives of their cooperation involve
analyzing oxygen and hydrogen ratios of minerals in well-characterized, active
laterites found in Brazil. Drs. Savin and Girard bring to the collaboration
their extensive experience in stable isotope studies of clays and related
minerals in geologic materials of low temperature origin. This is complemented
by the French investigator's expertise in problems of soil genesis and
geochemistry of laterite weathering. They will jointly collect laterite samples
found in the Amazon Basin in Brazil and conduct laboratory analysis. Laterites
offer one of the best prospects to obtain information about ancient climates.
Using stable isotopes studies, the investigators propose to determine both
paleotemperatures and isotopic values of ancient rainfall as recorded in the
mineral content of the laterites. The results will be important to research into
the use of stable isotopes for paleoclimatic reconstructions. Knowledge about
these ancient climatic factors particularly rainfall in tropical regions will
advance our understanding of the link between change in equatorial rainfall
patterns and global climate change.