* 9115516
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:   Regulation of the        Infection Process by Erysiphe Graminis
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Ralph Nicholson, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 11/30/1994
* USD 11,950.00

This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative science research
project between Professor Ralph Nicholson, Department of Botany and Plant
Pathology, Purdue University, and Professor Hitoshi Kunoh, Laboratory of Plant
Pathology, Mie University, Tsu, Japan. The project will also involve Professor
Robert Hanau of Purdue and two co-investigators from Okayama University in
Japan, Professors Tomonori Shiraishi and Tetsuji Yamada. These researchers have
considerable expertise in diverse areas of plant pathology. The subject of this
project is Erysiphe graminis, a fungal pathogen of barley. Understanding the
molecular basis of disease interactions and its relationship to changes in plant
physiology is important to both the United States and Japan. Plant diseases
represent a significant problem in the production of all food and fiber crops.
This collaborative research project will expand on previous work by the
investigators to discern the molecular basis of the peptides released and their
influence on the physiology of the host as well as their importance to the
successful thigmodifferentiation of the fungus. Future research will be based on
using the information obtained to elucidate logical control strategies based on
the better understanding of the infection process and what specific sites in the
process might be considered as targets in a control scheme. It is expected that
researchers in both countries will benefit from this project because it will
result in a new understanding of plant disease caused by obligate pathogens. It
will also bring together researchers with considerable expertise in diverse
areas of plant pathological research.