* 9115310
* High Resolution Laser Spectroscopy, Visit to Develop a JointResearch Project, Travel Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1992,09/30/1993
* Gottipaty Rao, Travel Award
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1993
* USD 2,000.00

Technical Narrative: This is a travel award to finalize a research proposal in
the area of high resolution laser spectroscopy which will be submitted to the
NSF. Dr. Rao of Adelphi University will finalize a collaborative research
proposal with Dr. Srivastava of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur. The
proposed research is high resolution doppler free laser spectroscopy. This
enables the study of ultra narrow atomic/molecular lineshapes, linewidths and
small energy shifts. Many new physical phenomena which are not normally
accessible can be measured now. High precision and extreme sensitivity offered
by the high resolution Doppler free laser spectroscopy techniques will be
employed to study 1) the hyperfine structure of the atomic levels including
Rydberg states and the excitation and autoionization of atoms and molecules in
electron-ion collisions 2) atomic hyperfine structure and the nonlinear
polarization of the atoms using Degenerate Four Wave Mixing 3) of collision
cross sections, rate coefficients, collisional electronic excitation transfer
and other atomic and molecular parameters. Scope: This proposal is to support
Dr. Rao's travel to Kanpur, India where he has been invited by the Department of
Physics, Head to develop a collaborative program to utilize the sophisticated
facilities at their high resolution laser spectroscopy laboratory. This is the
only laboratory of its kind in India and has been identified by the Department
of Science and Technology as a high interest area. Dr. Rao in collaboration with
several scientists at Kanpur expects to provide the necessary expertise to
initiate the project.