* 9116355
* Natural Products Chemistry, International Symposium and U.S.Pakistan Workshop, Karachi, Pakistan, January 1992
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1993
* Philip Le Quesne, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 05/31/1993
* USD 19,950.00

Description: This project supports the participation by a group of U.S
scientists in the Fifth International and U.S.-Pakistan Symposium and Workshop
on Natural Products Chemistry scheduled to be held in Karachi, Pakistan in
January 1992. The Pakistani organizer is Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman of the H.E.J
Postgraduate Chemistry Institute at the University of Karachi. Topics to be
addressed will include: isolation, structure determination, and synthesis of
novel biologically active compounds from natural sources. Isolation methods will
emphasize techniques appropriate to the isolation of water-soluble marine
natural products as well as compounds from land organisms. Special emphasis will
be placed on synthesis as well as areas of biochemistry. It is expected that
additional support will be provided by a number of international organization to
allow for participation by scientists from South Asia and the Middle East. There
is also interest from a number of U.S industrial concerns to send
representatives at their expense to contribute to the discussions during the
workshop section, and to explore the potential for collaboration and for
developments in the technical areas of the meeting. Scope: Past workshops in
this series have resulted in high quality publications that were published in
the U.S., Germany and the Netherlands, and which serve as current references.
Several collaborative activities have resulted from these workshops. The
regional nature of the proposed 1992 meeting helps the wide exchange of
information in that important region where much of the world's medicinal plants
grow naturally. The U.S. and Pakistani organizers are among the most qualified
to direct this project.