* 9116843
* A Geometric Framework for the Exploration and Analysis of   Astrophysical Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1996
* Michael Goodrich, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 03/31/1996
* USD 539,553.00

One of the main challenges facing Astronomy today involves the organization and
analysis of the vast volumes of data that has been provided by recent advances
in computer and data-collecting technology. This project pools the efforts of
researchers in computational geometry, machine learning, and astrophysics in
order to develop and apply computational techniques to aid in the analysis and
synthesis of astrophysical data. The goal of this project is to provide the
astrophysical research community with computational techniques, embodied in a
software system called AstroExplorer, for analyzing very large, complex, multi-
parameter data sets. Specifically, this project will provide new paradigms for
performing general kinds of data extraction, data synthesis across databases,
and cluster analysis. All of the methods are based on the unifying framework of
viewing data points and the operations that act upon them geometrically. This
work extends the current database technology by providing methods for dealing
with geometrical data. This approach should significantly improve the
productivity of astronomers in their search through the oceans of data that have
been produced by the revolution in data collection and storage, for it gives
them a computational tool for extracting data that match specified geometric
patterns or can be clustered by methods based on natural and intuitive geometric
concepts.