* 9116646
* Integrated Data Exchange and Concurrent Designs for         Engineered Facilities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1995
* H. Craig Howard, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 02/28/1995
* USD 600,000.00

The architecture-engineering-construction industry is highly fragmented, both
vertically (between project phases, e.g., planning, design, and construction)
and horizontally (between specialists at a given project phase, e.g., design).
The industry needs an integrated computing environment that will support
concurrent design with fast data exchange and powerful change management
capabilities. The long-term potential benefits are improved designs, reduced
construction time, fewer design errors and omissions, minimization of costly
rework, and better life-cycle facility management. The key contributions of this
research project are methods to (1) translate and communicate project data
dynamically, overcoming both logical barriers (differing views of overlapping
data) and physical barriers (data distribution); and (2) detect, analyze, and
manage changes efficiently during concurrent design processes. These
contributions are demonstrated in prototype software that integrates systems for
CAD, drafting, analysis, and simulation along with relational and object-
oriented databases. The first software component is an integrated set of object-
oriented, multi-machine utilities to provide fast, flexible, intelligent data
translation and transfer. The second component is a set of constraint handling
and change management utilities that will support declarative definition of data
dependencies, constraints, and conflict resolution strategies. The project will
take advantage of industry links through Stanford University's Center for
Integrated Facility Engineering to develop a test bed of industrial-strength
databases to demonstrate the software.