* 9116251
* The Impact of Macrozooplankton on the Measurement of        Inorganic and Organic Nitrogen Cycling in Marine Microbial  Food Webs
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Patricia Glibert, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1995
* USD 289,059.00

Although our understanding of the complexity of the microbial food web has
increased tremendously over the past several years, there has been little
appreciation to date of the effects of trophic dynamics on the regenration of
nitrogen. Dr. Glibert's work to date leads us to believe that total nitrogen
regeneration in a natural food web is greater than that contributed by the
component popultions, and that this effect is a nonlinear function of
macrozooplankton density. This hypothesis has important consequences for how we
measure the regeneration of nitrogen, and implies that commonly-used size-
fractionation techniques may lead to underestimates of total regeneration. If
the magnitude of this bias is large, even if only under certian conditions, then
our perspective of the balance between "new" and "regenerated" nitrogen may also
be biased. In these studies Dr. Glibert and collaborators will use several
newly-developed techniques to determine the magnitude of the effect of these
interactions under a range of conditions and the major processes contributing to
this effect. The significance of these studies lies in elucidating the complex
role of macrozooplankton in controlling the regeneration of nitrogen and how
their interactions with other components of the plankton food web regulate the
flow of nitrogen.