* 9116558
* Object-Oriented Data Management for Interactive Visualiza-  tion of Scientific Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Richard Peskin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 02/28/1994
* USD 283,000.00

This project continues development of a data management strategy to organize
scientific datasets into online (i.e. "in memory") object-oriented numerical
databases. The strategy uses hashing maps based on the spatio-temporal
coordinates of the dataset itself and addresses a key issue in interactive data
analysis - maintaining a retrieval route for the user between the visual
representation on the screen and the actual data. This is accomplished through a
set of data structures that manage computed data as "computational objects" at
the nodes of a mesh organized as a single plane, a volume of planes, or a
timeseries. All references to the data are resolved into queries about the maps.
The hashing maps can be resident in a workstation while managing a database that
is itself distributed across numerous facilities. Current extensions of this
research include: (1) design of parallel storage and searching techniques of the
distributed data objects; (2) interactive user specification of filter functions
(local or non-local) for graphics and diagnostics; and (3) generalization of
management utilities to support conversion of any user specified data set to
object-oriented database organization. This research seeks to alleviate the
continuing user problem of "data glut" in science and engineering. Equally
important are its implications for the development of software strategies that
can utilize the complex and diverse hardware developments promised for the next
decade in massively parallel computing.