* 9116202
* Paleoecology, Biogeography and Systematic Paleontology of   Ordovician Sponges from Eastern Canada and Western United   States
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1998
* J. Rigby, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 05/31/1998
* USD 92,199.00

Early Paleozoic poriferans of the Western Hemisphere are among the least known
of fossil invertebrate phyla, even though they are important constituents of
reefs and inter-reef faunas, and even though North America seemed to have
functioned as a major center of sponge evolution during the early Paleozoic.
Objectives of the research are to publish monographic and synthesis papers on
major Lower and Middle Ordovician faunas, from North America, including those
from classic stratigraphic sections in western Newfoundland and from the Mingan
Islands of eastern Quebec. These faunas are from the northern part of the
Appalachian-Maritime region, which was on the southeastern margin of the
Ordovician paleocontinent. Other major faunas to be studied are from Lower and
Middle Ordovician rocks in the Confusion Range (Ibex area) of western Utah, and
from equivalent rocks of the Toquima Range-Eureka-Ruby Mountain are of central
and east-central Nevada. These latter faunas represent those from the
northwestern margin of the Ordovician North American paleocontinent. Fossil
sponges to be studied were generally collected from measured stratigraphic
sections that have been selected as type or reference sections and that
characterize broad regions in North America. Fossils will be studied using
standard thin-section and acetate-peel techniques because the originally
siliceous skeletons have been largely replaced by calcium carbonate in most
fossils in the collection. A few potentially etchable sponges have been
collected from Utah and Nevada, and they will be processed in dilute acids. Even
fragments of such sponges have proven to be important because they show skeletal
details that are often obscure in calcareous preservations. Taxonomy,
paleoecology, stratigraphic and paleogeographic distributions and potential for
biostratigraphic zonation, along with evolution of the assemblages, will be
treated in an effort to present uniform data and synthesis of the scattered and
uneven literature.