* 9116368
* Structural and Hydrological Evolution of the Central Oregon Accretionary Prism
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1994
* J. Casey Moore, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 04/30/1994
* USD 67,421.00

Accretionary prisms form along the landward side of deep sea trenches in
response to offscraping of oceanic sediments during lithospheric subduction.
Several interrelated factors influence the evolution of these thick sediment
prisms including sediment composition, physical properties, rate of
underthrusting, and fluid de-watering and migration within the offscraped
sediment. Fluid migration and expulsion play an important role in the mechanical
behavior, fluid pressure and lithification of sediments in the deformation zone.
The present renewal award will complete study of the structure of the Oregon
accretionary margin using multichannel seismic techniques. Under previous
funding, 2000 km of data was acquired along this margin. Progress in analyzing
the data has been excellent. Both the sources and migration pathways of fluids
can be imaged in the data. Continued analysis and interpretation will focus on:
1) the role of basement topography in controlling structural evolution of the
margin; 2) the nature of the fault zone along which underthrusting occurs; 3)
oblique faults which were discovered during initial analysis of the data; and 4)
the porosity of the sediment sequence. These data are the basis for a major ODP
drilling cruise to the area in late 1992.