* 9116172
* Three-Dimensional Seismic Reflection Investigation of Fluid Flow and Structural Evolution: Northern Barbados Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1998
* Paul Stoffa, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 03/31/1998
* USD 1,067,107.00

The mechanics of accretionary wedge growth along deep sea trenches is a
fundamental problem in plate tectonics. Although models exist which predict
seafloor shape, sparse information exists on the geometry of deformation
structures, strength of the accreting sediments, or shear resistance along the
base of the fault zone which controls underthrusting. It is well recognized that
fluids play a crucial role in sediment accretion, deformation, diagenesis, and
metamorphism in accretionary zones, but study of fluid pathways and timing of
dewatering have just begun. The importance of fluids in controlling the strength
of rocks and shear resistance is recognized, but little data exists to
investigate these properties spatially or temporally. The present project will
conduct a high-resolution three- dimensional seismic reflection survey of the
accretionary prism offshore Barbados in the zone of initial off-scraping,
underplating and deformation of sediments. The objectives are to characterize
the structural geometries, and identify fluid pathways in the frontal part of
the accretionary prism. The seismic data will be constrained by an extensive
suite of other geophysical data, as well as the results of previous ocean
drilling in the region. Results from this project will be used in planning
additional drilling in Barbados.