* 9116246
* U.S.-France Cooperative Science Program: Simulation of      Airflow over Complex Terrain Using PYREX Data
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1996
* USD 14,010.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in mesoscale
meteorology between Dale Durran of the University of Washington and Evelyne
Richard and Phillipe Bougeault of the University Paul Sabatier in Toulouse,
France. The U.S. and French investigators have developed predictive models for
air-flow over mountains. Although it has been recognized that mountains exert a
significant influence on atmospheric circulations, existing forecast models and
global climate models contain deficiencies in representing the effects of
mountain geography on air circulation. The specific objective of their
cooperation is to increase understanding of the interaction between mountains
and synoptic- scale air circulation, with particular emphasis on gravity-wave
drag. In order to achieve this goal, the investigators need to better understand
the limitations of the current models and improve their flexibility. Dr.
Durran's nonhydrostatic model successfully simulates mountain waves in a variety
of regional environments, but has not been used to simulate the interaction
between gravity waves and larger scale air flow. The French investigators bring
to this collaboration their hydrostatic models for larger scale air flow. Both
models will be to simulate real and idealized cross mountain flows. Their
investigations will be aided by unique observational data recently collected in
the Pyrenees region. These complementary efforts will result in models which are
better able to predict the effect of gravity-wave drag and in turn, weather
forecasting in mountainous regions.