* 9116356
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Magnetic Fields in Star    Forming Regions
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Richard Crutcher, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1995
* USD 13,450.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in galactic
astronomy involving Thomas Troland, University of Kentucky, Richard Crutcher,
University of Illinois, and Ilya Kazes at the Observatoire de Meudon in France.
The investigators propose to continue their successful research on magnetic
field strengths in the evolution of interstellar clouds and star formation.
Magnetic fields have emerged as a mechanism for explaining star formation and
other cosmic phenomena. The only known technique for measuring magnetic field
strength is detection of the Zeeman effect in radio frequency spectral lines.
The U.S. and French investigators will continue their survey observations of the
OH Zeeman effect of dark clouds using the VLA (Very Large Array), Green Bank and
the Arecibo telescopes. They will extend their research to denser regions by
observing the Zeeman effect in the 3-mm lines of CN using the IRAM 30-m
telescope. This experiment will allow direct probing of magnetic fields at a
crucial stage in star formation when core fragmentation and collapse are taking
place. Observations with the IRAM telescope is essential since its collecting
area is sizeable and will allow for observations in denser regions of space. The
project will benefit from French expertise in observation and access to the IRAM
facility in Europe. Through the observational program, the investigators will be
able to test fundamental theories of magnetic fields in interstellar clouds and
enhance our understanding of the role of magnetic fields in star formation.