* 9116782
* Graduate Engineering Education Program for Women and        Minorities at Drexel University
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1991,06/30/1999
* Nihat Bilgutay, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 06/30/1999
* USD 621,000.00

The major thrust of the Drexel University program focusses on the recruitment
and retention of the target groups which are currently underrepresented in the
graduate engineering fields. A multi- pronged approach is utilized to inform and
attract the target groups into the PhD program through media advertising in
appropriate journals, presentations at engineering education conferences, and
through personal contacts with faculty and professional staff in engineering
education across the U.S. To assure the continued success of the program,
contacts will also be established and maintained with the undergraduate
engineering programs and regional high schools through existing outreach
programs at Drexel. There is a mentor system to create an educational, social
and emotional environment conducive to fostering successful acclimation and
advancement of the recruited students. The object is to oversee and assist the
progress of the students from enrollment to employment. An optional Industrial
Internship Program will be developed to encourage industrial participation, and
to increase the financial resources available to the students. The NSF funds are
viewed as seed money, namely for establishing the program and for leveraging
external funds through industrial, private, state and University sources to
sustain the program on a regular basis.