* 9116585
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research:  Fundamental Heat Transfer Studies in Polymer Processing and Manufacturing
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Satish Ramadhyani, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 09/30/1994
* USD 19,730.00

This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative research project
between Professor Raymond Viskanta, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue
University, and Professor Yasuo Kurosaki, Director of the Heat Transfer
Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering for Production, Tokyo Institute
of Technology. Professor Satish Ramadhyani of the Department of Mechanical
Engineering at Purdue will also be involved in the project. The goal of the
project is to develop basic understanding of both polymer flow in molds and the
mechanisms of residual stress generation within molded polymers during injection
molding processes required for production of precise molded polymer components.
This is to be achieved by use of in situ, noninvasive experimental techniques to
obtain test data, modeling of the processes, and development of computational
techniques for simulating real systems. The theoretical models will be developed
at Purdue to simulate processing of polymers during injection molding.
Predictions of these models will be compared with experiments carried out on the
apparatus at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. The U.S. and Japanese
researchers will work together to validate the mathematical models developed at
Purdue using experimental data obtained in Tokyo employing non-intrusive optical
(birefringence) techniques for making temperature and flow measurements during
the cooling stage of a polymer being molded. This is a unique method that has
the potential of determining the frozen layer thickness, melt front position,
shear stress, and temperature fields without interfering with the process.