* 9116499
* Active Site Structure and Function of Copper Enzymes in     Denitrification
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1992,07/01/1993
* David Dooley, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/01/1993
* USD 31,040.00

The principal goal of the proposed research is a fundamental understanding of
the structural and catalytic roles played by the metal ions and protein moieties
in nitrite and nitrous oxide reductases. Extensive spectroscopic and chemical
studies on these reductases are proposed. These classes of multicopper redox
enzymes provide new opportunities to investigate structure/function
relationships in copper-containing enzymes that are involved in denitrification.
Dr. Dooley will also address questions concerning the possible regulation of
theses enzymes by intermediates in the denitrification pathway. In addition a
partially copper-depleted form of N2O reductase, isolated from a mutant strain
of Pseudomonas stutzeri, will be thoroughly characterized. The spectroscopic
properties of Cu(II) will be exploited as a built-in probe of the active site by
variable temperature X-ray absorption spectroscopy circular dichroism, magnetic
circular dichroism resonance Raman, and EPR spectroscopy. Dr. Dooley plans to
develop a N2O-specific electrode assay for activity which would facilitate
kinetics and mechanism studies of N2O reductase. Effects of exogenous ligands
(inhibitors, denitrification intermediates, substrate analogs) and pH on the
spectral properties and kinetics of the copper reductases will also be
investigated. Integrating results from spectroscopic experiments and mechanistic
studies will permit new structure/reactivity/function correlations among
multicopper oxidases and reductases to be formulated. Understanding the
relationships between the structures and mechanisms of nitrite and N2O
reductases is expected to play an essential role in developing rational
strategies to control and exploit biological denitrification.