* 9116211
* U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research: Geodetic investigation of oblique plate convergence in Sumatra
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,03/31/1994
* Yehuda Bock, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 03/31/1994
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Yehuda Bock, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, to pursue with Dr. Jacub
Rais, Indonesian National Coordination Agency for Surveys and Mapping
(BAKOSURTANAL), for 24 months, a study of the tectonics of the Indonesian
archipelago, using measurements of the Global Positioning System (GPS). They
will study deformation associated with oblique plate convergence in Sumatra.
Specifically, they will examine the mechanism of decoupling of the oblique slip
into normal subduction and shear slip on faults parallel to the convergent
margin by measuring the deformation both southwest and northeast of the Sumatran
fault zone. The long-range goal of this project is extend GPS measurements
across the entire Indonesian archipelago, concentrating on specific tectonic
problems such as the distribution and rates of slip associated with arc-
continent collision in the Banda arc in eastern Indonesia. In the Indonesian
region, many tectonic processes that result in mountain building, continental
accretion, destruction of continents, displacement of ophiolites, development of
subduction zones, arc polarity reversal, basin closure, etc. are now active.
This project will provide U.S. scientists a unique opportunity to observe such
phenomena. Because Indonesia lies in a zone of high seismicity and volcanic
activity, monitoring of crustal deformations has potential humanitarian and
economic value as well. The U.S. and Indonesian collaborators are highly
respected scientists who have records of successful research in the field of
this project. The present project will allow the collaborators to combine their
talents and interests for mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit. Primary support for this project is provided by NSF Grant No.
EAR8817067, the Indonesian government, and the World Bank.