* 9116562
* Determination of Band Oscillator Strengths of Atmospheric   Molecules from High Resolution VUV Cross Section            Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1995
* Kouichi Yoshino, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 10/31/1995
* USD 384,800.00

Vacuum Ultraviolet (VUV) absorption cross section measurements of the
atmospherically important molecules nitric oxide and molecular oxygen will be
performed with a recently constructed VUV Fourier transform spectrometer that is
unique in achieving the very high resolution necessary for the determination of
absolute absorption cross sections of molecular bands possessing distinct
rotational structure. In the spectral region 175-205 nm, the penetration of
solar radiation into the atmosphere is controlled by the absorption of the
Schumann-Runge bands of molecular oxygen and some fraction of the transmitted
radiation is available to photodissociate NO in bands below 192 nm. The nitric
oxide cross sections will be measured in the wavelength below 192 nm. The
molecular oxygen cross section will be measured in the wavelength region 175-180
nm where the lines of the Schumann-Runge bands are sharp. In the stratosphere,
photodissociation in the Herzberg continuum in the spectral region 200-240 nm,
becomes the principal path for molecular oxygen dissociation. Above 242 nm, the
Herzberg I bands, which are directly related to the Herzberg continuum, are very
sharp. The absorption cross sections of the Herzberg I bands will be obtained at
temperatures of 300K and the band oscillator strengths will be determined by the
direct integration of the absolute cross sections.