* 9116215
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Semiclassical Methods forHeavy Ion Collisions
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Michael Guidry, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 11/30/1994
* USD 13,013.00

This award from the U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program supports
collaborative research in theoretical physics to be conducted, in the U.S. by
Dr. Michael W. Guidry of the University of Tennessee, Knoxville and Dr. John O.
Rasmussen of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and, in Brazil by Drs. Raul
Donangelo and Filipe Canto of the Federal University, Rio de Janeiro and Dr.
Mahir Hussein of the University of Sao Paulo. The focus of the research will be
to use semiclassical methods to gain a theoretical description of heavy-ion
collisions when one of the collision partners is deformed. The work could lead
to a practical and reliable tool to interpret present and future heavy-ion
experiments. The project will extend previous calculations to a more
comprehensive treatment of heavy-ion transfer reactions including the treatment
of two- and one-particle transfer reactions, and will incorporate new ideas in
nuclear structure such as the Fermion Dynamical Symmetry Model. The formalism
will permit study of a substantial body of high-spin transfer data for which
there are presently few theoretical calculations, and should prove valuable for
understanding transfer data that will become available with GAMMASPHERE and
EUROBALL. The project brings together a group of internationally known
physicists who have collaborated well in the past.