* 9116298
* Evaluating the Effects of High Particulate Fluxes on        Chemical  Processes Occurring at the Amazon River/Ocean     Boundary (Renewal)
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1994
* David DeMaster, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/1994
* USD 171,461.00

This proposal is a renewal for the existing grant entitled "Evaluating the
Effects of High Particulate Fluxes at the Amazon River/Ocean Boundary," which is
part of the AmasSeds (A Multi- Disciplinary Amazon Shelf SEDiment Study)
Project. Three research cruises to the Amazon shelf (August 1989; February,
1990; May 1990; and November, 1991) have been completed successfully. This time
series approach to understanding the chemical, physical, and geological
processes active at the Amazon River/ocean boundary enables the investigators to
resolve the variable influences of river discharge, tidal resuspension, local
wind stress, and the intensity of coastal currents on particle-associated
processes. The specific topics of research described in this proposal include:
1) evaluating the effects of suspended sediment concentration on the biological
uptake and regeneration of nutrients and carbon; 2) the release of radium
isotopes to the water column from particles and sediments and their use in
tracking seabed/water column exchange processes; 3) scavenging of particle-
reactive elements from continental shelf waters; 4) uranium cycling during
river/ocean mixing; and 5) tracing biological and physical processes on the
Amazon shelf based on the distribution of carbon and stable isotopic data.
Measurements of radioactive tracers in the water column and seabed enable
investigators to characterize many of these processes on a variety of time
scales (ranging from days to hundreds of years). This proposal requests support
for two additional years of research, which will be used to complete data
analyses, work up individual data sets, model the initial results, and integrate
the field measurements with the other research groups taking part in the
project.