* 9116490
* Isolation and Characterization of Genes Encoding Cytokinin  Metabolic Enzymes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Machteld Mok, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1995
* USD 230,000.00

Cytokinins are a group of plant hormones mediating cell division and
differentiation. The mechanisms controlling the appropriate level and activity
of cytokinins are not well understood. The long term goal of the research
project is to identify regulatory elements exerting such controls in the genus
Phaseolus. The approach is based on the identification of genetic differences in
the metabolism of zeatin (a naturally occurring cytokinin) in embryos which led
to the isolation of zeatin-specific metabolic enzymes. The enzymes are species-
spedific and the products of the enzymatic reaction display high biological
activity. Selective expression of such enzymes may represent important mechanism
regulating cytokinin activity. Therefore, genes encoding these enzymes may be
appropriate targets for molecular and physiological studies. Work proposed
herein will center on isolating and analysing genomic sequences and full length
cDNAs of the genes with emphasis on mechanisms regulating tissue specific
expression and substrate specificity. The presence and expression of these genes
in other representative dicots and monocots will also be determined. Enzymes
purified by immunoaffinity chromatography will serve as antigen to generate
monoclonal antibodies recognizing the substrate binding epitopes. Antibodies
antigenic to zeatin epitope(s) will be employed to isolate and purify other
zeatin metabolic enzymes and possibly molecules involved in cytokinin action.
The proposed research is important in formulating a model regarding the genetic
and developmental controls of hormone metabolism in higher plants.