* 9116268
* Dynamic Scheduling, Synchronization and Concurrency Problemsin Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Nicholas Bambos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Tatsuya Suda
* 02/29/1996
* USD 293,937.00

The principal investigator (PI) will study dynamic and stochastic scheduling
(allocation), synchronization (coordination), and concurrency aspects of
communication systems, especially those related to networking, multi-accessing,
and service integration. He will acquire a basic theoretical understanding of
how these issues emerging at the level of elementary operations, affect the
macroscopic performance of communication networks. Based on that he will address
the design (synthesis) of efficient operational schemes (protocols, policies)
for the optimization of networks with respect to criteria concerning throughput,
message delays, blocking probabilities, fairness, load balancing, and
reliability. In addition, the PI will create a unified framework emphasizing
rigorous mathematics for studying basic prototypical models, extracted from
various practical situations involving scheduling and synchronization in
communication networks. New powerful queueing models will be developed to
capture essential features of concurrency and synchronization, extending
classical queueing theory and allowing the systematic analysis of the dynamics
and performance of protocols. Real-time scheduling and resource allocation
schemes will be studied in a natural stochastic framework. In cases where the
relevant optimal scheduling algorithms are of high complexity, the focus will be
on exploring simple (low complexity) scheduling schemes of operations to improve
the performance. Other aspects of dynamic scheduling will also be examined, if
necessary by simulation.