* 9116071
* Spatial Articulation of Fish Growth Rate Potential: The     Integration of Bioacoustics and Bioenergetics
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Stephen Brandt, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1994
* USD 210,000.00

This investigation introduces a new concept, fish growth rate potential, which
is derived from the integration of spatially articulated field data on prey
sizes, prey density and the physical environment with a species-specific
physiological-based model of fish growth rate. The approach combines the
strengths of bioacoustics to measure fish density and size quantitatively and of
bioenergetics models to accurately simulate fish growth. The result is a two-
dimensional, nonlinear biophysical model of fish growth and system production.
This research will develop the growth rate potential parameter mathematically
and evaluate the sensitivity and spatial statistics of fish growth rate
potential on a diel and seasonal basis assuming different ecological hypotheses
on predator behavior (optimal foraging, thermoregulation, behavioral
bioenergetics). The Chesapeake Bay will be used as a study site because of the
availability of an extensive database well-suited for these analyses. Since
growth rate potential links biology and physics within a spatially-explicit
framework, it has widespread application for predicting how changes in the
patterning or absolute scaling of the environment might affect production
dynamics of higher trophic levels. It is anticipated that the concept of growth
rate potential will evolve and provide a stimulus for the development of
conceptual analogs.