* 9116866
* Graduate Engineering Education for Women, Minorities and/or Persons with Disabilities
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1998
* Dorothy Reed, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Win Aung
* 02/28/1998
* USD 1,080,000.00

The University of Washington project will develop recruiting, retention and
funding programs to substantially increase the number of underrepresented
minorities, women and persons with disabilities entering graduate study leading
to doctoral degrees in engineering. A special emphasis on disabled students,
with strong support from the University of Washington Disabled Students Office,
will improve our ability to recruit and attract persons with disabilities. This
project will significantly expand the amount of financial assistance available
to the targeted groups, while intensifying the recruiting and retention efforts
required to attract, retain and graduate more PhD students. An extensive
research program will serve as one of the key elements of the recruiting and
retention strategies. The multi-disciplinary efforts will serve as a magnet in
the attraction of outstanding graduate students to our nationally recognized
research centers and programs. NSF funding will provide initial student support,
while the College of Engineering develops sustaining fellowship and scholarship
support to perpetuate the program on a long-term basis. Another key element of
our recruiting and retention strategy is the five-year grant period, rather than
the total of eight PhD students that could be funded by NSF funds alone. This
will be accomplished by: the use of tuition waivers; and aggressive and quick
transfer of candidates from NSF support to institutional support during the
grant period.