* 9116240
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Laser Spectroscopy and     Quantum Interference Effects in Small Molecules
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Robert Bernheim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 10/31/1995
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support collaborative research between Robert Bernheim,
Pennsylvania State University, and Paola Bicchi, University of Siena, Italy.
This project is directed toward three areas of molecular and laser spectroscopy
that have evolved out of previous contacts with scientists from Pisa, Siena, and
Florence. The objectives of the research collaboration are threefold: laser-
induced shifts in chemical equilibrium; molecular spectroscopy of vapors of the
Group III Elements: Ga, In, Tl; and cooperative fluorescence studies of
translational recoil of photodissociation products. The equilibrium shift
studies are of fundamental importance as they provide unambiguous evidence for
the use of lasers to "guide" chemical reactions. The collaboration will seek to
extend this remarkable effect to chemical systems other than alkali metal
vapors, possibly even to a stabilized vapor of H-atoms. The proposed studies of
molecules such as In2 will reveal the potential of these systems for active gain
media for visible and uv eximer lasers. Cooperative fluorescence studies will
provide an alternative method for the investigation of translational energy
partitioning resulting from photodissociation processes. The major benefit of
the collaboration is the sharing of equipment -- a Bomem Fourier transform
spectrometer at Penn State; a tunable mode-locked laser system and proper
detection apparatus for quantum beat experiments in Florence; and tunable,
pulsed and CW dye lasers in all locations where researchers with special skills
and expertise make use of special variations. One of the major benefits of this
work will be the stimulation of international activity in the field of laser-
guided chemistry. Furthermore, the cooperative fluorescence method is a
powerful, but unused, tool for studies of molecular dynamics.