* 9116770
* Processing Heterogeneous Data In Scientific Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Arie Segev, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Y. T. Chien
* 08/31/1996
* USD 218,953.00

This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award. Many important
information systems applications require access to data stored in multiple
autonomous databases. These databases often use different hardware, software,
database management systems and are distributed among various geographical
locations. Heterogeneity among the databases, in the systems, semantics and data
distribution poses challenge to the conventional data retrieval techniques. In
this project, key issues related to the processing of heterogeneous data are
investigated. In particular, the focus of the work is on joining of the records
of the same instances across disparate databases. A new operator, the Entity
Join, has been defined. It uses the common attributes present in the joining
data to probabilistically estimate the correctness of the result. The model is
extended to cover all types of data heterogeneity problems including temporal
heterogeneity. Additional operators are defined to enhance the data manipulation
capability of the model, and their optimization explored. This project also
examines the use of rules in the process of matching objects. The different
algorithms are first simulated to assess their performances, and then prototypes
built to further evaluate the optimization concepts. The results of this work
will facilitate data analysis and exploration in many statistical and scientific
applications including census, surveys, epidemiology, biology, astronomy and
other areas.