* 9116582
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Organization of the       Lexicon and Semantic Operation Based on Active Constraints
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1995
* James Pustejovsky, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1995
* USD 15,826.00

This three-year award supports U.S-France cooperative research in computational
linguistics between James Pustejovsky of Brandeis University and Patrick Saint
Dizier of the University Paul Sabatier in Toulouse. The project addresses
research in the semantics of word meaning in natural language processing. The
objective is to combine formal and theoretical work on the representation of
word knowledge and then to define a computational framework for expressing this
knowledge. Dr. Pustejovsky brings to this collaboration experience in the theory
of lexical semantics and natural language representation. His recent research
has provided a contemporary framework for research on lexical knowledge. This is
complemented by the French group's innovative methodology for applying logic
programming to natural language processing problems. Lexical semantics, one of
the most difficult areas in natural language processing, requires effective
computational tools. This project addresses that problem by combining the
complementary approaches of the U.S. and French investigators. The results will
advance our knowledge of computer linguistics and contribute to the resolution
of several practical problems in this field: information retrieval, interface
between humans and computers, machine translation, dictionary design and
electronic document dissemination.