* 9116375
* Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Computational Algebra -May 1992
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1993
* Phillippe Loustaunay, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1993
* USD 4,900.00

The theory of Groebner bases is the underlying theoretical base of the
computational tools being developed in commutative and noncommutative ring
theory. Important results have been achieved in commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry, including algorithms for polynomial factorization and
computation of the greatest common divisor of polynomials. There are algorithms
for the primary decomposition of an ideal, the construction of projective
resolutions and syzygies, the codimension of an ideal, the Poincare and Hilbert
series, and the determination of ideal membership. For noncommutative rings,
Groebner bases are becoming increasingly relevant. There are complications here
since free algebras and path algebras are not Noetherian in general. Recently,
algorithms have been designed for finding syzygies, ideal membership, and
computation of the Cartan determinant. The theory itself has led to interesting
questions about algorithms and their implementations as programs. Theoretical
questions on termination as well as effectiveness are being studied. This
project will support a Conference on Computational Algebra to be held in May
1992 at George Mason University. The conference will focus on some theoretical
and practical applications of computational algebra, including topics in
commutative and noncommutative ring theory which utilize Groebner bases, as well
as applications to other fields.