* 9116547
* Parallel Real-Time Collection and Processing of Scientific  Data Through Extensible Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Alain Jouchoux, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 09/30/1994
* USD 197,816.00

This work contributes to scientific data processing technology through the
development of an extensible toolkit of database operators to capture, clean and
manipulate scientific data, and through the study of mechanisms for interactive,
real-time scientific processing, such as parallelization and flow control. This
work builds on the experience of the research team in gathering and processing
spacecraft data and in developing extensible database technologies as part of
the Volcano project. The team includes a graduate student in computer science
who has worked extensively at the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics
(LASP) of the University of Colorado on spacecraft operations and data
management projects. The focus of this project is on the development of new
database technologies which can be accomplished by combining real-time and
database query processing techniques. The key results of this work will include:
(1) techniques for enhancing the responsiveness of database query operations,
(2) tools to enable a scientist to capture and process huge amounts of
scientific data such as those received from a spacecraft, and to process these
data interactively, and (3) an extensible toolkit of database operations (such
as capture, clean, relate, manipulate, and display scientific data sets) to
facilitate analysis of the complex data sets required to understand complex
scientific issues such as global ozone depletion.