* 9116620
* U.S.-Japan Seminar: Gene Regulation and Expression in Mitochondrial Disease and the Aging Process/December 1992/ Honolulu, Hawaii
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1993
* Roderick Capaldi, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 03/31/1993
* USD 13,440.00

This award will support the participation of ten U.S. scientists in a U.S.-Japan
Seminar on Gene Regulation and Expression in Mitochondrial Disease and the Aging
Process. The seminar, which will be held December 7-12, 1992, in Honolulu,
Hawaii, is being co-organized by Professor Roderick Capaldi, Institute of
Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, and Dr. Takayuki Ozawa, Department of
Biomedical Chemistry, Nagoya University. The seminar will focus on the latest
developments in basic research on mitochondrial biogenesis, combining the
interests of scientists who study the basic process of oxidative phosphorylation
with those who study mitochondrial dysfunction in a wide variety of diseases and
in the aging process. In addition to U.S. and Japanese scientists, the seminar
will include researchers from Australia. This seminar follows a successful
seminar in December 1987. The seminar topics are: structure and replication of
mitochondrial DNA, regulation of mitochondrial molecular biology, biochemistry
of mitochondrial enzyme complexes, bioenergetics and relationship to
mitochondrial disease, nature of mitochondrial mutations associated with
disease, mitochondria and the aging process, and treatment of mitochondrial
diseases. The goal of the seminar is to encourage the sharing of expertise,
which could lead to collaboration in this important area of research.