* 9116390
* Collaborative Project:  Large Scale Structure at High       Redshift.
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1994
* Arlin P. Crotts, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Morris L. Aizenman
* 04/30/1994
* USD 119,325.00

How did the universe, which apparently began with an almost perfectly uniformly
expanding Big Bang, evolve into the present exceedingly complex and granular
structure of galaxies, clusters and superclusters of galaxies, and vast voids?
Theories to account for this are best tested by observations of the changing
clustering of objects over exceedingly great distances and look back times
toward the beginning. Only quasars are bright enough to permit this, but they
are too few in number to define the early structure. Far more numerous absorbing
objects exist between us and the distant quasars. Using an existing multifiber
spectrograph (to be in the second year of the grant) and the McDonald
Observatory 2.7 - meter reflector to detect and analyze the redshifts of these
absorbing clouds along lines of sight to the quasars, the clustering of large
numbers of otherwise undectable high redshift objects can be described, thereby
directly studying the evolution of large-scale structure in the universe. The
effects of ionizing flux from quasars upon their local neutral hydrogen
environment will also be measured, and the incidence will be determined. This is
the second part of a two part collaborative project. Dr. Smith has worked for
many years in extragalactic studies. Dr. Crotts, the co-investigator, is a
leading young instrumentalist.