* 9116301
* A Comprehensive Evaluation of Herbivory by in Situ          Assemblages of Pelagic Protists
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1991,10/31/1994
* Barry Sherr, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 10/31/1994
* USD 215,695.00

One of the most urgent questions in biological oceanography at present is that
of the fate of small phototrophs in pelagic food webs. The prevailing concept,
based on both theoretical considerations as well as laboratory and field data,
is that phagotrophic protists are the dominant predators of < 5 um sized cells,
and as well may consume a significant portion of the biomass production of
larger phytoplankton. Most previous studies of protistan herbivory have involved
either laboratory experiments with single species, primarily ciliates, or
estimation of total microzooplankton grazing pressure on natural phytoplankton
assemblages. A more complete picture of the magnitude and details of the
component parts of this link in pelagic food webs in needed, especially with
respect to the role of phagotrophic flagellates. Dr. Sherr and collaborators
will investigate herbivory by pelagic flagellates and ciliates in the natural
planktonic assemblages of Oregon coastal waters. Questions addressed will
include: 1) Do phagotrophic protists have a greater grazing impact on <5 um
sized phytoplankton than on cells > 5 um? 2) What is the relative grazing impact
of flagellates versus ciliates on phytoplankton? 3) Do rates of protistan
herbivory show consistent day/night differences? 4) Do thresholds of prey
density exist? 5) Does predation affect the cell division rates of
phytoplankton? 6) Do phagotrophic protists show selective feeding among various
phytoplankton taxa in situ?