* 9116988
* Spatio-Temporal Database Management for                     Global Change Research
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1994
* Michael Gennert, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 09/30/1994
* USD 330,906.00

The goal of this research is the design and development of an integrated system
for the management of very large scientific databases, cartographic/geographic
information processing,and exploratory scientific data analysis for global
change research. The system will represent both spatial and temporal knowledge
about natural and man-made entities on the earth's surface, following an object-
oriented paradigm. It will apply (user- modifiable) procedures to perform
operations on the data, including comparison, derivation, prediction,
validation, and visualization. It is an effort to extend the database technology
with an intrinsic class of operators, which is extensible and responds to the
growing needs of scientific research. Of significance is the integration of many
diverse forms of data into the database, including cartography, geography,
hydrography, hypsography, images, and urban planning data. Equally important is
the maintenance of metadata, that is, data about the data, such as coordinate
transformation parameters, map scales, and audit trails of previous processing
operations. This project will impact the fields of geographical information
systems and global change research as well as the database community. It will
provide an integrated database management testbed for scientific research, and a
testbed for the development of analysis tools to understand and predict global
change.