* 9116728
* I/UCRC for High-Speed Image/Signal Processing (CHIP)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1996
* Leonard Ferrari, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1996
* USD 419,272.00

The University of California at Irvine and the University of California at
Santa Barbara propose to establish an NSF Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for High-Speed Image/Signal Processing. The Center will focus on
fundamental approaches to high-speed computation and will include the
development of algorithm, computer software, computer architectures, and
electronic circuits for industrial applications. The Center will initially cover
six principal research areas: 1) Digital Signal Processing Algorithms, 2)
Parallel Architecture, 3) Pattern Recognition and Image Understanding, 4)
Automatic Circuit Design, 5) Image Formation and Sensors, and 6) Robotic
applications. The Center plans to support industries in several areas including
Robotics and Automation, Non-destructive Evaluation, Remote Sensing, Medical
imaging etc. Both the University of California at Irvine and the University of
California at Santa Barbara have an outstanding research record in high-speed
image/signal processing and the combined resources of the two universities will
provide an outstanding interdisciplinary environment to attack the problems that
will be addressed by the Center. The Program Manager recommends $100,000 for the
first year of a five-year continuing award to be divided equally between the two
universities participating in the Center. Near the end of each 12 month period
the Program Manager and/or the Director of the Engineering Centers Division will
review the progress of the Center on a number of criteria, including the
following: (1) the extent to which the university-industry interaction and
collaboration is developing; (2) the extent to which the support base is
expanding; (3) the extent to which a robust research program is developing. If
the review is satisfactory, the Program Manager will recommend support of the
next period of this continuing award.