* 9116248
* Acquisition of a High Efficiency, High Resolution Gamma     Ray Spectrometer
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1992
* Douglas Hammond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/1992
* USD 39,827.00

Naturally-occurring radionuclides of cosmogenic origin and of the U-Th decay
series, as well as man-made nuclides produced by atmospheric weapon testing and
nuclear reactors, have proven to be valuable tracers for geochronology and
geochemical studies. At the University of Southern California, the application
of these isotopes is being actively studied for solving oceanographic, geologic
and environmental problems. In many cases, the research has been carried out in
collaboration with scientists at several other institutions. The measurements
rely heavily on two work-horse instruments: y-ray and &amp;-ray spectrometers.
Whereas the &amp;-spectrometer has 16 detectors to serve the basic need in the
alpha-counting area, there is only one detector for y-ray spectrometric work.
The y-ray detector, seven years old, has shown signs of wear-and-tear as a
result of heavy use. The present gamma counting system not only is heavily taxed
beyond its capacity, but also limits the ability to make measurements in the
field and on short-lived isotopes. This action provides funds to purchase an
additional y-ray spectrometer, equipped with a high efficiency, high resolution
well-type intrinsic germanium detector, to alleviate this problem. The
acquisition will also enable a substantial reduction of man-power in future
analyses to be realized and benefit programs both at USC and at the institutions
of our collaborators.