* 9116523
* Dissertation Research: Source Analysis and Hydration Dating of Post-Formative Period Obsidian Artifacts From the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1993
* USD 8,480.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Benfer, Professor of Anthropology at the
University of Missouri, Mr. Michael Elam will collect data for his doctoral
dissertation. During the course of fieldwork in 1991 Mr. Elam collected obsidian
(volcanic glass) samples from the archaeological site of Monte Alban, located in
the Valley of Oaxaca in central Mexico as well as from other sites in the
region. These cover the Terminal Formative, Classic and Postclassic periods and
date from ca. AD 1 - 1520. These materials, which have been returned to the U.S.
with Mexican government approval, will be subjected to two kinds of analysis. A
subseries will be dated by means of obsidian hydration. Secondly, concentrations
of 28 elements will be determined through neutron activation analysis and
through comparison with samples from known geological deposits the origin of the
archaeological specimens can be pinpointed. With these data, Mr. Elam will be
able to determine how exchange in obsidian materials changed over time and the
role which Monte Alban played in this process. Obsidian has provided a focus for
many archaeological studies in Middle America. Prehistorically, it was a rare
and extremely valuable material both because it was easy to flake into tools and
because it produced razor sharp cutting edges. Since obsidian results from
volcanic eruption, it is found only in discrete highly localized areas. Because
chemical composition differs from region to region, it is possible to analyze
archaeological specimens and match them to a specific source. Thus, it is
possible to determine how obsidian moved through prehistoric social systems and
gain insight into both their economic and political organization. Monte Alban
exhibits the characteristics of many other Middle American centers. It rose,
achieved a regional dominance as the center of a small state, and then declined.
The processes which underlie this transformation however are not well understood
and this research will help to elucidate them. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to a large number of
archaeologists. It will shed new light on the role which trade played in the
emergence of social complexity and will assist in the training of a promising
young scientist.