* 9116569
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  The Nature and           Distribution of Dark Matter
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Lawrence Hall, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 05/31/1996
* USD 15,250.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in astrophysics
between the NSF Science and Technology Center (STC) for Particle Astrophysics at
the University of California, Berkeley, and the Theoretical and High Energy
Physics Laboratory of the University of Paris, South. The U.S. and French
research teams will be led by Bernard Sadoulet, Director of the STC at Berkeley,
and Jean Kaplan, director of the French research group. Specifically, support
will be provided to advanced U.S. graduate students and young postdoctoral
researchers affiliated with the Berkeley STC for travel to France. The
objectives are to provide these young investigators with research experience at
a French center of scientific excellence and to establish long-lasting links
between the research programs in the U.S. and France, thereby, enhancing the
scientific productivity of both groups. The U.S. and French teams will focus on
the fundamental problem of dark matter, a topic identified as the highest
priority in astrophysics research. Evidence indicates that 90% or more of the
universe is made of dark matter, and that this matter may be in the form of
particles dating back to the beginning of the universe. The study of the dark
matter problem has important implications for understanding the origin of the
universe and the fundamental nature of matter. The U.S. and French teams will
focus their efforts on: (1) experimental searches for dark matter either in the
form of weakly interactive particles or in the form of massive astrophysical
compact halo objects; (2) theoretical investigations of various dark matter
particle candidates and their signatures in the atrophysical environment; and
(3) development of a theory of galaxy formation and clustering in the universe,
in which dark matter may play a central role.