* 9116919
* Application of Adaptive Pattern Recognition in Regional Seismic Risk/Damage Assessment
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Albert T. Y. Tung, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 02/28/1993
* USD 36,338.00

This project attempts to develop an adaptive and non-parametric Modified
Mercalli Intensity (MMI) forecast model for the direct prediction of spatial
distribution of MMI corresponding to an earthquake scenario for use in regional
risk/damage assessment. The development of the model is based on recent advances
in Adaptive Pattern Recognition (APR). The APR predictors of the MMI forecast
model are to be constructed using neural networks implementation through
supervised learning utilizing historical earthquake and regional geological data
as training sets. The proposed model represents an improvement and
simplification of the risk/damage assessment methodology in current use. By
combining two steps, the attenuation of peak ground acceleration (PGA) and the
PGA-MMI conversion, into one and using an optimal nonfunctional and incremental
model, the accuracy of risk/damage analysis results are improved through the
reduction of uncertainties, e.g., the PGA-MMI conversion, and the inclusion of
additional site-specific independent variables affecting MMI levels. The model
will be applied for regional risk assessment for the major metropolitan regions
in California, namely the San Francisco Bay and the Greater Los Angeles
metropolitan areas. A generalized computer code will also be developed and made
available for application to these and possibly other seismic locations in the
world at international levels.