* 9116686
* Ceramic Production and the Economic Organization of         Protohistoric Zuni Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1993
* Barbara Mills, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 41,168.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Mills will conduct an
analysis of two Zuni pottery samples. One derives from complete vessels
collected from living individuals in the 19th and early 20th centuries. The
other comes from archaeological materials excavated from known Zuni sites which
were occupied from the 15th to 17th centuries A.D. The goal of the study is to
use the ethnographic samples as a control and on this basis, reconstruct both
pottery making and social organization during the earlier period. Dr. Mills will
focus on both shape and size of vessels as well as the raw materials from which
they are constructed. In particular, she is concerned with degrees of
standardization since this can be taken as an indirect measure of social
organization. She will analyze raw material through use of Instrumental Neutron
Activation Analysis, Inductively-Coupled Plasma Emission Spectroscopy and
electron microprobe analysis. The degree of standardization in raw material
preparation will be determined through visual imaging techniques. Careful
ethnographic studies in the United States began in the late 1800's and much
first hand data are available for groups like the Zuni from that period.
However, it is uncertain how stable native American social organization is over
time, given increasing influence of European contact. For anthropologists, this
poses a major problem since 19th and 20th century models are usually (and with
doubtful validity) extended back in time. Dr. Mills postulates that organization
of ceramic manufacture reflects societal organization: especially degree of
authority centralization. Through analysis of well controlled ethnographic and
archaeological pottery samples, she will be able to examine social change
through time. This research is important for several reasons. It will increase
our understanding of native American history and prehistory. It will also serve
to develop techniques which will be of anthropological use in many parts of the
world.