* 9116887
* Mathematical Sciences: Structure and Representation Theory  of Lie Algebras; April 17-19, 1992, New Haven, CT
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1993
* Walter Feit, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1993
* USD 10,000.00

The theory of Lie algebras has played a significant role in mathematical
research during this century. Important roles have been played by finite-
dimensional semisimple Lie algebras, modular Lie algebras and Kac-Moody Lie
algebras. The most dramatic progress in the classification and structure of
finite dimensional Lie algebras has been the recent solution of the
classification problem for simple Lie algebras over algebraically closed fields
of characteristic p&gt;0. Despite this work, many important areas of research
remain, including the characterization of important classes of Lie algebras
(e.g., nilpotent, solvable) by homological properties and the search for
structural results. There has also been substantial work over the last decade on
the representation theory of restricted Lie algebras of classical type. While
some of this work has been associated with the solution of the classification
problem, much more of it has been motivated by connections with the modular
representation theory of semisimple algebraic groups. Finally, the study of the
representation theory of affine Lie algebras has been one of the most rapidly
growing parts of algebra since its inception twenty years ago. The problem of
finding explicit constructions of modules for affine Lie algebras has been
attacked by various methods. This project will support the Conference on
Structure and Representation of Lie Algebras to be held from April 17-19, 1992
at Yale University. Topics will include the classification and structure of
finite dimensional Lie algebras, representation theory of finite dimensional Lie
algebras over fields of positive characteristics, and representation theory of
Kac-Moody Lie algebras. The format will consist of plenary lectures of an
expository nature by leading experts as well as some shorter, more specialized
talks.