* 9116174
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research on Stochastic Partial      Differential Equations:  Approximations and Asymptotic      Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1996
* Peter Li, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 09/30/1996
* USD 20,106.00

This three-year award will support cooperative research between Rene A. Carmona
of the University of California at Irvine and Jean-Pierre Fouque, of the Center
of Applied Mathematics at the Ecole Polytechnique in Paris. Jean Lacroix of the
University of Paris X and Etienne Pardoux of the University of Provence in
Marseille are also part of the French team. The investigators will examine the
probabilistic properties and the asymptotic behavior of the solutions of some
stochastic partial differential equations. They will consider equations which
are important to mathematical models in oceanography. Dr. Carmona is a leader in
the field of stochastic partial differential equations. Collaboration with the
French investigators will enhance different aspects of this project. J.P. Fouque
is an expert on partial differential equations and Lacrois is experienced in the
theory of Luyapunov exponents, programming and random simulation. Their
respective backgrounds will contribute to solving problems on the asymptotic
properties of these equations. Pardoux has interest and experience in
mathematical problems in oceanography. He will contribute to the development of
mathematical models in this area. Combining these complementary strengths and
interests will benefit the project. The results will advance our understanding
of the theory of stochastic partial differential equations, an important and
active area in the modern theory of statistics and probability.