* 9116176
* Studies on the Improvement of Mesoscale Numerical Weather   Predictions Using Continuous Four-Dimensional Data          Assimilation
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Nelson Seaman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 07/31/1995
* USD 400,000.00

Rapid advances in remote sensing technology have made possible nearly continous
monitoring of the atmosphere in fine spatial de- tail. Several new observing
systems, including wind profilers, NEXRAD doppler radars, automated surface
observing stations, computer-assisted aircraft observing systems, and improved
satellite instrumentation have either been recently deployed, or will be
deployed in the U.S. in the 1990's. At the same time computer facilities with
order-of magnitude increases in computational capability have become available
to the National Weather Service (NWS). These advances offer opportunites for
significant improvements in numerical weather prediction (NWP), exemplified by
development of a 30-km resolution mesoscale model (the . model) at the National
Meteorological Center (NMC), scheduled for operational use in about 1992. A
critical element in the advancement of NWP is the more accurate specification of
the initial state, using the full capability of the advanced systems to be
deployed. The work proposed combines two mathematical approaches ("nudging" and
the adjoint equation method) in the development of a 4-dimensional (spatial and
time) data assimilation (4DDA) scheme. It carries through to the testing and
evaluation of such a scheme at PSU. The NMC has already expressed interest,
contigent upon the PSU research results, in transferring the scheme and testing
it in an operational environment.