* 9116679
* Interinstitutional Fellowship Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1991,07/31/1998
* Harold Martin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 07/31/1998
* USD 1,080,000.00

North Carolina State University and North Carolina A&T State University are
jointly establishing the NSF/AEMP Interinstitutional Fellowship Program. The
primary objective of the proposed program is to increase the number of African-
Americans pursuing doctorates in engineering and qualifying for academic and
research careers. A secondary objective is to establish a model for similar
programs at other universities. In brief, the program will provide approximately
eight full fellowships for minority, women, or disabled students, but focusing
initially on African-American students. The program will provide full fellowship
support during the first, second, and fifth years of doctoral study (following
the BS) and research assistantships and supplementary fellowships during the
third and fourth years. The program will also provide full payment of tuition
and fees and funds in support of publication preparation, travel, and minor
equipment purchases by fellows for up to five full years of study. Important
components of the program are to make doctoral study more attractive and to
accelerate progress toward the degree by providing full support during the time
when a student is preparing for research and afterward, when the student is
writing the dissertation. During the research phase the student would receive
support as a graduate research assistant supplemented by a reduced fellowship
stipend. This would allow the student, during this period, to concentrate fully
on completing the research requirements associated with the PhD degree.