* 9116612
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: A Study of S=-2 Dibaryons  and Hypernuclei
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Peter Barnes, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 09/30/1994
* USD 15,630.00

This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative science project
between Professor Peter Barnes, Physics Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
and Professor Fujio Takeutchi, Department of Physics, University of Kyoto
Sangyo, Kyoto, Japan. The U.S. group, which includes other investigators from
Carnegie Mellon University and the University of New Mexico, will travel to
Japan to develop and test equipment to be used in an experiment at Brookhaven
National Laboratory (BNL). The experiment (E836) has been approved by Brookhaven
authorities to operate at the AGS accelerator. The experiment is a follow-on of
one already performed to search for the bound state of six quarks, two of them
strange quarks. The U.S. team will work on equipment performance tests at the
National Laboratory of High Energy Physics (KEK), where beam time at the
synchrotron is available, and will compare and check data analysis performed
independently by the U.S. and Japanese groups. It is also planned to develop
detectors at KEK for an experiment related to the search for double strange
hypernuclei that should exist if the H particle does not exist. The Japanese
group, which includes investigators from Kyoto University and the Kyoto
University of Education, will travel to Brookhaven to take part in the
experiment. They will install their equipment at the AGS/BNL and take data. A
goal of this project is to develop and maintain a cohesive effort and to develop
future avenues of collaboration between U.S. and Japanese physicists.