* 9116462
* Fluid Flow and Dehydration Reactions Inferred from Chloride Anomalies at Three Accretionary Complexes
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1991,06/30/1996
* Shirley Dreiss, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 06/30/1996
* USD 165,921.00

Continental margin accretionary complexes are sites of large- scale fluid
transport of dissolved matter. Deformation and compaction processes occuring in
accretionary terranes are resposible for increasing pore pressures producing
these large scale fluid-flows. Temperature and pressure conditions in these
areas are beleived to be responsible for the dehydration of hydrous minerals
which then result in the formation of low chloride fluids. Variations in
chloride concentrations are an essential part of the observations used to infer
preferential pathways and transient flow episodes in accretionary prisms. These
poorly understood material-transport processes exert a first-order control on
the geochemical and thermal balance of the earth's reservoirs. This award will
support Dr. Dreiss' efforts to investigate the origin of low chlorinity fluids
and to develop a combination of fluid and mass transport models in three
acccretionary complexes (Barbados, Nankai, and the Peru margin). Dr. Dreiss
proposes to develop models which can can be used to test the hypothesized
sources of low-chloride fluids and transport mechanisms with known information
about site geometry, sediment permeabilities, and pore water compositions. These
models will provide indepen- dent estimates of fluid flow which can be compared
to those derived from heat transport studies.