* 9116383
* U.S.-Hungary Jt. Fund Research on DNA Sequence Recognition  by Type II Restriction Endonucleases and Modification       Methyltransferases
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1992,06/15/1995
* Antal Kiss, Hungarian Acadmey of Sciences Institute of Biochemistry
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 06/15/1995
* USD 0.00

The primary objective of this US-Hungary research project under the Hungary
Joint Fund between Dr. Antal Kiss, Institute of Biochemistry, Hungarian Academy
of Sciences, and Dr. Richard Roberts, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, is to
purify restriction endonucleases and modification methylases for enzymological
and crystallographic studies. Experiments are planned to identify the regions of
these enzymes that are responsible for sequence specific DNA recognition. This
will involve the preparation of hybrid methylases and the isolation of
specificity mutants, plus an extensive algorithmic analysis of the amino acid
sequences of restriction endonucleases and of modification methylases. The
algorithms and programs developed would be used to detect, define and search
sequence motifs of functionally related proteins. These motifs could then help
in interpreting new sequence data. A database of motifs will be built and
maintained. The results of these studies will increase our understanding of how
restriction endonucleases and DNA-methylases work. This project in molecular
biology fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by
enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine
complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence.