* 9116969
* Welfare Use, Welfare Dependency, and Labor Markets in the   Deep South
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1991,10/31/1994
* Samson Kimenyi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1994
* USD 86,198.00

Recent studies of welfare recipients in the United States have found that most
of them remain on welfare for only short periods of time. However, the evidence
also shows that a small number of recipients are highly dependent on public
support and have long welfare careers. These long term recipients are also
responsible for the largest portion of welfare expenditures. Although much has
been learned about this important phenomenon, a wide range of issues related to
the process and patterns of welfare dependence remain to be investigated. This
project proposes to study the patterns and determinants of welfare use and
dependency in the Deep South, an area which has a higher concentration of
poverty, larger numbers of poorly educated people, and a higher concentration of
low wage employment than other parts of the country. Due to these factors, among
others, the Deep South region provides particularly suitable conditions for
testing hypotheses related to welfare dependency. One of these, on which
attention is centered, is the so-called culture of poverty hypothesis. This
states that high concentrations of poverty, existing over many years, may lead
to the emergence of a welfare culture which translates into long term welfare
use and to inter-generational transmission of welfare dependency. The study will
investigate empirically individual, social, cultural, labor market, and
institutional factors that lead to long term welfare use. The main thrust will
be to specify lifetime models permitting the estimation of the duration of time
on welfare. In addition, the study will focus on labor market models
incorporating job search, unemployment durations, and wage determination as they
relate to welfare use and dependency. Survey data of AFDC recipients from the
state of Tennessee and from the Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP) will be utilized. The investigator is asking very important policy-
related questions, the answers to which promise to provide information crucial
to welfare reform. The empirical work involved marks one of the first SIPP
analyses of the problem of welfare dependence. The new evidence will enable
valuable comparisons with earlier studies based on PSID and NLSY surveys.