* 9116480
* SGER:  Development of the Plan for Long Term Impact         Assessment of Recent War-Related Pollution Events in The    Gulf:  The Marine Chemistry Component
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Kathryn Burns, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

The Gulf has long been recognized as an important biologically productive
ecosystem which supports a diversity of coastal and oceanic habitats. These
include mangroves, seagrass beds, reef flats, reefs and well as pelagic and
benthic oceanic habitats. Commercial fisheries and shellfish industries provide
income to regional fisherman and The Gulf provides a critical habitat to some
endangered species including dugongs and birds. The massive oil spills and the
depositions of oil burn products resulting from the 1991 war activities have
potential for long term impact on both the oceanic and coastal biology. These
events are superimposed on coastal habitat destruction due to military
activities such as mines, bombs, vehicular movement and related mechanical
disturbances. All of this additional stress must be assessed in the framework of
the recent history of oil exploration and production activities and past wars.
Many national and international groups have undertaken preliminary impact
assessment work in the Northern Gulf. These include the USCG, US EPA, NOAA
consultants sent by several UN agencies and regional Gulf state authorities.
These efforts have been directed at initial animal rescue activities, clean up
and assessment in coastal habitats. The UN agencies, in collaboration with
ROPME, have intentions of developing and implementing a plan for the long term
impact assessment of recent war related pollution and habitat destruction events
on the marine ecology or The Gulf. To do this the UN requires input by
appropriate expert. This effort will be conducted under the SGER Program to
undertake this long range Plan Development regarding the marine chemical
component.