* 9116497
* Measurement and Characterization of DOM Pools Using EEM     Spectroscopy and HPLC
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1991,09/01/1992
* Paula Coble, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/01/1992
* USD 86,800.00

The major pool of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the ocean is an order of
magnitude larger than the particulate organic carbon (POC) pool, and twice as
large as the atmospheric pool of CO2, yet as much as 90% of DOC remains
uncharacterized as to specific chemical identity. One component of this
uncharacterized pool is known as "humic substance" or "gelbstoff", two non-
specific terms for a complex mixture of compounds having a yellow color and a
blue fluorescence. The way in which these compounds have been defined and
analyzed in the past has resulted in much confusion and a lack of insight
regarding their nature, distribution, and cycling in the ocean. Recent
developments in fluorescent spectroscopy and high performance liquid
chromatography show promising results when applied to the study of gelbstoff in
seawater. Three-dimensional excitation-emission matrix (EEM) analysis of
unconcentrated samples has shown for the first time the existence of four
different fluorophores in seawater, each of which exhibits characteristic
properties and distributions. One of these fluorophores may be indicative of a
protein-like, bioreactive substance. Ion-pairing HPLC can resolve gelbstoff into
up to twenty individual components. Application of these new technologies in
tandem to the analysis of dissolved organic matter in seawater can be used to
trace different components of the DOC, thereby leading to an improved
understanding of the oceanic carbon cycle.