* 9117763
* DNA-Protein Interactions in Class III Genes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Scott Franklin, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/1996
* USD 253,000.00

Proteins which bind to specific base sequences in DNA regulate the expression of
many different genes. Transcription factor TFIIIA, the prototype of the Zn-
finger class of proteins, binds strongly to a defined base sequence contained
within the coding region of 5S RNA genes. This interaction represents the
primary step in assembly of a transcriptionally active complex and, once
assembled, these complexes persist through many rounds of transcription. The
objective of this research is an understanding of the molecular interactions
between this protein and its target sequence during complex formation and
transcription. To facilitate these studies, a photosensitive cross-linking
reagent has been developed, 5-N3-deoxyuridine-5'- triphosphate, which can be
enzymatically incorporated into DNA in place of thymidine. Photoactive DNA can
be used to label sites or regions in proteins which are in close proximity to
the DNA, Contacts between purified TFIIIA and specific positions in the Xenopus.
5S, DNA internal control region have been mapped. This allows examination of the
fine structure of this interaction to understand the recognition process,
determine how it is affected by the presence of other transcription factors as
well as RNA polymerase III, and look for changes which occur as the polymerase
initiates RNA synthesis and traverses the TFIIIA contact sites.