* 9117386
* TEM Studies of Weathering Reactions: The Importance of      Mineral Structure, Microstructure and Composition
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Jillian Banfield, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 01/31/1994
* USD 120,000.00

Chemical weathering is of fundamental importance because it is the process by
which silicate minerals formed at high-temperatures and pressures are converted
to the constituents of sediments and soils. Despite this, the structural and
compositional controls on the mechanisms and rates of transformations of many
reactions are still poorly understood. This proposal describes two research
projects designed to use high-resolution transmission electron microscopy to
investigate the microscopic characteristics of weathering reactions where
significant structural exists between the parent and product minerals. The first
of these involves hydration and oxidation of amphibole-group minerals. The
second project focuses on perovskite weathering, where hydrous minerals are not
formed and oxidation does not occur. The weathering reactions of a selection of
microstructurally complex amphiboles with close to end-member compositions,
intergrown and exsolved amphiboles, and amphiboles containing chain-width
defects will be examined. Intergrown amphiboles offer the opportunity to compare
weathering rates and mechanisms under the same physiochemical conditions and to
evaluate the degree to which reactions are focused by coherency strain, defects,
and grain boundaries. The Weathering of perovskite will also be examined.
Hydrothermal dissolution of perovskite, a possible component of nuclear waste
storage ceramics, has been studied extensively, but the natural weathering
reactions have been largely ignored. The chemically simple transformation to
TiO2 minerals may involve considerable structural inheritance. The aims these
projects are to clarify the crystal chemical details of the natural weathering
processes, thus enhancing our understanding of the mechanisms by which these
reactions occur.