* 9117266
* A Prototype Ocean Seismic Network (OSN) Deep-Sea Borehole   Seismograph
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1995
* John Orcutt, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 02/28/1995
* USD 612,149.00

The research objective is modification and testing of an existing broadband
seismometer for eventual installation in ocean borehole OSN-1, drilled by the
ODP in March of 1991 (Leg 136). Augmentation of world-wide seismograph coverage
through the addition of ocean floor seismic observatories will improve
earthquake location, and allow the more accurate determination of deep Earth
velocity structure. %%% Understanding why and where earthquakes occur is
essential to mitigating these natural hazards. The earth motions induced by
earthquakes also provide detailed information on deep earth structure. Such
information is crucial to understanding such phenomena as the Earth's magnetic
field, and the distribution of mineral resources on the Earth's surface. Our
ability to measure earthquakes, however, is severely limited by geographic
constraints on the placement of seismometers. Heretofore, the two-thirds of the
Earth's surface that is water-covered has been inaccessible to seismometer
coverage. Emplacement of borehole seismometers in ocean-sub-seafloor
observatories is one solution proposed. This research is the first step in the
creation of a network of ocean observatories: the modification and land-testing
of a bore-hole seismometer capable of recording earth motions over a wide band
of frequencies.