* 9117928
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  Bifurcation and Instabilityin Condensing Systems with Noncondensable Gases
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1993
* Per Peterson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 10/31/1993
* USD 26,239.00

This award will support a long-term visit by Professor Per Peterson, Department
of Nuclear Engineering, University of California, Berkeley to Japan for a
cooperative research project with Professor Kunio Hijikata, Department of
Mechanical Engineering Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology. The researchers
plan to undertake a study of instability and bifurcation in vertical condensing
systems. The study will focus on instabilities which occur when lower molecular
weight vapor condenses beneath higher molecular weight noncondensable gas, and
also on the inverse condition of high molecular weight vapor above low molecular
weight noncondensable gas. The research is of fundamental importance because as
higher Rayleigh numbers are encountered in industrial applications, no
experimental, numerical or theoretical information is available even though the
unstable gas vapor interface is known to cause large temperature and pressure
fluctuations in condensing systems. The research should result in significant
advances in our understanding of heat transfer mechanisms in the heat pipe or
other high efficiency thermal energy transport systems. Additional areas that
will be impacted by this research include electronics, cooling, satellite
thermal control, and surface condenser efficiency. The Department of Mechanical
Engineering Sciences at Tokyo Institute of Technology has excellent facilities
for laser holographic and shadow-graph investigations of condensation. Professor
Hijikata has extensive research experience in condensation problems and in
numerical investigation of condensation in stable systems with noncondensable
gases. This complements Professor Peterson's work in stable systems which should
insure a fruitful collaboration resulting in benefits to both countries. It is
expected that this collaboration will continue after the formal agreement has
terminated.