* 9117721
* Sea Ice Physical-Structrual Characteristics: Development    and SAR Signature in the Pacific Sector of the Southern     Ocean
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Wilford Weeks, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/1996
* USD 406,555.00

This project is an examination of the physical and structural properties of the
antarctic ice pack in the Amundsen, Bellingshausen, and Ross Seas, with the goal
of defining the geographical variability of various ice types, the deformation
processes that are active in the antarctic ice pack, and the large-scale
thermodynamics and heat exchange processes of the ice- covered Southern Ocean.
An additional goal is to relate specific characteristics of antarctic sea ice to
its synthetic aperture radar (SAR) signature as observed from satellites.
Physical properties include the salinity, temperature, and brine volumes, while
structural properties include the fraction of frazil, platelet, and congelation
ice of the seasonal antarctic pack ice. Differences in ice types are the result
of differences in the environment in which the ice forms: frazil ice is formed
in supercooled sea water, normally through wind or wave-induced turbulence,
while platelet and congelation ice is formed under quiescent conditions. The
fraction of frazil ice (which has been observed to be generally in excess of 50%
in Weddell Sea ice floes) is an important variable in the energy budget of the
upper ocean, and contributes significantly to the stabilization of the surface
layers. The integration of sea ice field observations and synthetic aperture
radar data analysis and modeling studies will contribute to a better
understanding of sea ice parameters and their geophysical controls, and will be
useful in defining the kind of air-ice-ocean interactions that can be studied
using SAR data, as well as having broader relevance and application to
atmospheric, biological, and oceanographic investigations of the Southern Ocean.