* 9117005
* Modeling and Simulation Biological Processes as Logical     Enterprises
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1991,05/31/1995
* Shalom Tsur, Washington University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Program Director
* 05/31/1995
* USD 282,033.00

A potential use for scientific databases in the biological sciences involves the
simulation of in vivo metabolic tracer experiments. The queries of interest in
this area are difficult to answer using existing technologies. The proposal
suggests two hypotheses: first, that complex biological processes can be modeled
as logical enterprises comprising objects, processes and constraint dimensions;
second, that deductive database technology is suitable for the computer
realization of such models. To test these hypotheses, the proposal focuses on
the possible representations of compounds, biochemical reactions, and
biochemical and physiological constraints, and the computational consequences of
the alternative representations. The reactions come chiefly from intermediary
carbohydrate metabolism, and the strength of the computational ideas will be
evaluated by comparing the results with experimental data from the biological
literature. At the conclusion of the project, the strengths and limits of the
different representational schemes should be much clearer. The impact on
biological sciences will be the development of a generic representational
solution for a wide class of biological problems, while the computer science
impact will lie in the successful integration of the data and process aspects of
the problem in a declarative, symmetric treatment. In the long run it is
expected that computer systems of this type will be used for predictive purposes
and in the a prior assessment of in vivo experiments. //