* 9117822
* Electronic Structure of Condensed Matter on the CM-5
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* David Ceperley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1995
* USD 655,000.00

Electronic Structure of Condensed Matter - The proposed research is aimed at the
development of computational methods for studying electronic states in condensed
matter and the use of those methods to study the electronic properties of solids
and liquids. The primary techniques to be used are quantum Monte Carlo and
density- functional theory. Two primary improvements for QMC are contemplated:
finding accurate and efficient representations for the many-electron wave
function and development of pseudopotentials suitable for elimination of the
effects of core electrons. Such improved QMC techniques can be used to provide
an improved exchange-correlation energy for DFT which would include the effects
of structural inhomogeneity. These improved DFT methods can then be directly
compared to the QMC results for tests of accuracy. When the new DFT methods are
tested, they can be used to generate trial functions to make QMC analysis more
efficient. This coupling between different computational approaches is seen as
central to the proposed research. The potential benefit of using massively-
parallel computers on this class of problems will also be investigated.
Concurrent with their development, these techniques will be applied to the study
of a wide range of condensed systems, ranging from jellium to highly correlated
materials %%% The proposed research is part of a long-term effort to understand
and to predict the properties of real-world materials. They propose to develop
complementary computational methods for determining the electronic structure
(and hence the physical properties) of a wide range of solids and liquids. The
emphasis is to refine and simplify existing techniques, so that the resulting
methods are practical for use on complex materials. This research will include
development and evaluation of algorithms for massively parallel computers. As
improved computational techniques are developed, they will be applied to
problems with direct connections to experimental physics and materials science -
both to test the methods and to understand and predict experimentally relevant
properties. Such materials as silicon, condensed states of hydrogen metal
surfaces, and liquid and amorphous systems will be studied.