* 9117835
* Metabolism of Flagellar Protein mRNA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Ellen Baker, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 09/30/1995
* USD 249,000.00

Regeneration of detached flagella by Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, requires the
coordinate induction of synthesis of a large number of flagellar proteins.
Following induction, flagellar protein mRNAs are specifically destroyed in a
translation-dependent manner. This proposal addresses the mechanism and
specificity of the regulated degradation. Chimeric mRNAs, composed of parts of
the regulated alpha-tubulin mRNA, and an unregulated stable mRNA will be
expressed from an alpha-tubulin promotor to determine the sequence specificity
of degradation. An in vitro degradation extract, which reproduces degradation
specificity observed in vivo, will be expoited to localize and characterize the
trans-acting factors involved in degradation. The translation dependence of
poly(A) metabolism and the effect of altered poly(A) metabolism on flagellar
mRNA function and stability will be investigated by identifying the sequences
which direct the rate of poly(A) loss, and altering those sequences. The finding
that a probable poly(A)- binding protein (PABP) is coinduced by deflagellation
suggests this protein may be involved in regulation of the coinduced mRNAs. The
sequence for the Chlamydomonas PABP will be isolated from a lambda- library.
Elimination of induction of this protein will be attempted by coinducing an
antisense version, and the effect on coinduced mRNA stability and translation
evaluated.