* 9117905
* Effects of Compositional Differences on Early Diagenetic    Pathways of Carbonate Biominerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1997
* Susan Gaffey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1997
* USD 90,502.00

The proposed work will investigate the sequences, rates, timing, and
environmental controls of diagenetic changes in two types of mineral controlled
alteration: 1. Preneomorphic mineralogical and compositional changes in biogenic
aragonites, 2. The stabilization of biogenic high Mg calcites to low Mg
calcites. Materials for the work will be obtained from San Salvador Island, the
Bahamas, where Holocene and Pleistocene sediments of reef, shallow subtidal,
tidal delta, lagoonal, beach and dune facies exist in close proximity to modern
analogs occupied by the same genera and species of organisms. Prior and ongoing
work by others on the stratigraphy and depositional and diagenetic histories of
these sediments, and age dates determined by a variety of techniques, provide
and excellent framework for the proposed study. Tools (reflectance and nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy) and techniques are now available for non-
destructive characterization of H20-, OH- and organic-containing phase in
skeletons. Because abundances of these unstable phases in skeletons are
taxonomically controlled, work will focus on a small number of important
sediment-producing taxa. Comparisons of modern skeletons with suites of fossil
skeletal material of the same genera and species whose ages and diagenetic
histories are well-known, and whose mineralogy, chemical composition, and micro-
and ultrastructure are thoroughly characterized will clarify the roles of
several important mineral and compositional phases in the early diagenetic
alteration carbonate skeletons.