* 9117104
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Population Structure  and Zoogeography of Commercially Important Fishes of the    Parana-Paraguay River Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Michael Bell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tomas E. Gergely
* 05/31/1995
* USD 9,900.00

This award from the U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Program supports research
in ecology to be conducted by Drs. Michael A. Bell and Axel Meyer of the State
University of New York, Stonybrook and Dr. Alberto Espinach Ros of the Instituto
Nacional de Investigaciones y Desarrollo Pesesquero (INIDEP) at Buenos Aires,
Argentina. The project focuses on the study of the commercially important
characiform fishes of the genera Prochilodus and Salminus that inhabit the
Paraguay-Parana-Uruguay basin.. The main objective will be to assess the
phylogenetic relationships and geographic structure of their populations in
order to understand the evolutionary processes that have affected them. The aim
of the project will be to use mitochondrial DNA sequences to identify different
populations of characiform fish in the Paraguay-Parana-Uruguay river basin, to
quantify the amount of intraspecific differentiation and gene flow. Further, the
geographic population of the two taxa Prochilodus and Salminus will be related
to resource management. The data will also be used to formulate historical
biogeographical hypotheses based on the phylogenetic analyses and distribution
patterns observed for both taxa. The expertise in field work possessed by the
INIDEP team will be synergistic with the expertise in genetics residing in the
group at Stonybrook.