* 9117306
* Dissertation Research: Protohistoric Faunal Exploitation in Western Brong-Ahafo Region, Ghana
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1992
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1992
* USD 8,679.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ann Stahl, Mr. Andrew Black will collect data for his
doctoral dissertation. He will pursue combined ethnographic and archaeological
research in the Brong- Ahafo region of central Ghana. The area is interesting
because it spans the transition from forest in the south to dry savannah in the
north and this ecotonal quality allows residents to exploit a wide range of
resources. Taken together archaeological, historic and ethnographic data allow
the reconstruction of settlement and subsistence over a ca. 500 year period. Mr.
Black will examine food utilization and the study will consist of two phases. He
will conduct four months of ethnographic and ethnoarchaeological research to
learn how wild and domestic animals are integrated into contemporary diet and
how diets can be reconstructed from faunal remains. Secondly, he will analyze
collections from at least three different archaeological sites which span the
period from 1400 AD to 1930 AD. The ethnographic data will be used to help
interpret the archaeological material, serve as a basis for comparison, and help
to model the essential components of prehistoric subsistence patterns. The late
prehistory and history of this region is complicated because it witnessed the
development of complex polities as well as the imposition of a European colonial
system. Local groups relied not only on domestic animals which they raised, but
also on hunted and gathered wild resources. Given the significant changes in
social organization over this period, Mr. Black hypothesizes that subsistence
practices changed as well and he wishes to understand how local residents
changed their hunting and herding strategies to adapt. This research is
important for several reasons. While it has long been assumed that such Western
African peoples have been solely dependent on domestic resources for hundreds of
years, anthropological data suggests otherwise. Understanding successful
adaptations such as this may be useful in developing strategies in this drought
ridden and rapidly changing part of the world. The project will also assist in
the training of a very promising young scientist.