* 9117847
* Modeling the Cardiac Sinus node and Atrium on a Massively   Parallel Computer
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Raimond Winslow, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah A. Joseph
* 11/30/1995
* USD 310,221.00

The objective of this research is to undertake a comprehensive study of the ways
in which properties of single sinus and atrial cardiac cells such as voltage-
dependent membrane currents, ion pumping mechanisms, calcium buffering and
release systems, and inter-cellular gap junction conductance, influence the
generation and propagation of electrical activity in models of the sinus node,
atrium, and combined sinus node - atrial networks. Cell models will be based on
whole-cell voltage-clamp data obtained from sinus and atrial cells isolated from
rabbit heart. Networks will be modeled as two-dimensional lattices, with
neighboring cells interconnected by resistors representing gap junctions.
Network stat equations will be integrated on a massively parallel supercomputer,
the Connection Machine CM-2, in order to facilitate simulation of very large
systems of cells. The models will be used to study the mechanisms which
influence the generation and propagation of pacemaker activity in normal cardiac
tissue. Mechanisms giving rise to arrhythmias in localized groups of cells, and
factors affecting the propagation of arrhythmic activity through model networks
will also be investigated. The proposed research will enhance our basic
understanding of both normal and abnormal cardiac dynamics, and is unique in
that it represents an attempt to understand the "macroscopic" properties of
large networks of cardiac cells give detailed descriptions of the "microscopic"
behavior of individual cells.