* 9117569
* Paleontologic and Paleoecologic Record of the Cambrian      Radiation Event: Stratigraphic Paleontology of Central      Nevada
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Philip Signor, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1994
* USD 77,499.00

This project involves detailed taxonomic, biostratigraphic, and
paleoenvironmental analyses of previously unstudied Lower Cambrian fossil faunas
and stratigraphic units in Central Nevada (Shoshone, Toiyabe, and Toquima
Ranges). This research will provide the following: 1) detailed descriptions of
the Lower Cambrian stratigraphic units; 2) descriptions of the local Lower
Cambrian faunas; 3) paleoecological analyses of Lower Cambrian facies; and 4)
biostratigraphic correlations with other Lower Cambrian units in western North
America. This information will then be applied to more general problems of the
Early Cambrian including: 1) the temporal pattern of diversification during the
Cambrian radiation event; 2) tests of the Grand Cycle hypothesis of sediment
accumulation in the Lower Cambrian of western North America; 3) biogeographic
relationships of Early Cambrian metazoan faunas; 4) reconstruction of the
phylogenetic relationships of the early metazoan taxa; and 5) documentation of
the influence of changing paleoecologies on the actual nature of the radiation
event (as well as its apparent record). In short, the goal of this project is to
produce the detailed stratigraphic and paleontologic data critical to
understanding Early Cambrian metazoan evolution and the processes responsible
for the Cambrian radiation event.