* 9117267
* Use of Microbial Assays to Distinguish Between Heavy Metal  and Organic Chemical Toxicity
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Gabriel Bitton, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 08/31/1994
* USD 258,703.00

This is a an award to provide renewal support for research that was initiated
under NSF Grant No. 88-13714, objectives of which were to determine the
conditions under which the inhibition of metabolic processes in selected
microorganisms for production of enzymes could be used to predict the effect of
toxic substances on microorganisms organisms used in submerged culture,
biological wastewater treatment processes. Results included the application of
findings to development of a short-term, bioassay procedure for determination of
heavy metal toxicity in environmental media. Objectives of this project include
efforts to increase the sensitivity of the biosensing procedure by altering the
permeability of the test-organism's cell wall. Work will include efforts to
simplify the conduct of the procedure that would enhance its potential for
routine use in improving operation of biowastewater treatment processes,
investigate its potential for use in bioassays to distinguish between heavy
metal and organic toxicants, and in evaluation of heavy-metal toxicity
associated with contaminants associated with solid substances such as sediments,
soils, sludges and ash from incineration processes. Results of this research are
expected to be utilized in the engineering design of biological treatment
processes that are subjected to being impacted by toxicants, in assessing the
impacts of waste discharges to the environment, in determining the impacts of
toxicants on potential water reuse for agricultural and industrial purposes, and
in evaluating results of bio-, chemical-, and physical- procedures that are
applied to remediation of hazardous waste sites.