* 9117907
* Water Column Transformations of Nitrogen in a Perennially   Ice-Covered Antarctic Lake
* O/D,OPP
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1996
* John Priscu, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 01/31/1996
* USD 334,110.00

Permanently ice-covered Lake Bonney, an Antarctic lake with two distinct lobes,
presents a special situation where turbulence and upper trophic levels are
virtually non-existent. This unusual environment yields a system where
microbially-mediated processes dominate biogeochemical reactions. Current
information on nitrogen dynamics in Lake Bonney indicates that phytoplankton are
nitrogen-deficient, that nitrous oxide concentration in the chemocline of the
east lobe is the highest recorded in nature, that bulk denitrification does not
exist in the east lobe and that nitrogen values in the west lobe are the highest
ever measured in an aquatic system. It is hypothesized that 1) both ammonia and
oxidized nitrogen are significant regenerated nutrients in the upper trophogenic
zone, 2) nitrous oxide is a product of nitrification and 3) bulk denitrification
acts as a sink for nitrous oxide in the west lobe, regulating its accumulation.
These hypotheses will be addressed by measuring microbial regeneration and
utilization of ammonia, nitrite and nitrate, nitrous oxide production, and the
distribution of nitrifying and denitrifying bacteria. This study will be one of
the first to examine nitrogen dynamics in a system lacking "top- down"
regulation and will provide important clues regarding microbial nitrous oxide
production. This project is jointly supported by the National Science Foundation
and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.