* 9117535
* Functional Aspects of the Structure of the Sea Urchin       Bindin Gene and the Molecular Basis of Its Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Eric Davidson, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1995
* USD 320,000.00

In this application Dr. Davidson proposes to capitalize on recent discoveries
made in our lab in respect to the molecular basis of bindin-receptor
interaction. The species specificity of fertilization in certain sympatic sea
urchin species depends on molecular recognition of the acrosomal bindin protein
by egg receptor. Previously he has cloned bindin mRNAs and compared the bindin
protein sequences from several species of sea urchin, and we have recently
identified specific short regions of the protein that are apparently engaged in
contact with the receptor, and that are at least in part responsible for the
species specificity of the interaction. Here he proposes a series of new
experiments: i, we will generate transgenic S. purpuratus expressing S.
franciscanus bindin to determine whether presentation of the bindin sequence per
se will promote interspecific fertilization; ii, he will also test in vivo the
functional significance of alterations in specific regions of bindin sequence;
iii, he will determine the polymorphism of the bindin/receptor interaction in
S.franciscanus in order to understand how speciation might have come about; iv,
he will carry out studies on the interaction of recombinant mutant bindin
fragments with the receptor fragment recently described by Foltz and Lennarz; v,
he will investigate incorporation of exogenous bindin (and other) genes in
growing spermatocytes in culture, and determine whether transgenic spermatocytes
can mature into functional sperm in culture.