* 9117487
* Quantifying Seasonal Oceanic Temperatures and the Oxygen    Isotopic Composition of Seawater Over the Last 150,000 Years
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Howard Spero, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1994
* USD 100,000.00

The stable isotope geochemistry of fossil foraminifera has become an
indispensable tool for reconstructing paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic
fluctuations in the earth's past. Specifically, isotopic data have been used to
establish glacial-interglacial cycles, infer the size of continental ice-sheets
and to estimate paleoceanic temperature fluctuations. Despite the success in
applying these data to paleoclimatic problems, a large portion of the potential
data available for analysis remains unused. In this proposal, a strategy is
outlined to access this unused information to extract new paleoclimatic and
paleoceanographic information from the marine fossil record. Using the
intraspecific stable isotopic variability found within populations of fossil
foraminiferal shells which have been individually analyzed, it is now possible
to obtain absolute seasonal sea surface temperatures (SST) for paleoceans. In
addition, a procedure is proposed to determine the oxygen isotopic composition
of seawater ( 18Ow) during the last glacial cycle and penultimate deglaciation.
18Ow is a critical parameter used to model the growth of continental ice sheets.
Absolute determinations of SST and 18Ow during key intervals over the last
150,000 years will provide a suite of new paleoclimatic information for global
change models of the last glacial cycle.