* 9117866
* Studying Scale Invariance in Remotely Sensed Rainfall
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1995
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1995
* USD 147,578.00

Rainfall is produced by atmospheric processes which are highly nonlinear and
operate and interact at a wide range of scales. One of the main challenges to
hydrologists, meteorologists and climatologists is to measure, model and predict
the nature of the extreme variability exhibited by rainfall at different scales.
Recent research has indicated the exciting possibility that rainfall may exhibit
scaling/multiscaling characteristics, i.e., small scale fluctuations are
statistically similar to large scale fluctuations except for one or more factors
related to scale. The presence of such a hidden structure in the highly
irregular patterns of rainfall at different scales will improve our
understanding of the rainfall process and will significantly influence our
approach to rainfall modeling, measurement and prediction. The goal of the
proposed research is to develop a new theoretical framework for identifying and
studying the presence of scale invariant relationships in remotely sensed
rainfall. Our approach, based on multiresolution wavelet analysis, is different
from contemporary approaches. It is more general and has the major advantage of
being able to handle non-stationarity/inhomogeneity and anisotropy efficiently,
all of which are important characteristics of space-time rainfall fields.
Preliminary implementation of our approach to spatial rainfall has given very
promising results and has pointed out new directions for data analysis which
have the potential of unraveling simple structures from the complex non-
homogenous anisotropic spatial rainfall fields. Also, as part of this research,
the possibility of using scaling concepts for subgrid scale parametrization and
resolution- independent rainfall estimation, will be explored.