* 9117472
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Paleobiogeography of Late Devonian  and Carboniferous Echinoderms From the Peoples Republic of  China
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* N. Gary Lane, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 09/30/1995
* USD 41,289.00

The Carboniferous is the Age of Echinoderms, especially stemmed echinoderms.
Faunas are commonly abundant and diverse, but many genera are high endemic.
Crinoid endemism can make biogeographic analysis difficult, but could play a
positive role in assessing the proximity of continental blocks during the
Carboniferous. In this study, we will focus on echinoderms from the latest
Devonian and Carboniferous of China that could provide constraints to
paleogeographic reconstructions of the closure of Paleo-Tethys. Sparse
collections of crinoids from the latest Devonian of northwestern China indicate
the presence of a fauna that may be intermediate in nature between older
(Devonian) European echinoderm communities and younger (Early Carboniferous)
North American echinoderm communities. Camerate crinoids decreased in diversity
and abundance, becoming virtually "extinct" in North America and Europe.
However, some Carboniferous camerates survived elsewhere in the world and
eventually made a dramatic, although short-lived, comeback during the Permian in
the Tethyan realm (e.g., Australia, Timor, and the USSR). Collections of
crinoids from the mid-Carboniferous of southeastern China indicate the presence
of a fauna that may have set the stage for this Tethyan re-radiation of
camerate-rich assemblages. We will test the hypothesis that certain elements of
the Carboniferous echinoderm community radiated through Asia during the latest
Devonian and earliest Carboniferous, expanded globally in the Carboniferous,
then contracted back to the Tethyan realm during the latest Carboniferous.