* 9117935
* Late Paleozoic Tectonic and Depositional History of the     Central Basin Platform, Permian Basin of West Texas and     Southeast New Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Steven Dorobek, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1993
* USD 70,809.00

This proposal requests funds for a detailed study of the tectonic evolution and
depositional history of Permian sedimentary rocks on the Central Basin Platform,
Permian Basin. The Central Basin Platform (CBP) is similar to other foreland
uplifts. The results from an integrated study of Permian sequence stratigraphic
relationships across the platform, geophysical data, and quantitative subsidence
analyses will provide important information about the tectonic origin and
depositional history of this complex structure. This study also will present an
unique intrabasinal test of sequence stratigraphic concepts. The objectives of
the proposed research are: 1) to determine the late Paleozoic tectonic evolution
of the CBP through detailed analysis of pre-Leonardian structures and uplift
history of the CBP; 2) to better constrain tectonic models for the origin of the
Permian Basin area; 3) to integrate structural analyses of the CBP into larger-
scale models of the tectonic evolution of the Marathon- Ouachita foreland and
the Ancestral Rocky Mountains; 4) to determine the Permian subsidence history
along several east-west transects across the CBP and adjacent parts of the
Midland and Delaware Basins; 5) to determine the relative effects of subsidence,
eustasy, sedimentation rate, and paleogeographic position of the evolution of
Permian depositional facies from the platform interior and across platform-to-
basin transitions around the CBP; 6) to identify the controls that pre-Premian
structures of the CBP have on Permian subsidence history and facies
architecture; 7) to develop a better understanding of the origin of foreland
uplifts and their response to convergence events; and 8) to relate all the of
the above objectives to future hydrocarbon exploration and production strategies
on the CBP.