* 9117795
* Signal Transduction Pathways for Inducible Plant Defense Genes
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1997
* Clarence Ryan, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Erik T. Nilsen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 529,350.00

Research is proposed to investigate the intracellular signal transduction
pathways that regulate the synthesis of defensive proteinase inhibitor proteins
in plant leaves in response to herbivore and pathogen attacks. Our previous
research has provided strong evidence that the inducible signalling pathways
that regulate two proteinase inhibitor genes in tomato, potato, and alfalfa
plants, and likely in other plants as well, involve a lipid-based system that
results in the production of jasmonic acid as a key signalling molecule. The
evidence suggests that insect or pathogen attacks produce extracellular signals
that interact with the plant cell membrane to release linolenic acid. Linolenic
acid is known to be converted to jasmonic acid through several biochemical
steps. Both linolenic acid and jasmonic acid are powerful inducers of the
inhibitor genes when placed on leaf surfaces, indicating their involvement in
the signalling pathway. The research funded by this grant will seek the
mechanism within the plant membranes that releases linolenic acid in response to
signals produced by insect or pathogen attacks and will establish the
biochemical events leading to the synthesis of jasmonic acid. The mechanism by
which jasmonic acid can activate proteinase inhibitor gene expression in the
plant cell nucleus will also be studied. The fate of jasmonic acid and its
receptor will be sought, and its role in gene activation will be investigated.
The information will be utilized to understand the biochemical basis of
inducible plant defenses against insects and pathogens.