* 9117477
* Microtuble Organization and Dynamics During Amphibian       Oogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* David Gard, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 12/31/1995
* USD 278,599.00

Amphibian eggs are polarized along an animal-vegetal (A-V) axis defined by the
asymmetric distribution of pigment and yolk, and by the location of the meiotic
spindles. The A-V axis formed during oogenesis plays an important role in the
establishment of the germ layers during later embryonic development.
Microtubules and microtubule organizing centers have often been implicated in
specification of the A-V axis, though the precise mechanism remains unknown. The
proposed experiments are designed to determine the organization and dynamics of
microtubules and microtubule organizing centers during oogenesis and A-V axis
formation in Xenopus laevis. Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy will be used
to examine the organization of total and acetylated (non- dynamic) microtubules
during oogenesis. Microinjection of biotinylated-tubulin will be used to
characterize the microtubule assembly sites and dynamics in stage I oocytes,
during A-V axis formation in stages III-IV, and during oocyte maturation.
Microinjection of fluorescein-labeled tubulin and time-lapse confocal microscopy
will be used to examine microtubule dynamics in living stage I oocytes and
during assembly and alignment of the meiotic spindles. %%% The oocyte of Xenopus
laevis is a large spherical cell that exhibits a nonrandom distribution of
cytoplasmic components early in its development. The mechanism that controls
this redistribution is not known, but is significant because it underlies
polarized growth of the embryo. This project will provide important information
on the roles of microtubules and microtubule organizing centers on the formation
of the animal- vegetal axis of this cell.