* 9117398
* Climate Forcing, Ocean Circulation, and the Geologic Record of Global Change Across the Cenomanian/Turonian Boundary,   Western Interior Seaway of North America
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Rudy Slingerland, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1994
* USD 250,000.00

Strata deposited during the globally warm, equable, Cretaceous period preserve
the record of a unique natural experiment which will help us better understand
the dynamical behavior of the integrated earth system. The stratigraphic record
of the Western Interior Cretaceous Seaway (WIKS) provides an unparalleled
opportunity for study because of the availability of substantial data sets that
are ripe for synthesis and analysis. Using the WIKS as a working "laboratory" we
propose to: (1) understand the global climate system and its variability during
a period of extreme warmth; (2) validate climate models for conditions
substantially different from the present day; (3) determine the oceanographic,
biological, and chemical responses of the WIKS across the C/T boundary to both
global and regional forcing factors; and (4) better define the links between
these seaway responses and the geologic record of the Western Interior Basin. In
this study a series of hierarchical atmospheric and ocean model simulations
constrained by the diverse WIKS dataset will be performed for three times slices
representing different stages of a major second order sea level cycle (Greenhorn
cyclothem). For each time slice we will: (1) determine the global
paleogeography, paleotopography, sea level, and atmospheric pCO2 from the
literature; (2) perform baseline numerical experiments of global climate using
the NCAR Community Climate Model (CCM); (3) perform a series of CCM sensitivity
experiments to sealevel changes, low versus high topography, variable orbital
parameters, and variable pCO2; (4) investigate the sensitivity of the WIKS to
CCM variation by using daily wind stresses and evaporation minus precipitation
from the CCM runs to drive a three-dimensional, turbulent flow, coastal ocean
model; (5) investigate the influence these circulation changes might have on
organic carbon production, and carbon and oxygen isotopes by following chemical
tracers in the circulation model and developing box models of nutrients, oxygen,
and salinity; and (6) test these predictions by assembling lithofacies maps,
benthic biofacies/oxygen gradient maps, and maps of inferred temperature,
paleosalinity and organic carbon distribution.