* 9117186
* A Bacolovirus-induced RNA Polymerase
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Robert Weaver, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1996
* USD 322,154.00

Early transcription in the nuclear polyhedrosis virus of Autographa californica
is directed by the host RNA polymerase II, while late transcription depends on
an a-amanitin-resistant, virus-induced polymerase. The baculoviruses are
increasingly important as expression vectors for producing large quantities of
useful proteins. An understanding of baculovirus gene expression will probably
lead to better vectors. In particular, an understanding of the unique,
a-amanitin-resistant, virus-induced RNA polymerase would be especially valuable,
since this is the enzyme that transcribes the cloned genes in baculovirus
expression vectors. The immediate goal of this project is to map and
characterize the genes encoding this enzyme. The specific aims are: 1. Isolating
viral mutants with lesions in the genes encoding the late-specific viral RNA
polymerase. This will be accomplished in three steps: a. Obtaining temperature
sensitive (ts) viral mutants that are deficient in late gene expression, as
evidenced by failure to form non-occluded virions. b. Screening these ts mutants
for the inability to carry out a-amanitin-resistnt late transcription at the
non-permissive temperature in isolated nuclei. c. Screening the positive mutants
from specific aim 1b for a ts virus-induced polymerase by purifying the enzyme
and showing that it is ts in vitro. This would also demonstrate conclusively
that this is indeed the polymerase responsible for late viral transcription. 2.
Mapping the mutant genes from specific aim 1c. This will be done by rescue of
the wild-type phenotype with cloned fragments of the viral genome. 3. Sequencing
the mutant genes and their wild-type counterparts to locate open reading frames
and the lesions responsible for the ts phenotype. In the unlikely event that we
cannot find mutants in the genes for the virus-induced RNA polymerase itself,
the ts mutants we do isolate should be in the genes for late-specific
transcription factors. These are also of great interest, and will be mapped and
sequenced.