* 9117819
* RUI: Magnetostratigraphy of the Eocene-Oligocene Transition in Tran-Pecos Texas
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Donald Prothero, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 05/31/1994
* USD 60,636.00

The Eocene-Oligocene transition (about 42 to 30 million years ago) was the most
significant episode of climatic change and mass extinction since the demise of
the dinosaurs. The extinctions during this transition have been attributed to
many causes, including meteorite or cometary impacts, volcanism, and climatic
cooling due to Antarctic glaciation and oceanographic changes. Recent research
has shown that the most dramatic changes occur between the middle and late
Eocene. The Trans-Pecos region of Texas is the only place in North America where
this change is recorded by superposed mammalian faunas datable by both
radiometrics and magnetostratigraphy. There is no place in North American the
contains interfingering marine/non-marine sequence of this age, so this area is
the key to unlocking the details of the Uintan-Duchesnean-Chadronian transition
in land mammals. The Trans-Pecos rocks contain a number of well studied faunas
of middle Eocene (Uintan) and late Eocene (Duchesnean and Chadronian) age.
Although preliminary paleomagnetic studies have been on some these rocks, many
of the key fossil localities, and most of the Uintan and Chadronian parts of the
section, have never been sampled. This project will collect and analyzed
paleomagnetic samples from most of the key localities, and provide new 40Ar/39Ar
dates to improve the geochronology. It will then be possible to correlate
Uintan, Duchesnean, and Chadronian faunas from all over western North America to
the magnetic polarity timescale. Episodes of extinction and faunal change can
then be examined in greater detail, and correlated more precisely with the
global record of climatic and biotic change during the Eocene-Oligocene
transition.