* 9117130
* U.S.-Belgium Cooperative Research:  Dynamics and Energetics of Electrons and Nuclei in Molecular Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Yngve Ohrn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

This three-year award will support collaborative research involving Yngve Ohrn
and Erik Deumens of the University of Florida, Lucas Lathouwers of the
University of Antwerp, and Jean-Marie Andre of the University of Our Lady of
Peace in Namur, Belgium. The proposed research deals with time-dependent studies
of electron and nuclear dynamics in molecular systems. In order to predict
electron transfer rates and to distinguish between various transfer mechanisms,
the investigators propose to use time-dependent variational principles and model
wavefunctions for electrons. Electron transfer as a general phenomenon affects
our thinking in virtually all areas of chemistry and in many areas of biology.
Prior collaboration between Yngve Ohrn and Dr. Lathouwer's group at Antwerp has
been highly productive and covered the development of theory and computational
methods for the study of these processes at the submolecular level. The
investigators propose to continue their theoretical work and modeling and apply
the time-dependent methodology to extended polymeric systems. Dr. Andre's group
provides the necessary expertise on polymer codes and polymeric systems. The
project will continue to benefit from Dr. Lathouwer's expertise on model
wavefunctions. These combined efforts will advance our understanding of the
dynamics of electron transfer and contribute significantly to modern concepts in
theoretical chemistry.