* 9117220
* Barnacle Adhesion and Adhesives:  Biomechanical, Molecular  and Cellular Aspects
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Robert Draughn, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 250,000.00

The value and applications of adhesives are almost limitless in daily human
existence. The bioadhesives synthesized and secreted by barnacles, unlike most
man-made adhesives, forms bonds under water. This characteristic may prove
useful in dental, medical, mariculture, building and construction, and other
industrial applications. We have collected samples of an adhesive secretion from
local barnacles held in sea water culture in our laboratory. The application of
both standard and innovative adhesion tests will advance our knowledge of the
mechanical and chemical interactions that occur at the interface of various
substrates and this adhesive secretion under water. Electrophoretic and
chromatographic components of the barnacle adhesive secretion that exhibit
adhesive properties. Microscopic studies of barnacles will pinpoint the cells
that synthesize and secrete adhesive macromolecules. Isolation and purification
of the macromolecules will allow additional studies and applications of these
important materials. In the future, it is reasonable to expect that genetic
engineering methods will produce synthetic barnacle bioadhesives in sufficient
quantities to satisfy dental, medical, household, and industrial needs.
Moreover, after determining the chemical basis of adhesion of barnacle "glue",
could be synthesized. The incorporation of such anti-adhesives into marine
surface coatings could minimize environmental pollution and the economic impact
of barnacles on the boaters, shippers, and navies of the world.