* 9117094
* Toward a System that Supports Conceptual Modeling in Data   Intensive Scientific Investigation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Terence Smith, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 08/31/1994
* USD 610,808.00

The goal of the proposed research is to design, analyze, and perform feasibility
studies of key components of systems that support scientific modeling in data-
intensive and numerically- intensive applications, particularly in the area of
large-scale environmental science. The two major sets of issues under
investigation are explicit support for the complex spatio- temporal objects that
are required in the computational modeling of scientific phenomena (as well as
their temporal and spatial relationships) and transparent support for data
access from large, heterogeneous and distributed data sources. As products of
this research, the following tools will be developed: languages for the
definition and manipulation of complex, spatio-temporal objects and for the
mathematical and statistical modeling of scientific phenomena; algorithms for
the support of schema updates and evolution; optimization techniques for spatial
and temporal manipulations; protocols for storage and operation abstraction; and
platforms for collaborative scientific research. The particular domain of
scientific application involves database support for investigating the hydrology
of the Amazon basin, which is chosen as a typical Earth Observation System (EOS)
project. The research, however, is designed to benefit many areas of the natural
sciences by providing a set of tools for increasing the productivity of
scientists who need to integrate complex modeling activities with the use of
large datasets, which is a problem encountered in most EOS projects.