* 9117747
* Dynamics and Structure of Arabinogalactan-Proteins at the   Plasma Membrane-Cell Wall Interface in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Eugene Nothnagel, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 11/30/1995
* USD 303,763.00

The abundance of arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) and other glycoconjugates at
the interface between the plasma membrane and the cell wall of rose cells
suggests that these molecules serve as mediating agents between the surfaces of
these two distinct structures. This hypothesis will be tested on whole cells and
model systems by analyzing the effect of perturbations of AGPs on both lateral
diffusion of plasma membrane components and on linear motion between the plasma
membrane and cell wall. Characteristics of these types of motions will be
determined as a function of turgor or applied pressure. Perturbations of AGPs
will include aggregation, enzymatic cleavage, and altered synthesis. Such
characterization will provide further information on the effects of both turgor
and AGPs on membrane dynamics. Enzymes capable of cleaving plasma membrane AGPs
on live protoplasts will be further purified and their mode of action
elucidated. Analysis of the biochemical structure of plasma membrane AGPs and
molecules that copurify with plasma membrane AGPs during isolation will also be
conducted. Structural analysis of plasma membrane AGPs will include
determination of glycosyl linkage composition, predominant anomeric
configurations, and amino terminal sequence. The biochemical studies will
provide important information towards understanding the role of AGPs as
mediating agents or/and as specific recognition molecules during development.
The cell walls of plants are complex extracellular matrix structures containing
protein and polysaccharide components, the detailed organization of which is
largely unknown. As a result of the cellular high water pressure state known as
turgor, the plasma membrane must be tightly appressed to the wall by about 7
atmospheres of pressure. However, the components of the membrane must be free to
undergo rapid lateral diffusion, even while appressed against the wall. This is
particularly true during cell growth. A number of protein-linked glycoconjugates
have been found in the plasma membrane, the carbohydrate portion of which is
external to the cell and extends between the membrane and the wall. Some of
these are analogous to proteoglycans of animal cell membranes. The functions of
these are totally unknown. This project will explore functional and structural
aspects of one group of these glycoconjugates, the arabinogalactans, with the
hypothesis in mind that the arabinogalactans may serve as physical mediators or
cushions between the membrane and the wall of plant cells.