* 9117341
* Correlated Electron Transport in One-dimensional Channels
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Leonid Glazman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1995
* USD 183,000.00

Correlated Electron Transport in One-Dimensional Channels - The object of this
project is to build a theoretical structure within which to treat quantum
transport for a system with interacting electrons, in particular for narrow
channels formed in gated semiconductor heterostructures. Coulomb repulsion
between electrons becomes crucially important at low electron density, resulting
in long-range interactions and correlated states. Two models for a strongly
correlated system of electrons will be investigated. In the first model
fluctuations of the electrostatic potential that forms the channel within the
inversion layer is taken as much smaller than the electron-electron interaction.
The second model will take account of strong fluctuations in the potential and
the resulting formation of almost isolated quantum dots. These models will be
compared with experimental results. %%% Recent progress in fabrication of
semiconductor structures, including electron beam lithography and MBE growth on
vicinal surfaces, has allowed the systematic experimental study of quantum
transport on submicron length scales. Existing theories accurately describe the
case where the electrons in a narrow channel move with very little scattering,
and the opposite case where the electrons are frozen tightly in place. There is,
however and intermediate regime where a single sample can be changed from a
metal to an insulator simply by changing the electron density. This much more
interesting regime cannot be treated using conventional models, because they do
not include electron-electron interactions properly. This research project
proposes to develop models for this intermediate transition regime. Such
understanding is quite important, as this class of effects have been proposed as
the basis for the next generation of ultra-small electronic devices.