* 9117837
* Isoenzymes of Soybean Calcium-Dependent Protein Kinase
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Alice Harmon, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 04/30/1996
* USD 229,999.00

Calcium-dependent protein kinase from soybean is the prototype for a new class
of protein kinases having regulatory domains that are similar to calmodulin. The
biochemical properties of this enzyme indicate that it plays a role in signal
transduction pathways employing calcium as a second messenger. Recent evidence
suggests that several isoenzymes of CDPK are present in soybean. Supporting this
conclusion is the observation that the sequences of two cDNAs encoding soybean
CDPK are approximately 70% identical. Isoenzymes having differing sensitivities
to calcium, substrate specificities, and tissue distributions could provide the
basis for differences in cellular responses to calcium. The objective of the
proposed research is to identify and characterize isoenzymes of CDPK. The
techniques of molecular biology, biochemistry, and immunology will be used to
study the structure, function, regulation, and distribution of the CDPK
isoenzymes. The cDNAs encoding the isoenzymes will be identified and expressed
in Escherechia coli. The expressed isoenzymes will be purified and biochemically
characterized. Antibodies that recognize specific isoenzymes will be made.
Antibodies and cDNA probes will be used to determine the distribution of the
isoenzymes in the plant. In addition the function and interaction of the
catalytic and regulatory domains of CDPK will be studied through the expression
in E. coli and subsequent characterization of the individual functional domains.