* 9117062
* U.S.-Singapore Cooperative Research on Local Buckling of    Stiffened Plates in Offshore Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* M. Arockiasamy, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 05/31/1995
* USD 19,016.00

This award provides funds to permit Dr. M. Arockiasamy, Department of Ocean
Engineering, Florida Atlantic University, to pursue with Dr. N. E. Shanmugam,
Department of Civil Engineering, National University of Singapore, for a period
of 24 months, research on the behavior of stiffened steel plates subjected to
the combined action of in-plane and lateral loading in offshore structures.
Simplified methods will be developed for predicting the behavior of ultimate
load carrying capacity of stiffened plates supported in the longitudinal
direction or both in the longitudinal and transverse directions. Orthotropic
plates will be analyzed using the energy method with an approximate deflection
function. The effects of parameters such as plate width to thickness ratio,
flexural and torsional properties of stiffeners, aspect ratio of stiffened
plates, and the relative magnitudes of lateral and in- plane load on the
behavior of stiffened plates also will be studied. The proposed analytical and
experimental investigations will lead to a greater understanding of the behavior
of stiffened plates under various load conditions and will contribute to the
formulation of improved design recommendations for offshore structures. These
recommendations, based on experimental and analytical work, will replace the
empirical formulae currently being used for stiffened plates commonly adopted in
ship and offshore structures. This project will provide for the PI access to
ongoing research at the National University of Singapore, where the experimental
research will be done. Both collaborators will be engaged in the analytical
investigations which will be carried out at Florida Atlantic University. The
collaborators are highly respected engineers who have published extensively in
the field of the research. The present project will allow them to combine their
talents and the resources of their respective laboratories in cooperative
research on a problem of mutual interest and potential benefit to the United
States and Singapore. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science
in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and developing country scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.