* 9117779
* Calcium and Phosphate Regulation in Avian Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Nancy Clark, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 08/31/1995
* USD 164,999.00

During the first half of development, all calcium utilized by the chick embryo
is derived from yolk. At mid-incubation, the chorioallantoic membrane grows out
and comes in contact with the shell membrane; thereafter it functions in
mobilizing calcium from the shell. Excess calcium resorbed from the shell that
is not utilized by the chick embryo is deposited in the yolk. Thus while the
chorioallantoic membrane transports calcium in one direction (from shell to
embryo), the yolk sac membrane is apparently able to transport calcium both into
and out of the yolk, by mechanisms that are not well understood. Chick embryos
can be raised in shell-less culture, in which the only source of calcium is the
yolk. After about mid-incubation, shell-less embryos deplete their supply of
calcium from the yolk. These embryos have low blood calcium values, poorly
mineralized bones and fail to hatch. Shell- less embryos provided an excellent
system for study of yolk sac membrane calcium transport, since their supply of
shell calcium is absent. In these embryos, all calcium transport of calcium
across the yolk sac membrane is from yolk to embryo. The transport of calcium
across the yolk sac membrane and chorioallantoic membranes will be measured in
normal and shell-less cultured embryos. The effects of inhibitors and various
calcium-regulating hormones on these transport processes will be investigated.
Another possible site of calcium regulation in the chick embryo is the kidney.
There is almost nothing known about the function of the kidney during
development in vertebrate embryos. Birds offer easy access to such studies,
since the embryo is separate from the mother. The function of the kidney is
filtering, reabsorbing and excreting various ions will be studied at several
developmental ages in normal and shell-less chick embryos. Additionally kidney
function will be studied in embryos treated with several calcium- regulating
hormones. //