* 9117150
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Biological Response       Associated with Mesoscale Hydrodynamical Structures in the  Western Mediterranean
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Tommy Dickey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 10/31/1994
* USD 13,350.00

This two-year award supports cooperative research between T.D. Dickey of the
University of Southern California and Isabelle Taupier-LeTage of the Center for
Oceanography in Marseille, France. The investigators will study biological
responses associated with the mesoscale hydrodynamical features in the western
Mediterranean Sea. The objectives of their research are to develop two types of
moored, interdisciplinary instrumentation, which will be utilized in studies of
western Mediterranean mesoscale features, and to initiate joint field
measurements. Dr. Dickey and his research group bring to the collaboration
innovative approaches to moored instrumentation development and its application
to multidisciplinary questions in oceanography. They have considerable expertise
in the collection, analysis and modeling of bio-optical and physical data sets.
This is complemented by the French group's experience with physical and
biological measurements and theory relevant to the western Mediterranean Sea.
Recent advances in interdisciplinary oceanic measurement systems now make it
possible to collect physical and bio-optical data concurrently. Problems
concerning the physical and biological processes, the carbon cycle, and global
climate change require simultaneous and complementary moored measurements,
ground truth and remote sensing observations. The further development of
sensitive and accurate moored instrumentation will advance capabilities to
collect information about these processes.