* 9117938
* E. coli Colony Development
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1992,02/29/1996
* James Shapiro, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/29/1996
* USD 300,000.00

Surface growth is a key feature of bacterial action in nature. The E. coli
colony is an excellent model system of bacterial surface populations. It is a
highly organized structure characterized by differential gene expression. Cell-
cell interactions over distances of microns regulate the growth of individuals
cells, and gene expression patterns can be coordinated between populations
separated by distances of millimeters. Diffusible signals affect several aspects
of colony development. Genetic loci subject differential control during colony
development have been identified by spontaneous and transposon insertion
mutations and the use of lacZ fusions. In addition, the cAMP system has been
implicated in activating the spatially localized replication of Mudiac elements.
The experimental program will extend these initial observations by detailed
study of three systems:(1) developmental regulation of the dev1891::lacZ fusion.
(2) the role of DNA polymerase 1, the cAMP system, and diffusible substances in
the control of Mudiac replication, and (3) the dev2137 and dev2137 mutations
located in the oriC region of the chromosome. The results will specify gene
products involved in colony morphogenesis, provide a more detailed picture of
differential gene expression during growth on an agar surface, and identify
diffusible signals that affect colony developments.