* 9117929
* Organic Free Radical Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1991,05/31/1997
* Martin Newcomb, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 05/31/1997
* USD 500,000.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of
Professor Martin E. Newcomb at Wayne State University. A number of very fast
organic radical reactions will be studied including second order radical
trapping reactions that approach the rate of diffusion in low viscosity solvents
and first order rearrangements of highly reactive radicals that have lifetimes
at room temperature as short as several picoseconds. An indirect kinetic method
for determining rate constants of carbon- centered radical rearrangements which
has been reported will be further developed such that it will have an ultimate
kinetic resolution at room temperature of about one picosecond and will be
useful even when direct kinetic studies are not possible. The indirect method
will be extended to decarboxylations of acyloxy radicals and reactions of
nitrogen-centered radicals. Fast rearrangements of aryl-substituted cyclopropyl-
carbinyl radicals, substituted 5-hexenyl radicals and the cubylcarbinyl radical
will be fully characterized. Applications of radical rearrangements in
mechanistic studies of iron-containing enzymes and their models will be
initiated. A direct laser-flash kinetic method will also be utilized to study
decarboxylations of acyloxy radicals as well as rearrangements of carbon- and
nitrogen-centered radicals. %%% Organic radicals, neutral species with an odd
number of electrons, will be studied. These reactive species will be generated
by thermolysis of stable precursor molecules. An indirect method of determining
the rates of reactions of the radicals will be developed. This new rate
measurement method will allow examinations of reactions of carbon and nitrogen
containing radicals which were previously too rapid to study conveniently.
Application of this new technology to examine iron-containing enzymes and their
models will be initiated. The results are expected to provide valuable
information that can be used in a wide variety of organic and biological
reactions that involve radical intermediates.