* 9117084
* Developing Guidelines To Providing Computer-Based Support   For Scientific Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* William Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 08/31/1995
* USD 248,818.00

9117084 Soloway, E. This is the third year funding of a three-year continuing
award. The "human-computer interface" is paramount if scientists are to take
full advantage of the vast quantities and types of data now becoming available.
Attention needs to be focused on more than the query language; rather, the
interface needs to integrate scientific databases into the everyday work
practices of scientists, e.g., data exploring, hypothesis generating and
testing, report and chart making. The Task/Artifact Methodology is being
employed; it consists of cycles of cognitive task analysis, system building, and
testing in ecologically valid contexts, e.g., practicing scientists using the
system on a daily basis. The resultant computer-based environment, ReV
(Representations for Visualization) is user- and task-centered, as opposed to
being technology-driven. ReV serves as the scientist's "notebook" permitting
him/her to move among databases, hypotheses, reports, charts, etc. ReV is being
designed for scientists in nuclear engineering and for scientists engaged in
global change research. As computers become integral to the moment- by-moment
work practices of scientists, well-designed tools become critical. This project,
then, serves as a model for how scientist- centered computing environments can
be developed and deployed.