* 9117143
* Infrastructure for Integrated, Heterogeneous Engineering    Databases and Design Histories
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Jami Shah, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Y. T. Chien
* 06/30/1995
* USD 266,731.00

This research investigates an advanced heterogeneous database environment for
engineering design, with emphasis on using design knowledge and relating design
decisions to design versions. The environment uses a blackboard approach to
coordinate, integrate, and monitor product development. An object-oriented
database provides an integrated, logical view of complex design entities that
are stored in a variety of databases. Designers therefore have a global view of
how heterogeneous data repositories form the complete product design. The
blackboard also coordinates access to expert systems and deductive databases to
provide engineering design knowledge. Design histories are captured as a series
of design development steps and the corresponding engineering knowledge is used
in each step and resulting decision. Both navigational and knowledge-based
approaches to querying design histories are used. The impact of this research on
database technology will be the advancement of heterogeneous databases through
the use of object-oriented concepts to achieve a tightly-coupled view of design
data. Object-oriented concepts will also be extended with a process model for
capturing and querying design histories. This research will also lead to the
improvement of the engineering design productivity by providing an integrated
view of design knowledge and data and by supporting the ability to query design
histories allowing re-use of previous designs.