* 9117633
* Energetics of the Adults and Larvae of the Antarctic Krill  Euphausia superba
* O/D,OPP
* 07/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Robin Ross, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/1996
* USD 341,186.00

This research on the energetics of the adults and larvae of the Antarctic krill,
Euphausia superba, is focused on quantification of the role of ice biota in
winter-over survival of krill larvae. Observed interannual differences in
physiological condition of the larvae during the winter could lead to
differences in survival of the young-of-the-year, and thus in the strength of
any one year class. Processes underlying such differences during early and late
winter will be studied. Low food availability in the fall after the summer
phytoplankton blooms suggests that larvae in early winter will have experienced
several months of near starvation conditions. Without an additional food source
such as ice biota in the underside of the sea ice these larvae may not survive
the winter. However, larvae under the ice in late winter of a heavy ice year
will have had this additional food source, and may be in better physiological
condition than the beginning of the winter. Environmental conditions in open
water and under ice will be compared and will be sampled to determine their
physiological condition. The nutritional contribution of the ice biota to total
energy demand of the larvae on two month-long cruises to the Southern Ocean will
be quantified. The proposed research will address several significant questions
about the winter-over energetics of larval krill, in particular the role of ice
biota in winter-over survival and subsequent recruitment.