* 9117056
* Acquisition of an Elemental Analyzer
* MPS,CHE
* 11/15/1991,04/30/1993
* Kyriacos C. Nicolaou, Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas C. Farrar
* 04/30/1993
* USD 42,500.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will help the
Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation acquire an Elemental Analyzer. This
instrument will provide fundamental analytical support for researchers in the
Department of Chemistry including synthetic, bioorganic and analytical chemists
involved in research projects that include: synthesis of complex natural
products, design and synthesis of complex organic and organometallic compounds,
catalytic antibodies, design and synthesis of enzyme inhibitors, synthesis of
peptides, oligonucleotides and their analogs, isolation of enzymes, modification
of natural enzymes, synthesis of artifical enzymes, and the development of new
synthetic technology. Departments at Scripps (Immunology, Molecular and
Experimental Medicine, Molecular Biology and Neuropharmacology) and outside of
Scripps will also have access to this facility through an already established
mass spectrometry user facility. %%% Elemental analysis combined with mass
spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance and x-ray crystallography can provide
sufficient information to allow for the unequivocal determination of molecular
structure. The distinctive characteristics of this technology include its
ability to provide unambiguous compositional data consistently and quickly for
virtually all of the numerous classes of organic materials, independent of the
physical characteristics of a sample (i.e., crystal size and the stability of
the molecular ion). In addition, elemental analysis is the only method that can
evaluate sample purity. The unique and fundamental information provided by
elemental analysis facilitates research in the chemical and biological sciences.
This is particularly true in structural, synthetic and bioorganic chemistry.