* 9117387
* Structural and Biological Characterization of               Elasmobranch Urotensins
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1995
* J. Michael Conlon, Creighton University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 07/31/1995
* USD 157,117.00

The term "neurosecretion" refers to the fact that certain nerve fibers release
biologically active substances into the blood stream which are then able to
influence the activities of distant target organs. The lower portion of the
spinal cord of fishes contains such a neurosecretory system. The nerves
synthesize two peptides (small proteins) known as urotensin I and urotensin II.
The urotensins were first isolated from bony fishes (teleosts) but despite
intensive study, their importance in the physiology of these fish is not
understood. The laboratories of Dr. Conlon and Hazon are proposing a new animal
model in which to investigate the physiological roles of the urotensins. We will
purify urotensin I and II from an extract of the spinal cord of a cartilaginous
fish, the European common dogfish and determine their chemical structures. We
will then synthesize several milligrams of the peptides in order to determine
their biological actions in the dogfish. Using free swimming fish that have been
fitted with a cannula in an artery, we will investigate the effects of the
dogfish urotensins on blood pressure and on the production of steroids. The
blood of the dogfish, like other members of the shark family, contains a very
high concentration of urea which is important in maintaining an equilibrium
between the fish's body fluids and the surrounding sea water. We will
investigate the effects of the urotensins upon the levels of urea and other
blood constituents in the dogfish. We will prepare strips of smooth muscle from
the various organs and blood vessels of the dogfish and study the abilities of
the urotensins either to relax or contract these muscles. Finally, we hope to
gain insight into the sites of action of the urotensins by tagging the molecules
with a radioactive label and determining which organs in the dogfish recognize
and bind the peptides. In this way, we hope to build up an overall picture of
the roles of the urotensins in regulating the physiology of a cartilaginous
fish. This knowledge will be valuable in future investigations that will assess
the roles of the urotensins in other classes of vertebrate.