* 9117992
* Study of the Early Cretaceous (Albian) Faunas of the        Cottonwood District
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Michael Murphy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Bourgeois
* 12/31/1994
* USD 73,204.00

The project will establish a modern taxonomic base for studies of
biostratigraphy, biogeography, and evolution of the middle Cretaceous (Albian)
faunas (predominantly ammonites) of the Pacific rim of North America and will
refine the biostratigraphic standard of reference for this interval in the
Cottonwood District of northern California. A detailed standard of reference is
prerequisite to an understanding of paleobiological problems of biofacies,
biogeography and patterns of evolution, and for chronostratigraphy. It is also
needed for stratigraphic and structural problems requiring a high degree of
biostratigraphic resolution. Such a study would: 1) elucidate the
microstructural, morphologic, and ontogenetic characteristics of many unstudied
ammonite taxa; 2) would enable some evolutionary sequences to be recognized and
their patterns to be examined; 3) permit examination of hypotheses of ammonite
evolution proposed by German, Russian, and French writers; 4) enable a refined
correlation of the Lower Cretaceous strata around the Pacific rim with the
classical sections in Europe and with sequences originating in the Tethyan
seaway, e.g. Caucasus, Indian; 5) enable paleobiogeographic and biofacial
interpretations some of which are now masked by antiquated taxonomy; 6) permit a
better understanding of the history of the region and its faunas; 7) permit a
more balanced view of the Cretaceous history of North America; 8) permit
assessment of proposed mid-Cretaceous extinction events.