* 9117701
* A Comparative Study of Shale Sedimentology: Relationships   Between Sedimentary Environment and Shale Fabric
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Juergen Schieber, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 11/30/1994
* USD 69,953.00

This a comprehensive study of shale meso- and microfabrics on a suite of shale
units from a variety of climates and basin types. All shale units contain a wide
range of sedimentary environments from terrestrial to basinal. The units under
study were selected on the basis of good stratigraphic control and prior
sedimentological studies. Shale fabrics represent the cumulative record of the
history of transport, deposition, and burial of these fine-grained rocks. There
is presently a severe deficiency of comprehensive petrographic and
sedimentological case studies of shale units, and the environmental significance
of shale fabric features is still poorly understood. Comparing the full range of
meso- and microfabric features from equivalent sedimentary environments in a
suite of well studied shale units will allow us to identify environmentally
significant features (or combinations thereof), and to filter out local factors
(due to climate, biological control, basin type etc.). Data from this study will
benefit efforts of fabric classification, will establish correlations between
mesofabric and microfabric features, will probably lead to the recognition of
environmentally specific fabric associations and relate fabric features to basic
processes, and will ultimately lead to considerable refinements in basin
analysis studies.