* 9117670
* Gordon Conference on Prolactin, Oxnard, CA, February 3-7,   1992
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1993
* Nira Ben-Jonathan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1993
* USD 5,450.00

A Gordon Research Conference on the hormone Prolactin will be held in Casa
Sirena Marina Hotel, Oxnard, California on February 3-7, 1992. This conference
has been ongoing every two years since 1980, and has been drawing an audience of
110-130 participants. These include graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
academic, government and industrial scientist form the USA and abroad who share
a common interest in the various aspects of the hormone. About half of the
participants has attended every Prolactin Gordon Conference since it inception.
The participants including the invited speakers and discussion leaders, are
expected to stay in the meeting for the entire five days duration. Because of
the unique evolutionary aspects of prolactin an its many biological functions,
the conference is of interest to an broad range of scientists, from a variety of
disciplines. In accordance with the long tradition of the Gordon Research
Conferences, the emphasis is on presentation of recent, unpublished
observations, followed by long and probing discussions. Such a format fosters
interactions between scientists from different disciplines and geographical
locations and enables the field to remain progressive and viable. There is no
other scientific meeting which fulfills this function. The conference is
consisted of eight scientific sessions, 2-3 poster sessions, a banquet speaker,
a business session, several informal meetings of groups with common interests
and 2-3 social functions.