* 9117748
* Genetics and Biochemistry of Xanthan Synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Spencer Benson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1994
* USD 95,000.00

Xanthan gum (xanthan) is an exopolysaccharide that is produced by the gram-
negative pseudomonad, Xanthomonas campestris. Xanthan is composed of repeating
penta-saccharide subunits that are polymerized through B-1-4 linkages between
adjacent glucose residues to create a polymer with a glucose backbone, having
the same structure as cellulose; alternate glucose molecules contain
trisaccharide side-chains composed of one molecule of glucuronate plus two
molecules of mannose substituted with an acetyl or pyruvate group. This project
will study xanthan production in X.campestris as a model system to obtain an
understanding of the genetics and biochemistry that determine the ability of
bacteria to synthesize and export exopolysaccharides. The study of xanthan
production is important for two reasons: the ability of bacteria to colonize
hosts is often associated with polysaccharide production; thus investigations
into the production of polysaccharides should contribute significant new
knowledge about bacterial-host relationships. Also, these studies of xanthan
biosynthesis will contribute to our understanding of macromolecules cross the
molecularly complex cellular envelope. A cluster of 12 gum genes codes for
proteins that function in the assembly and polymerization of the xanthan repeat
units. The expression of this gum gene cluster will be delineated, and the
presence of additional, as yet, undiscovered gum genes that function in the
cellular export of xanthan will be investigated. A collection lacZ and phoA
fusions to each of the clustered gum genes will be isolated using a combination
of in vivo and in vitro procedures. These fusions will be used to: (i)
characterized the cellular location of the gum proteins, (ii) determine the
level of in vivo expression of each gum gene, and (iii) define the
transcriptional director gum transcripton unit. The region of DNA that contains
the gum cluster promoter will be fused to lacZ; the effect of deletion and
spontaneous "leaky" mutations on the expression of lacZ will be used to clearly
define and characterized the gum promoter. Gene products that are needed to
export xanthan from the cell are virtually certain to be envelope proteins.
Since alkaline phosphatase (product of phoA) activity is restricted to the
periplasm, putative export mutants will be isolated as TnphoA insertions that
are Gum-PhoA+. These mutants will be characterized to begin to define the genes
involved in the export process.