* 9118100
* Investigation of Nanoparticle Formation Using a Plasma      Expansion Process
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1995
* Steven Girshick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1995
* USD 644,461.00

It is proposed an experimental and theoretical study of nanoparticle synthesis
using a plasma process. Silicon carbide particle synthesis will be studied as a
model of systems which involve chemical nucleation of microcrystals. The
experimental apparatus will consist of a thermal plasma reactor into which
reactants are injected and then expanded through a converging nozzle. Particles
will nucleate in the nozzle, and then will exit to a free expansion so that
coagulation is suppressed. The advantages of this approach are that (1) the
process is capable of generating nanosize particles with narrow size
distributions; (2) the nozzle flow environment can be well-characterized; (3)
key process variables such as cooling rates can be controlled; and (4) the
processcan be scaled for high-rate industrial production. A hypersonicimpactor
located immediately downstream of the nozzle will be used to collect particles
as small as 5 nm. Particles will be characterized by techniques such as scanning
tunneling microscopy and high resolution transmission electron microscopy. A
theoretical model will be developed which corresponds to the experimental
conditions, and which combines first-principles molecular dynamics calculations
of cluster properties with a dynamic model for particle nucleation and growth.
The knowledge and technology base will be develop for nanoparticle synthesis in
a plasma reaction, with a broad range of applications for advanced materials.