* 9118972
* Retinoids and Homeobox Genes in Pattern Formation: A        Feather Morphogenesis Model
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Cheng-Ming Chuong, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 06/30/1994
* USD 200,000.00

Identification of molecules and mechanisms involved in pattern formation in
embryonic development has been a central problem of developmental biology.
Recently, studies of homeobox genes and retinoic acid have brought exciting new
insights to the understanding of pattern formation. Dr. Chuong has recently
found homeoprotein gradients in developing feather buds and position specific
homeoprotein expression patterns in different cutaneous appendages. He also has
showed retinoic acid causes a disorientation of feather axes and converted
feathers into scale- like structures in a concentration dependent manner. He
hypothesizes that Hox gene expression is involved in determining the phenotypes
and orientation of cutaneous appendages in birds as has been found for appendage
phenotypes in Drosophila. He will examine the distribution of the Hox 4 complex
during feather morphogenesis. He will analyze the effect of a retinoic acid
gradient on feather pattern formation by arranging retinoic acid soaked beads in
a geometric pattern on cultured feather explants. The function of the
homeoprotein gradient will be tested directly by disrupting the gradients with
ectopically expressed Hox genes. This work will combine classical feather
morphogenesis experiments with modern molecular biology and offers an excellent
opportunity to provide clear answers to some fundamental issues of
morphogenesis.