* 9118656
* Regulation of Protein Synthesis in Developing Oat Seeds
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Scott Boyer, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1994
* USD 150,001.00

Genes for the oat storage proteins globulin and avenin are expressed in a
differential manner during seed formation. The cause for this differential
expression has been studied by Dr. Larkins as a component of his research on the
biochemistry of seed storage proteins. Preliminary evidence has narrowed the
control of expression to the translation step of the process. The investigators
propose to explore the molecular basis for the differential synthesis of storage
proteins in the oat system. They have constructed a series of transcription
vectors encoding avenins and globulins and will analyze the translation of
synthetic mRNAs in both wheat germ extracts and xenopus oocytes. This analysis
may allow them to identify structural features of the mRNAs that cause the
preferential translation of the globulin transcripts. They plan to prepare a
tRNA-dependent in vitro translation system and assess the role of the tRNA
population of oat endosperm in storage protein synthesis. This will allow them
to determine if translation termination or protein transport play a critical
role in regulating storage protein accumulation. A thorough knowledge of how
storage protein synthesis is controlled will give us insight into the mechanisms
regulating the growth and development of seeds and provide a basis for future
improvements in the nutritional quality of oats and other cereals by genetic
engineering.