* 9118773
* Marginal Band Formation and Cellular Morphogenesis in       Nucleated Erythrocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1997
* William Cohen, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1997
* USD 325,128.00

Nucleated erythrocytes are utilized as a model system for studying biogenesis
of the cytoskeleton and its relationship to cellular morphogenesis. The focus is
on formation of the marginal band (MB) of microtubules (MTs) and its function in
effecting the change of cell shape from spheroidal erythroblast to flattened
ellipsoid. A major objective is to analyze MT bundling as a basis for MB
formation, using a recently developed in vitro system. Here, MT bundling is
followed by real-time video microscopy during reassembly of MT protein obtained
simply by low temperature extraction of cytoskeletons or isolated MBs. The
analysis includes identification and ultrastructural localization of MT-
associated proteins (MAPs) involved in MT-MT crossbridging, and the use of
antibodies as potential bundling inhibitors. The second major objective is to
test our working hypothesis for stages of MB biogenesis and their functional
correlation with cell shape changes. This work exploits anemic Xenopus in which
erythroblasts differentiate in the circulation. Erythroid cells which are singly
and doubly pointed and which contain pointed, incomplete MBs have been
discovered in the circulation of such anemic frogs; these may represent
morphogenetic intermediates. Experiments include BrdU nuclear labelling to
determine the morphogenetic sequence in vivo and in vitro, testing of predicted
MT polarity in pointed cells, and study of ;the causal relationship between MB
structure and cell shape. The work is expected to help settle current
controversy regarding MT bundle formation and function, and to enhance general
understanding of cytoskeletal function in eukaryotic cells. The red blood cells
of nonmammalian vertebrates are quite different from those of mammals, in that
mammalian red cells lose their nuclei during maturation while nonmammalian red
cells retain their nuclei. During frog red cell differentiation, there is a
marked shape change from the rounded, spheroid shape of the erythroblast
precursor to the flattened ellipsoid shape of the mature erythrocyte. This shape
change is associated with the development of a set of circumferential bundles of
microtubules in the plane of flattening, known as the marginal band (MB), which
presumably functions to maintain the unique shape of these cells. This proposal
addresses two questions with respect to the mechanism by which MBs develop and
function: 1, what non-microtubular proteins are involved in the bundling
process; and 2, what is the role of the MB in cellular morphogenesis? In
addition to increasing our understanding of how nonmammalian vertebrate
erythrocytes develop, this project may shed new light on general principles of
microtubule bundling and microtubule interactions with associated proteins.