* 9118846
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Revising the         Engineering Curriculum by Using Simulation Models for       Engineering Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Russell Barton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Senior Program Assistant
* 08/31/1993
* USD 30,000.00

Today's practicing engineers run their simulation models iteratively to help
create product designs, often through ad hoc strategies for multiple runs. It
has been observed that: (a) there are efficient strategies for planning multiple
simulation runs; (b) many of these techniques are common across all engineering
disciplines; and (c) there is a void in the United States engineering curriculum
in this area. The objective of this effort is to create a modern course in
engineering design, with a focus on the exercise of computer models to improve
the performance and manufacturability of device and system designs, not just to
analyze existing designs. An interdisciplinary course will provide a common
language and approach that will allow engineers from different disciplines to
work together more effectively. This will result in better designs for products
and systems. This effort represents a unique and innovative mechanism for
training engineers in engineering design. Tools of simulation will be combined
with a case study approach using extensive industrial collaboration. The modular
development of this interdisciplinary course will facilitate its transfer and
use by manufacturing engineering programs throughout the country.