* 9118208
* Underground Metabolism and Development: Polyacetylene       Biosynthesis in Asteraceae Roots
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Hector Flores, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 06/30/1995
* USD 120,000.00

The studies proposed here focus on the physiology and biochemistry of the
polyacetylenes, fatty acid derivatives which are present mainly in the roots of
Asteraceae. Polyacetylenes show a wide range of biological activities
(nematicidal, fungicidal and antiviral), and may play an important role in
protecting plant roots against challenge from soil pathogens. By transformation
with Agrobacterium rhizogenes, we have obtained "hairy roots" cultures of five
genera in the Asteraceae. These fast growing roots have shown stable, long-term
production of root polyacetylenes and are therefore an ideal experimental
system. Using precursor label incorporation, HPLC and GC-MS analysis, and cell-
free assays, we propose to establish the pathway for polyacetylene biosynthesis
in root cultures. Fungal and nematodal bioassays have been developed, and will
be used to monitor the biological activity of the polyacetylenes produced in
rootcultures. The de novo formation of polyacetylenes in root cultures can be
induced by treatment with fungal elicitors. This approach will be used to
identiy the rate-limiting enzymatic steps in polyacetylene biosynthesis, and
test the proposed involvement of lipoxygenase. Although roots normally grow
heterotrophically both in isolated culture and "in planta", we have found that
they can also be grown photosynthetically and photoautotrophically. We will also
study the quantitative and qualitative effects of photosynthesis and
photoautotrophy on root polyacetylene patterns. ***//