* 9118439
* Long-term Ecological Research (LTER) on the Antarctic       Marine Ecosystem:  Microbiology and Carbon Flux
* O/D,OPP
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1997
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/1997
* USD 704,356.00

The annual advance and retreat of pack ice may be the major physical determinant
of spatial/temporal changes in the structure and function of antarctic marine
communities. Interannual cycles and/or trends in the annual extent of pack ice
may also have significant effects on all levels of the food web, from total
annual primary production to breeding success in seabirds. Historical records
indicate a 6 to 8 year cycle in the maximum extent of pack ice in the winter.
During this decade winters were colder in 1980 and 1981, and again in 1986 and
1987. In order to understand the interactions between pack ice and ecosystem
dynamics, especially the influences of the well- documented interannual
variability in ice cover on representative populations, a long-term ecological
research (LTER) site has been established in the Antarctic Peninsula region near
Palmer Station. The LTER project, will conduct comprehensive measurements of
ice-dominated ecosystems in this region with a focus on primary production,
krill populations and swarms and seabirds. A primary emphasis will be placed on
the development of ecosystem models that will provide a predictive capability
for issues related to global environmental change. This proposal will add to the
existing LTER project detailed studies of the biogeochemical cycling of carbon
and associated bioelements. The microbiology and carbon flux component of LTER
will provide measurements of a suite of core parameters relevant to the carbon
cycle and will test several hypotheses pertaining to carbon flux, including
bacterial productivity and nutrient regeneration.