* 9118386
* A Unique Metabolic Response of Conifers to                  Environmental Compression Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Wilbur Campbell, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 06/30/1996
* USD 225,000.00

Lignin, a major plant constituent, is crucial to the efficient mechanical
support and the defense system of plants. The adaptability of plants to changes
and stress in their environment in order to survive is due primary to the
existence of lignin. For instance, when a plant is forced out of it natural,
equilibrium position in space by an environmental compression stress, such as
bending, a unique growth pattern involving the formation of a high amount and an
abnormal type of lignin is initiated to reinforce the cell wall architecture in
order to restore the natural, equilibrium orientation of the plant.
Collectively, the resultant tissues formed under such a phenomenon is called
"compression wood". We have discovered a unique enzyme, 4-hydroxycinnamate: CoA
ligase, whose activity is significantly induced in developing tissues of
loblolly pine seedlings subjected to compressional stress. We propose a
comprehensive study on this unique metabolic response to the compressional
stress by first investigating the molecular biology of this particular enzyme.
The overall long term project goal is to illuminate the development of
compression wood in compressionally stressed loblolly seedlings at the molecular
level and establish a model system which can be used to probe the underlying
signals triggering the metabolic changes stimulated by compressional stress. The
significance of this project is its role as a foundation from which further
investigation of how plants perceive and respond to both normal and altered
environmental compression signals can be achieved at a gene level.