* 9118952
* MRI: Multifaceted Control of G Protein Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Anthony Carter, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1996
* USD 316,896.00

This study focuses primarily on the transcriptional regulation of the G-protein
alpha i2 subunit and potential feedback mechanisms by which G proteins are
themselves regulated. Transient co- transfection assays demonstrate changes in
transcription of several different promoter-reporter genes when introduced into
cells with increasing amounts of plasmids directing the synthesis of specific G
protein subunits. The combination of this co-transfection assay with in vitro
mutagenesis of alpha i2 promoter regions will aid characterization and mapping
of regions required for G protein dependent responses. Such studies will permit
the association of new functions with specific G protein subunits and the
distinction between mechanisms affected by closely realted subunits. GTP-binding
(G) proteins are membrane-associated proteins that have critical roles in
regulating cellular responses to a variety of external stimuli. G protein-
mediated cascades include the generation of cyclic AMP, activation of protein
kinase C, and the regulation of several ion channels. These pathways impinge
upon other processes that ultimately can affect the functioning of transcription
factors and the expression of numerous genes, including G proteins. Multiple
control mechanisms appear to be operative in determining tissue specific aqnd
differentiation- dependent expression of G proteins. In addition, analysis of
DNA sequences from some of these genes reveals potential cAMP and phorbol ester
responsive elements near the transcriptional control signals. Knowledge of how G
protein pathways interact to influence transcription will lead to a greater
understanding of how signal transduction mechanisms coordinate gene expression
during cell growth and development.