* 9118056
* Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory:  A Pilot Study for        Seismic, Gas and Robotics Surveillance
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 10/31/1995
* USD 206,334.00

Mount Erebus is the most active volcano in Antarctica having been in a
continuous eruptive state throughout this century. The volcano is unique in
containing a persistent convecting lava lake composed of highly alkalic
anorthoclase phonolite magma. Eruptive activity from the lava lake and adjacent
vents has consisted of minor strombolian eruptions which occasionally eject
volcanic bombs to heights of over 500 meters. Recent work has also shown Mount
Erebus to be an important source of aerosols to the pristine Antarctic
atmosphere. It is likely that Erebus contributes significant quantities of
Chlorine, Fluorine and other trace components to the snow falling on the East
Antarctic ice sheet. This has important consequences to chemists who are trying
to decipher paleoenvironments from snow and ice core analyses. This award
supports the establishment of the Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory at McMurdo
Station to allow continued surveillance of Mount Erebus. This will contribute
greatly of an understanding of the degassing behavior of an "open vent" volcano.
Measurements of Sulfur Dioxide emissions made at Mount Erebus between 1983 and
1991 are amongst the most extensive and detailed made at any volcano in long
periods if a complete understanding of the degassing and eruptive behavior of
this unique volcano and its magnetic system is going to be obtained.