* 9118942
* The Molecular Organization of Chlorophylls and Carotenoids  in Photosynthetic Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1994
* J. Thornber, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 04/30/1994
* USD 50,000.00

Recently developed electrophoretic and FPLC procedures enable each caroteno-
chlorophyll-protein in a green plant, alga, cyanobacterium or photosynthetic
bacterium to be purified without essentially displacing any pigment molecules or
protein subunits that are present in the component in situ. These procedures are
to be used in the proposed research. The specific questions to be answered are
how are the approx. 250 chlorophyll and carotenoid molecules and their
associated proteins, which constitute most of the antenna of photosystem II,
organized so that they absorb and efficiently transfer light energy to the
photochemical reaction enter. Similarly, how are the approx. 150 pigment
molecules in a purple bacterial photosystem arranged at the molecular level as
well. %%% The goal of the research is to contribute to basic knowledge about
photosynthesis: specifically to energy trapping and migration in the antenna;
antenna composition and structure; molecular organization of chlorophyll and
carotenoid; and, assembly and disassembly of the photosynthetic apparatus. The
approach is a combination of biochemical, biophysical, and molecular biology
studies. Emphasis will be on those membrane components that contain chlorophyll
and carotenoid molecules. These studies should provide new information on the
organization of light-capturing proteins in diverse organisms.