* 9118317
* Mechanism of Protein Biosynthesis in Animal Mitochondria
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Linda Spremulli, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 04/30/1996
* USD 270,000.00

The overall objective of the proposed research is to investigate the initiation
of protein biosynthesis in animal mitochondria. This process is unique in the
animal mitochondrial system since initiation occurs at or within few nucleotides
of the 5' end of the mRNA. One animal mitochondrial translational initiation
factor has recently been purified. This factor (IF-2mt) is responsible for
binding the initiator tRNA to ribosomes in response to the AUG codon. In the
present application, additional factors that are required for the assembly of
the functional initiation complex on the mitochondrial ribosome will be
investigated. The components in addition to IF-2mt, required for the binding of
the initiator tRNA to ribosomes in the presence of a natural mRNA will be
identified. These factors will then be purified, characterized and their roles
in the initiation process investigated. Studies will be carried out to determine
how the 5'end of the mRNA is recognized as the initiation signal in the animal
mitochondrial system. The role of proteins that interact with mitochondrial
mRNAs and 28 S ribosomal subunits will be explored and the importance of
mitochondrial membranes or membrane components will be analyzed. %%%
Historically a tremendous amount of effort has been directed toward
understanding the biochemistry and molecular biology of mitochondria. This
organelle is of prime importance in energy metabolism and cytoplasmic
inheritance in eukarytic cells. Little is known about mitochondrial protein
synthesis. This proposal addresses the regulation of protein biosynthesis at the
level of initiation.