* 9118377
* Metabolism of Abscisic Acid
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Jan A. D. Zeevaart, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 08/31/1996
* USD 200,000.00

The plant growth substance abscisic acid is involved in a number of
physiological responses, such as closure of stomata, seed maturation and
dormancy, amelioration of environmental stresses through gene activation, etc.
During water stress there is a large increase in the content of abscisic acid.
To understand the many roles of abscisic acid in plants, it is essential to know
how its concentration is regulated at the tissue and cellular level. This
project deals with the biosynthesis and catabolism of abscisic acid. Biochemical
as well as genetic approaches are proposed. The research is based on the
hypothesis that all abscisic acid in green plants is derived by oxidative
cleavage of 9-cis-epoxy-carotenoids and that the cleavage step is stimulated by
water stress. Objectives are 1) to identify the cleavage substrate(s) and
products; 2) to prepare a cell-free system for the cleavage enzyme; 3) to
isolate novel biosynthetic mutants in Arabidopsis; 4) to purify the enzyme that
converts abscisic acid to phaseic acid; 5) to select for a mutant in Arabidopsis
that is blocked in the conversion of abscisic acid to phaseic acid; and 6) to
determine the mechanism by which different osmotica stimulate abscisic acid
biosynthesis in the wall-less alga Dunaliella. Once the pathways for abscisic
acid synthesis and degradation have been worked out, it will be possible to find
out at the biochemical and molecular level how a water deficit stimulates
abscisic biosynthesis, and how restoration of turgor results in the conversion
of abscisic acid to phaseic acid. These studies are therefore of interest in
connection with the response of plants to drought.