* 9118854
* Phosphorus, Carbon, and Nitrogen Dynamics in Perturbed      Neotropical Dry Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1992,09/30/1997
* William Parton, University of Denver
* Continuing grant
* None
* 09/30/1997
* USD 764,348.00

Tropical dry forests are the most endangered tropical ecosystem. They are also
poorly understood, particularly with regard to ecosystem structure, site
productivity, nutrient cycling, and resilience following fire. This study will
investigate biogeochemical mechanisms in intact, and cut and burn tropical dry
forests at Chamela Biological Station, Mexico. The research will focus on pools,
flows and losses of phosphorus, nitrogen and carbon, but with particular
emphasis on phosphorus because of the distinctive role of phosphorus as the
limiting element for plant growth in this system. The principal investigators
hypothesize that: (1) a pattern of pulsed nutrient release occurs in soils under
intact forest and that this pattern is substantially altered following fire, (2)
soil organic reactions mediated by plant and microbial biological activity are
fundamental for maintaining phosphorus availability in this system, (3)
deforestation and fire cause substantial, and nearly irreversible net losses of
phosphorus, nitrogen, and carbon from the system, and (4) repeated burning
and/or very severe fires (high biomass consumption) will result in declining
long-term site productivity. The researchers will quantify nutrient dynamics and
experimentally manipulate both intact forest and fire severity to examine the
mechanisms that control cycling and losses of these elements. Results of these
studies will be used to validate and further develop simulation models. These
models will be used in synthesis work, to examine long-term patterns of forest
productivity, and to estimate the effect of fire caused phosphorus, nitrogen and
carbon losses from this system. The principle investigators are well-qualified
to do this work and the facilities are excellent.