* 9118753
* Regulation of Antibody Diversity in Xenopus
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1998
* Ellen Hsu, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1998
* USD 559,494.00

The overall goal of these studies is to gain further understanding of the
mechanisms involved in regulating or generating antibody diversity. The approach
is to examine the switch in the spectrum of antibody diversity that occurs
during development. Early in ontogeny, in the fetal/neonatal mammal or in the
Xenopus tadpole, the antibody pool is very limited. The sources of this
restriction have to do, in part, with the enzymatic machinery governing Ig
assembly: there seems to be a paucity of junctional diversity manifested by Lack
of N-region sequence insertion and a more precisely defined site of
recombination by use of regions containing homology. Antibody diversity
increases during development. In Xenopus, the more heterogeneous adult-type
antibodies appear only with metamorphosis and whenever the process of
metamorphosis is contrived. This clear separation of larval and adult
immunological states in Xenopus is a unique advantage that allows more incisive
examination of the differential regulation of the genes involved in antibody
repertoire generation. The specific aims of the proposed projects are: 1) to
isolate Xenopus homologs of mammalian genes involved in B lymphocyte
differentiation (TdT, RAG1, RAG2, Oct2); 2) to study the ontogeny of
lymphopoiesis in Xenopus using these markers, with focus on the onset and course
of expression in the larva and changes at metamorphosis; and 3) to construct
transgenic Xenopus carrying TdT in order to alter the normal pattern of Ig
diversification during development. The ability of the immune system to survey
and recognize a broad spectrum of different antigens is based on the huge
repertoire of different immunoglobulin (antibody) variable region amino acid
sequences and the binding specificities that result. The Nobel Prize-winning
discovery, just a few years ago, that this diversity is generated by a complex
somatic gene recombination mechanism has raised the fundamental question of how
this recombination mechanism is regulated. In mammals, there is a difference in
the amount of recombination (and therefore in the diversity of the antibody
pool) that occurs in adults vs. newborns, with newborns having a much more
limited repertoire of specificities than adults. This difference seems to be
based on differences in the enzymatic machinery needed to effect the
recombination events. In frogs, this difference is reflected by a change in the
ability to generate diversity at metamorphosis: tadpoles have a very limited
pool of antibodies, while post-metamorphosis adult frogs have the more
heterogeneous spectrum of antibodies. This project will take advantage of this
distinct difference in immunological states in tadpoles vs. adult frogs, in
order to study the differential regulation of expression of the genes involved
in the somatic recombination events that result in the generation of antibody
diversity.