* 9118880
* Support of the U.S. National Committee for the Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Blanpied
* 08/31/1994
* USD 64,890.00

The globalization of science is occurring in parallel with a rapid expansion in
the speed and sophistication of information and data handling technologies, and
their use for scientific purposes. Developments in these areas permit the
planning and execution of large scale scientific programs. Such programs, in
turn, frequently require sophisticated data handling and processing techniques.
In view of the multilateral character of many large scale scientific programs,
the handling, processing, and transmission of scientific data has a major
international enterprise in its own right, one that is vital to those large
scale programs. The Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) is a
non governmental, multilateral body, affiliated with the International Council
of Scientific Unions (ICSU), whose principal objective is to facilitate
worldwide communication on problems related to scientific data. Like other
members of the ICSU family, CODATA is comprised of non governmental National
Member Organizations. The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) fulfills that
function in the United States. In the past, NAS's request to support US
participation in CODATA has been limited to payment of dues, shared jointly by
NSF, NIST, and DOE. The NAS, in order to upgrade US participation, established a
U.S. National Committee (USNC) for CODATA similar to those that guide U.S.
participation in the ICSU unions. NSF is being asked to pay one-third of the US
annual dues for CODATA and to provide support for the development of
recommendations to ICSU concerning access to data and its role in the Commission
on International Geosphere-Biosphere Program (IGBP).