* 9118306
* Use of an Arabidopsis Mutant to Study the Induction of      Plant Cell Differentiation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Michael Marks, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1994
* USD 262,476.00

The objective of this proposal is to expand the analysis of a gene that is
required for the initiation of trichome differentiation. This gene, GL1, was
isolated and initially characterized during the previous granting period. It was
found that the predicted polypeptide encoded by GL1 is homologous to the Myb
class of transcriptional activators. Interestingly, the gene appears to be
expressed in stipules, which develop at the base of the leaves, but not in leaf
primordia where trichomes develop. This result suggests that GL1 may be involved
in the production of a diffusible signal that activates trichome formation.
Experiments are proposed to confirm or negate the stipule-derived, trichome
morphogen hypothesis. The PI also examine the mechanism behind the reduction in
trichome formation that is found in plants that contain a 35S-GL1 gene. Other
experiments are designed to identify the sequences that mediate the temporal and
spatial regulation of GL1, to begin to identify genes that encode proteins that
interact with GL1 promoter or that directly interact with the GL1 protein. In
addition, experiments are planned to determine if GL1 is regulated appropriately
in other plant species and to begin the characterization of other members of the
Arabidopsis myb gene family.