* 9118410
* Nuclear Permeability in Proliferating and Growth Arrested   Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Carl Feldherr, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* David G. Capco
* 02/28/1995
* USD 220,000.00

This laboratory recently found that the relative rate of signal- mediated
transport through the nuclear pores, as well as the functional size of the
transport channel, decrease significantly when proliferating 3T3 cells enter a
period of growth arrest. To better understand the role of nuclear envelope
permeability in regulating cellular activity, experiments are proposed to
determine 1) if the growth-related effects on transport are limited to
nonspecific changes (e.g., functional pore size), or whether the specificity for
different targeting signals is also affected, 2) whether the size restrictions
that limit nuclear uptake in growth arrested cells also apply to nuclear efflux,
3) if the observed permeability changes are due to alterations in cell shape,
modifications in the composition of the pore glycoproteins, or variations in the
activity of cytoplasmic transport factors, and 4) if growth factors are involved
in the modulation of signal- mediated nuclear transport. In order to analyze
nuclear transport, cultured cells will be injected with either various size
colloidal gold particles coated with proteins containing nuclear localization
signals, or fluorescent-labeled BSA conjugated with different targeting
sequences. Uptake into the nucleus will be analyzed by electron or fluorescent
microscopy. Communication and protein movement between the nucleus and the
cytoplasm of an interphase eukaryotic cell is crucial to the cell's ability to
regulate such fundamental cellular processes as protein synthesis, gene
expression, and cell cycle. Movement of proteins and nucleic acids back and
forth across the nuclear envelope is known to take place at discrete specialized
structures called nuclear pores. At least some materials move specifically
through pores via a system of "targeting sequences" and receptors which
recognize and facilitate such movement, although the detailed mechanism(s) by
which these transport phenomena occur remain unknown. This project will
contribute significantly to understanding of the complex nature of nuclear
targeting.