* 9118772
* A New Voltammetric Strategy for Investigating Reactive      Iron-Sulfur Clusters
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1994
* Fraser Armstrong, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/1994
* USD 195,000.00

The aim of this study is to quantify complex reactivities of Fe-S clusters in
proteins. These clusters perform numerous, diverse functions in nature. A novel
methodology will be used, exploiting the unmediated voltammetry displayed by
ferredoxins (small proteins containing one or two clusters) at graphite
electrodes in the presence of aminocyclitols. Ferredoxins co-adsorb with
aminocyclitols forming electroactive films. This makes possible highly
economical, detailed studies involving film transfer between electrolytes
containing reagents that react with Fe-S clusters. Cluster oxidation levels are
controlled, and reactions are monitored via voltammetric signals assigned to
specific states by EPR and MCD spectroscopy. Some longstanding problems of
studying reactions of Fe-S clusters - very low reduction potentials, poor
spectroscopic signatures, instability and lability - are overcome. Dr. Armstrong
will characterize an unusual property of (3Fe-4S) clusters, the ability to
undergo reversible, multiple electron and proton uptake. This property
represents a dramatic departure from the current belief that the protein
environment permits only very conservative changes in cluster oxidation level.
He will examine the equilibria and kinetics of reversible metal ion uptake by (3
Fe-4S) to give (M3Fe-4S) in various proteins. The likely existence of clusters
containing such ions as Zn will be assessed. He will compare the redox and
ligand binding properties of various (M3Fe- 4S) clusters. He will study the
course of cluster assembly in proteins, from trace levels of Fe and S, and
examine the fidelity of this process in the presence of competing ions such as
Zn. %%% This study, exploring the characteristics of this important class of
compounds, will help to enlarge our understanding of oxidation -reduction and
electron transfer in life processes.