* 9118492
* Late Quaternary Paleoclimatic History of Southern Chile:    Evidence from the Marine Record
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1995
* Lawrence Krissek, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/1995
* USD 196,804.00

Southern South America provides a natural and almost continuous transition from
polar to temperate climatic settings. The recovery of high resolution late
Quaternary paleooceanographic and paleoclimatic records from the Chilean
continental margin is thus an essential step in establishing the temporal and
physical linkages between the oceanographic, atmospheric, and terrestrial
systems of the southern hemisphere. This award addresses the late Quaternary
marine record of marginal sediments of the Pacific rim of southern Chile. High
resolution biostratigraphic, paleoecologic, paleooceanographic, and
paleoclimatologic reconstructions will be accomplished through diatom,
foramineral, and mineralogic analyses of modern and late Quaternary sediments.
Comparing these results with paleoclimatic interpretations of terrestrial and
ice core data will lead to a more comprehensive understanding of the ocean-
atmosphere-continent response to climate change. The development of a high
resolution late Quaternary climate record from southern Chile by this project is
required for: (1) establishing the relationships in the timing and extent of
late Quaternary glacial/climatic fluctuations between the Antarctic Peninsula
and South America and (2) completing a regional framework of preliminary
paleoclimatic studies, thereby leading to detailed future research on the
neoglacial history of southern South America and the Antarctic Peninsula region.