* 9118729
* Leaf Structural Properties that Influence Photosynthesis:   Interactions Between Gradients of Light, CO2, and           Photosynthetic Capacity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Thomas Vogelmann, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 02/28/1994
* USD 85,000.00

Photosynthesis os the process whereby plants convert solar energy into chemical
energy. This process supports all life on this planet. A detailed knowledge of
how photosynthesis occurs in leaves is necessary for understanding solar energy
conversion in land plants. The project "Leaf Structural Properties that
Influence Photosynthesis: Interactions Between gradients of light, CO2, and
Photosynthetic Capacity" will examine how leaf anatomy is related to the
photosynthetic performance of the whole leaf. The overall goal is to examine the
mechanisms that lead to optimization of photosynthetic performance in different
types of plants. Species have been selected that have specific leaf anatomical
features and we plan to make correlations between leaf anatomy, penetration of
light into the leaf, and internal gradients in carbon dioxide concentration.
Internal concentrations of both light and CO2 must be optimized for maximum
photosynthetic performance of the whole leaf. Experimental results should allow
us to establish a baseline for a more mechanistic understanding of why some
plants are more productive than others. Microscopy, CO2 exchange measurements
and a new fiber optic microprobe technique will be used to accomplish the
objectives of this project. The resulting information may be applied to problems
that relate to understanding the physiological basis for plant productivity and
increasing crop yield, and how plants may respond to global climate change
resulting from increases in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases.