* 9118681
* Ligands for the Mannose 6-Phosphate/Insulin-Like Growth     Factor II Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Peter Lobel, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1996
* USD 274,931.00

The overall objective is to understand the biological function of the
mannose-6-phosphate / insulin-like growth factor II receptor (M6P/IGF-IIR) in
targeting lysosomal enzymes to lysosomes. This protein binds at least two
distinct classes of ligands: phosphorylated lysosomal enzymes and IGF-II. The
biophysical properties and primary structure of the receptor strongly suggest
that other ligands not yet identified exist. Preliminary studies indicate that
new classes of ligands and variant forms of IGF-II bind to the receptor. This
proposal has three specific aims: 1, protein ligands which bind to the receptor
will be purified; 2, new ligands will be identified, and their primary
structures determined by chemical methods and, if necessary, molecular cloning;
and 3, the new ligands will be characterized in terms of the parameters of the
receptor-ligand interaction and their biological effects on cultured cells. One
of the most fascinating and provocative findings in cell biology in recent years
was the discovery that the membrane bound receptor for phosphorylated lysosomal
enzymes, which is responsible for targeting of lysosomal enzymes to the
lysosomes and has binding specificity for the phosphorylated mannose residues on
these enzymes, and the cell surface IGF-II receptor, which is responsible for
detecting and binding a hormone-like growth factor termed insulin-like growth
factor II, were in fact the identical molecule. Subsequent work has shown that
the two ligands bind to different regions of the receptor. Results from other
laboratories suggest that the receptor is vital for fetal development in mice,
whereas the two known ligands are not. The hypothesis underlying this research
project is that there are other biologically important ligands for this
receptor, which bind at a region or regions distinct from those involved in the
binding of either IGF-II or lysosomal enzymes. This research will provide
fundamental insights into the function of this important membrane protein.