* 9118661
* Regulation of Expression of the Calmodulin-Related TCH Genesin Plants and Cultured Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Janet Braam, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1995
* USD 356,002.00

The long-term objective of this laboratory is to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms and the functional components involved in the regulation of plant
gene expression in response to environmental stimuli. Comprehension of these
sensory and response pathways is essential for understanding the dynamic nature
of plant development. The expression levels of five genes, the TCH genes of
Arabidopsis, are rapidly and sharply increased in response to diverse stimuli,
such as rain, wind, touch, heat shock and darkness. Three of the TCH genes
encode calmodulin-related proteins, suggesting roles for calcium ion and
calmodulin in the signal transduction pathways. The focus of this work is to
characterize the regulation of the calmoduln-related TCH genes in plants and
cultured cells in response to diverse environmental stimuli. First, the
transcription initiation sites, intron/exon boundaries and polyadenylation sites
will be defined and the full-length cDNA sequences will be determined for the
calmodulin-related TCH2 and 3 genes. Subsequently, the tissue- and
developmental-specificity of TCH 2 and 3 mRNA accumulation in plants will be
examined, with the emphasis on comparing the characteristics of the responses to
different stimuli. The processes of habituation, desensitization and recovery
will be investigated using TCH mRNA accumulation as an assay. Additionally, the
regulation of TCH 2 and 3 gene expression by mechanical stress, heat shock and
calcium ion will be addressed using cultured root cells that are relatively
homogeneous and easily manipulated. Because of the universal role of calcium ion
a second messenger in eukaryotic cells, elucidation of the regulation of
expression of genes that encode calcium ion receptors will likely be relevant
for the great variety of plant and animal cells that transduce extracellular
stimuli into calcium signals.