* 9118868
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Modern Chronologic and Geochemical  Techniques Applies to a Young Volcanic Field in an Active   Continental Rift: Potrillo Volcanic Field, NM
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1994
* John Geissman, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1994
* USD 20,710.00

This project combines geochronologic, paleomagnetic and geochemical studies of
this Potrillo Volcanic Field of southern New Mexico. This young (&lt;Ma) field
is located within the active Rio Grande Rift and is composed of a series of
maare and several hundred mafic flows. Geochronologic methods will include
40AR/39Ar, U-series disequilibria, and surface exposure (3He) dating. The age
limits of these three methods overlap, thus allowing an excellent opportunity to
develop a robust chronology for the field while also testing the internal
consistency of each method. The series of flows preserve a large population of
high fidelity records of the geomagnetic field. An intensive paleomagnetic
sampling regime, in conjunction with the chronologic studies, will be used to
identify and date high amplitude geomagnetic excursions of the Earth's magnetic
field and to examine to axial dipole hypothesis, a tenet of paleomagnetism which
assumes that the geomagnetic field averages to a geocentric axial dipole over
time. These studies, combined with trace element and petrological
characterization of the flows, will provide insight into the rates of physical
and chemical evolution and the eruptive cyclicity within is very young field and
serve as a paradigm for currently active explosive volcanism contributing
atmospheric aerosols on a global basis.