* 9118785
* Systematics of an Ancient North American Lineage of         Robinieae (Leguminosae)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Matthew Lavin, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 134,000.00

The objective of this study is the revision of the fifteen species currently
referred to Lennea, Hybosema, Gliricidia, and Yucaratonia. This will stabilize
the generic classification of this portion of the tribe Robinieae and better
estimate the phylogenetic position of these species within it. These species
form a distinctive element of the dry tropical forests in North America;
however, two species occur in tropical rain forest and one occurs in South
America. Economic uses of these species are many and include construction
materials from the wood, livestock fodder from the copious leaf production, and
"living" fences around agricultural fields and private dwellings. The
culmination of this study will be a monograph summarizing the classification,
phylogeny, geographic distribution, and economic value of each species. An
analysis of taxonomically informative restriction site mutations from the
chloroplast genome will be combined with classical taxonomic methods. Further
assessing the phylogenetic position of these species in the tribe Robinieae is
important because an increased understanding of the phylogenetic relationships
within Robinieae will have a bearing on our knowledge of the origins and
biogeography of the North American tropical flora. Robinieae is one of the
largest papilionoid tribes well represented in tropical and subtropical North
America. Current evidence suggests it may have been derived from Asiatic
ancestors during the Paleocene or Eocene rather than from South American
ancestors in more recent times. Such phylogenetic studies of other plant groups
centered in the North American tropics will be essential for understanding the
origins of this biota.