* 9118770
* Tissue-Specific Expression and Subcellular Localization of  Maize Beta-Glucosidase
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1994
* Asim Esen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 04/30/1994
* USD 60,066.00

Beta-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.21) catalyses the hydrolysis of aryl- and alkaly-
beta-D-glucosides, as well as cellobiose. In maize, the enzyme is encoded by a
highly polymorphic locus, Glu1. The main objectives of the proposed research are
to clone and characterize the gene coding for the maize beta-glucosidase enzyme;
to deduce the amino acid sequence of the enzyme from the sequence of its gene;
to determine in what organs and tissues this enzyme is found; to determine where
in the cell this enzyme is found, and to determine the natural substrates of the
enzyme. The gene will be cloned into a multipurpose expression vector; and the
desired recombinant clones will be indentified by immunoscreening. The natural
substrates will be determined by extracting beta-glucosides with alcohol from
maize tissues and testing whether the extracts contain a substance which will
competitively inhibit beta- glucosidase hydrolysis of commonly used artificial
substrates (e.g., p-nitrophenol-beta-D-glucopyranoside) which are readily
hydrolyzed by beta-glucosidase to produce glucose. Determining in which tissues
the enzyme is found will be done by infusing tissue sections with chromogenic
beta-glucosides (e.g., X-glu and 6-bromo- 2-naphthyl beta-glucoside), which
produce colored precipitates when cleaved by beta-glucosidase. The location of
the color can then be observed under the light microscope. Subcellular
localization will be done using immunocytochemical techniques. The results of
the proposed research will further knowledge of the structure, location,
function, and regulation of plant beta- glucosidases; they will contribute to
studies directed at finding the molecular basis for subcellular targeting and
will aid in the development of markers which would be useful in maize breeding.