* 9118653
* Development, Structure, and Metabolic Role of Membranes of  Methanotrophic Bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1997
* Mary Lynne Collins, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1997
* USD 208,038.00

All biological production and consumption of methane (a greenhouse gas) is due
to bacterial metabolism. Methanothrophs are bacteria that use methane as a sole
source of carbon and energy. Unlike most bacteria that lack internal membrane
structure, the methanotrophs have an intracytoplasmic membrane that is suggested
to play a role in the metabolism of one carbon compounds. The presence and
structure of this membrane is subject to regulation making methanotrophs an
attractive model system for studies of membrane biology. In the proposed study,
the effect of environmental stimuli on intracytoplasmic membrane formation and
other aspects of methanotroph cell biology will be evaluated. In cell
fractionation studies, intracytoplasmic membranes and other subcellular
fractions will be isolated and characterized to elucidate their role in one
carbon metabolism. These experiments will form the basis of other studies in
which the details of the cellular response to environmental stimuli and membrane
development are investigated. The proposed research should contribute to our
understanding of cell biology through studies in a methanotrophic bacteric model
system. Additionally, these studies should provide information that will be
useful for other purposes since methanotrophs are important in the biotechnology
industry due to numerous potential applications including biotransformation and
biodegradation. This research will facilitate biotechnological exploitation of
methanotrophs. //