* 9118430
* NSF EHM/BCS Research Grantee Workshop in Structural,        Architectural and Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1992
* Leon R. Wang, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 06/30/1992
* USD 18,975.00

As a forum to inform the investigators of current NSF program plans and
initiatives, and to conduct general technical discussions to identify future
research needs and priorities, the Structural Systems Program (SS) and the
Architectural Systems Program (AMS) of the Earthquake Hazard Mitigation Program
(EHM) within the Biological and Critical Systems (BCS) Division conducts a
grantee meeting/workshop among their current grantees on August 5/6, 1991. This
project provides the support for such a grantee workshop during the summer of
1991 for the exchange of research results among participants. This project will
(a) organize and convene the workshop, and (b) develop a technical program and
management plan in order to proceed with final schedules, including over- all
logistic and organizational matters, formal invitations to prospective grantee,
etc. A special presentation will be made to report on the current and future
programs at the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research (NCEER) at
SUNY-Buffalo and an invited lecture will be given on the new development of Non-
Destructive Evaluation Techniques and their possible applications in earthquake
engineering. A workshop report will be assembled from highlights of research
projects, special lectures, and workshop recommendations for distribution to the
research community and for use as program development references.