* 9118701
* Accretion of Extraterrestrial Matter to the Earth: The      Sedimentary Record
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Frank Kyte, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 06/30/1995
* USD 210,000.00

The proposed research program will make major advances in the understanding of
the chemical and mineralogical record of the accretion of extraterrestrial
matter to the Earth, as recorded in terrestrial sediments. In the next three
years we propose research into the mineralogy and geochemistry of debris from
three distinct impact events. 1) We will characterize the abundance,
distribution, and composition of Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary impact debris in
the Pacific Ocean basin. This will approximately double the portion of the
Earth's surface studied in this way and will probably result in the most
definitive study to date of the composition of this debris. 2) We will
investigate the detailed geochemistry of an early Archean (~3.4 Ga) spherule bed
which marks a major asteroid impact as well as a major change in the tectonic
evolution of the Barberton Greenstone Belt. We will concentrate on determining
whether there is geochemical evidence to support the hypothesis that gradations
across the spherule bed reflect chemical and thermal evolution of an impact-
generated vapor cloud. 3) We plan initial characterization of new sediments and
debris recording an asteroid impact into the subantarctic South Pacific during
the late Pliocene. The sediments will be from piston cores that are scheduled
for sampling in Jan. 1994.//