* 9118682
* Activation and Sexually Dimorphic Development of the        Corpora Allata in Pharate Adult Manduca Sexta
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Govindan Bhaskaran, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/29/1996
* USD 206,024.00

Juvenile hormone (JH) controls the development of insects during juvenile
stages and also, in many species, egg development in the adult females. In all
insects JH secretion ceases at some time during the last larval stage thus
permitting the insect to undergo metamorphosis to the adult stage. JH secretion
resumes shortly before or after the emergence of the adult and promotes egg
maturation. The processes by which the reappearance of JH prior to adult
emergence is regulated are not known. The results of the proposed investigations
will fill the gap in our knowledge about this critical event in the life of
insects. The proposed studies will be done on the tobacco hornworm moth, Manduca
sexta. This insect is used as a model for many physiological, biochemical and
behavioral studies. We will examine the changes in the biosynthesis of JH during
metamorphosis with standard biochemical methods, and investigate the
neuroendocrine basis for the reactivation of JH biosynthesis. These studies are
the first of this kind and will be of fundamental importance in the field of
developmental endocrinology. Since Manduca sexta belongs to the order
Lepidoptera, which includes some of the most destructive crop pests, the
proposed studies may also have an important bearing on the development of new
strategies for limiting the reproductive potential of pest species.