* 9118302
* Enzyme Structure-Function Relationships
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Stephen Remington, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1995
* USD 294,000.00

Two approaches are proposed to investigate substrate specificity and catalytic
mechanisms of two different enzymes, citrate synthase (CS) and serine
carboxypeptidase (CPD). The first will be an X-ray crystallographic analysis of
the structures of the enzymes and to compare ligand affinities and catalytic
activity of related or mutant forms of the enzymes. The second will be to
investigate the role of electrostatic fields in the mechanisms by use of
theoretical calculations. Citrate synthase is one of few enzymes capable of
directly forming a carbon bond. A detailed mechanism for part of the reaction
has been proposed. Site-directed mutants of CS with differing activity have been
constructed. Their structures will be analyzed by crystallographic techniques,
enzyme kinetics and electrostatic field calculations to study the roles of
selected side chains. Serine carboxypeptidases are highly specific proteinases
which are essential for the maturation of peptide hormones. They are unrelated
to other serine proteinases, but have the same active site groups. Analysis of
inhibitor binding will determine the basis for substrate specificity. Selected
mutants of yeast CPD will be studied to determine the basis for the unusual pH
dependence of the reaction and to test whether the enzymatic mechanism is
similar to that proposed for other serine proteinases.