* 9118689
* Structural Studies of Fe:S Proteins:  Nitrogenase,          Rubredoxin and Ferredoxin
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1998
* Douglas Rees, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/1998
* USD 635,000.00

Iron-sulfur (Fe:S) centers in proteins exhibit a diverse range of structures and
functional properties. X-ray diffraction methods will be used to determine the
three-dimensional structures of three Fe:S proteins involved in electron
transfer reactions: the nitrogenase molybdenum-iron protein from Azotobacter
vinelandii and the rubredoxin and ferredoxin from the hyperthermophile
Pyrococcus furiosis. The crystallographic structures will permit an evaluation
of the roles of the polypeptide and iron-sulfur centers in controlling the redox
properties and electron transfer mechanisms of these proteins. The specific
structural objectives of this proposal are: Nitrogenase molybdenum-iron protein.
The molybdenum iron (MoFe-) protein component of nitrogenase contains the site
of substrate reduction, an iron-sulfur-molybdenum cofactor of presently unknown
structure. The functional roles of the clusters and protein will be addressed by
crystallographic studies to at least 2.5A resolution of the A. vinelandii MoFe-
protein in the presence and absence of bound ligands (inhibitor and nucleotides)
and in different oxidation states: mutant MoFe-proteins; and structures of
alternative nitrogenase proteins related to MoFe-protein. Thermostable
rubredoxin and ferredoxin. The archaebacterium Pyrococcus furiosis is a
hyperthermophile that grows at 1000C. Crystallographic structures of the
rubredoxin (refined to at least 0.96A resolution) and ferredoxin from this
organism will not only define the details of the protein-Fe:S center
interactions, but will also provide a structural framework for characterizing
the thermostability of these proteins.