* 9118411
* RUI: Signal Coupling During Endocytosis in Amoeba Proteus
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Robert Prusch, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1995
* USD 207,705.00

The major objectives of this proposed research are to continue basic
investigations into the mechanism of signal-coupling during the initiation of
endocytosis in Amoeba proteus and to provide some undergraduate students with a
realistic research experience. Endocytosis is a fundamental process which
involves the uptake of material external to a cell by surface membrane infolding
and vesiculation. Previous work from this laboratory examined the interaction of
signal molecules with the cell surface and identified several possible
components of the signal pathway associated with the onset of endocytosis. These
include a G- protein, cyclic AMP and calcium. A G-protein in the amoeba membrane
was identified by ADP-ribosylation of a membrane protein(s) in the presence of
cholera and pertussis toxin. Initiation of both phagocytosis and pinocytosis
elicit rapid transient oscillations in cytoplasmic cAMP levels and cytoplasmic
Ca increases transiently in stimulated cells. This proposal will attempt to
further characterizethe components of the signal pathway and try to
differentiate between the signal processes occurring during both pinocytosis and
phagocytosis. The ameba represents a particularly useful model system in the
study of endocytosis and it is expected that this study will increase our
insight into the mechanism of endocytosis in this and other systems.