* 9118158
* Molecular Activation of Plant Cells by Rhizobium
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1996
* Thomas Jacobs, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1996
* USD 270,000.00

Cell cycle regulation will be studied in the roots of legumes at various
intervals after infection with Rhizobium. Early stages of Rhizobium infection
are followed by either an activation or derepression of mitotic activity in
cortical cells of the root and culminate in the formation of the root nodule,
the site of nitrogen fixation in the plant/bacterial symbiosis. The proposed
experiments will focus on changes in the expression, abundance and activity of
the cell-cycle regulators, p34cdc2 and B-type cyclin in cortical cells of pea
roots after infection. The working hypothesis is that p34cdc2 or cyclin is
limiting in the quiescent plant cells. Experiments are also directed toward the
study of a protein kinase that appears to respond to extracellular signals such
as those that are involved in the early transduction events of infection by
Rhizobium. Changes in the regulation of mitotic activity of otherwise
terminally-differentiated cells in roots of the garden pea will be assessed
after infection with the nitrogen-fixing bacterium, Rhizobium. During the
earliest phases of root nodule formation, there is a significant increase in
mitotic activity in what had been quiescent cells. The regulatory aspects of
nodule formation are not known. Experiments in this project are directed toward
discerning the factors that limit mitotic activity in differentiated cells under
normal conditions, through a biochemical, molecular and immunological analysis
of known activators of cell cycle progression during and after the infection
process. This research problem is extremely important in plant biology, because
insight into the signal transduction events that result in changes in the
patterns or rates of cell division are central to almost all aspects of plant
growth and development.