* 9118467
* Circadian System of Diurnal Rodents: Integrated             Physiological/Behavioral Approach
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1996
* Patricia DeCoursey, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1996
* USD 209,750.00

Daily biological timekeeping, best reflected in the perception of lay persons
in terms of human "jet-lag" or shift-work maladies, is regulated by a composite
interaction of neural pacemaker (SCN) and environmental synchronizing agents.
The pacemaker autonomously drives dependent biochemical, physiological and
behavioral functions with free-running circadian period under constant
environmental conditions close to but not exactly 24-hours, while the
environmental entraining or synchronizing agent corrects phase and frequency of
the pacemaker to local time. Much mammalian circadian research, particularly the
physiological aspect, has been limited to laboratory rats and golden hamsters.
In an attempt to distinguish differences between the circadian "wiring" of
diurnal mammals and better known nocturnal mammals, the study will examine
selected key issues for three diurnal species in successive stages of circadian
function including sensory input from the environment for entertainment,
physiological properties of the SCN rhythm generator, and behavioral output.
Physiological and behavioral circadian output measurements will be employed in
these three diurnal rodents to clarify circadian regulation in day-active
mammals. The antelope ground squirrel, 13- lined ground squirrel, and eastern
chipmunk were chosen as model species to minimize operational problems that have
long hindered progress of research on circadian behavioral function in diurnal
mammals, and also to assess circadian variation span in ecologically widely
divergent desert, prairie, and forest species. Issues will include the light-
sampling process for entrainment in lab and field, the role of environmental
temperature as well as cyclic body temperature in circadian function, and the
delineation of a "light-mimicking" phase response curve system (PRC) by use of
intraventricular injection of carbachol; the distribution of key SCN
neuropepetides (NP-II, VIP, SS, NPY) will be determined by immunocytochemical
methods plus computerized image processing for quantitative determination of co-
localized immunoreactivity. Finally, in vitro and in vivo recording of SCN
rhythmic output relative to other brain areas will also be investigated. The
data may serve as a useful model for better understanding the functioning of
diurnal circadian systems of mammals, and more generally for envisioning the
means by which the relatively simple neuronal circuitry of the SCN is able to
control contrasting nocturnal and diurnal circadian behavior modes.