* 9118528
* Control of Cell Specification and Gene Expression in        Anther Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1997
* Robert Goldberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1997
* USD 964,000.00

Male reproductive processes in flowering plants occur in the anther. This organ
is composed of several specialized tissues and cell types and is responsible for
producing pollen grains that contain the sperm cells. Anther tissues form in an
orderly pattern from cell lineages that are present within the floral meristem.
These tissues differentiate from precursor cells that appear at specific
locations, or territories, within the developing anther primordium. The
molecular processes responsible for the specification of different anther cell
types after primordium initiation are not known. Nor is it understood how gene
sets that are expressed in specific anther cell types are activated coordinately
during anther development. Experiments outlined in this proposal will utilize
chimeric cytotoxic and anticytotoxic genes to address the role of cell/cell
interaction processes in the specification of anther cell types. Other
experiments will utilize molecular strategies to identify elements of the
regulatory circuitry necessary to activate several non-homologous genes within
one anther tissue, the tapetum. The significance of these experiments is that
they should provide new insight into the communication processes required for
the differentiation of anther cell types, provide entry into the processes
required for the differentiation of anther cell types, provide entry into the
molecular pathways responsible for the specification of these cell types, and
generate new conceptual information on the mechanisms that control cell-specific
gene expression during plant development.