* 9118120
* Gene Regulation in Glyoxysome Biogenesis
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* John Harada, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/1994
* USD 200,000.00

Glyoxysomes are specialized peroxisomes that contain enzymes critically
required for the mobilization of lipids. To study processes involved in the
biogenesis of the organelle, Dr. Harada is investigating the regulation of genes
encoding isocitrate lyase and malate synthase, two glyoxylate cycle enzymes that
are associated exclusively with glyoxysomes. The genes are regulated
developmentally; they are expressed in seedlings, developing seeds, senescent
organs, and in pollen but not in non-senescent organs of the mature plant.
Moreover, regulation of the genes occurs primarily at the transcriptional level.
The proposal's long term goal is to define the physiological signals that
regulate these genes, and, therefore, control glyoxysome biogenesis. An
accompanying objective is to determine whether a common signal regulates these
genes at different periods of the plant life cycle. Two primary approaches are
proposed to address these issues. First, Dr. Harada will localize cis-acting
elements and identify the DNA binding proteins that interact with these elements
to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the regulation of the genes. Second, he
will identify mutants altered in the expression of the genes to begin to define
components of the pathway regulating the genes. He anticipates that these
complementary studies ultimately will provide insight into the physiological
cues that control glyoxysome biogenesis.