* 9118319
* Geochemical Investigations of Major Environmental and       Tectonic Changes in the Permian and Triassic
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1995
* J. Douglas Macdougall, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1995
* USD 158,511.00

The record the chemical and isotopic composition of seawater through time
contains a wealth of information about climate, tectonics, hydrothermal activity
on the sea floor, and perhaps even about the details of sea level change, ocean
circulation and atmospheric composition. The problem is to unravel the various
signals recorded in sediments in terms of these processes. Here we will examine
the time period spanning the Permian and early Triassic, a time of global
environmental change. Our study will concentrate on the SR and Nd isotopic
record, but will also include various other, probably related, geochemical
indicators. Through collaborators, we have acquired a suite of samples for this
work from geographically widespread, stratigraphically controlled, overlapping
sections. Much of our work will be done on conodonts, which provide
stratigraphic information as well as having conveniently high concentrations of
most of the elements of interest, so that analyses can be made on single
individuals or fragments in most cases. We will carefully investigate possible
diagenetic effects, and attempt to delineate much more precisely than has been
done previously the timing and magnitude of the observed large changes in Sr and
Nd isotopic ratios in seawater during this time period. The data will be
examined in terms of current knowledge of paleotectonics, paleoclimate and
paleogeography. In addition, we will explore the feasibility of U-Th dating of
conodonts in this time interval, in order to refine the temporal framework for
our isotopic studies and to aid in section-to-section correlation.