* 9118878
* Attachment Theory and the Consequences of Desert Shield     Separation and Reunion of Families
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1993
* Frederic Medway, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 02/28/1993
* USD 31,319.00

This is a Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award. The proposed
research will examine how families were affected by the separation and
subsequent reunion in connection with Operation Desert Shield. The investigators
propose to use attachment theory to predict individual differences in patterns
of reacting to the stresses of separation and in the ways of handling the
experience of reunion. The investigators have secured access to the South
Carolina National Guard and Reserve Units allowing them to examine
systematically how deployment and subsequent reunion affects families. The
research design includes a baseline survey completed during the period of
separation as wells as two measurements during the reunion period. The
investigators have completed the baseline survey of the spouses of 600 deployed
and 290 non-deployed members of the National Guard and Reserve Unites. The
follow up studies are planned to take place 2-4 weeks after re-union, and
approximately 6 months after reunion. The proposed research provides a unique
opportunity for examining the effects of war duty on the families that are left
behind. In addition, the research promises to enhance our understanding of the
ways in which different styles of attachment influence the ways in which men and
women deal with the absence of their spouse and with the subsequent reunion.