* 9118997
*  Trophic Coupling Between Mesopelagic and Sea-Ice            Communities in the Weddell Sea
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1993
* Kenneth Smith, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 05/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

The discovery of deep-sea fish in the stomachs of surface-feeding seabirds
foraging in open areas of pack ice has presented the surprising possibility of
prey-predator coupling between two apparently disjunct communities. Although
many of the deep-sea species found in birds stomachs are known to migrate
vertically on a daily basis, most have not been caught at depths of less than
100 m in open waters away from the ice, while the seabird species sampled are
not known to forage deeper than 5 m. This prey-predator coupling is intriguing
but difficult to address with conventional methods because of the many problems
associated with sampling in pack ice. As a first step in examining the
interaction between the under-ice mesopelagic (100 to 1000 m) and epipelagic
(surface to 100 m) communities, scientists propose to use moored, upward-looking
hydroacoustic instruments to compare the distribution, abundance and movements
of acoustically -detectable deep-sea fish in the epipelagic of the water column
at two stations in the Weddell Sea, one in the pack ice and one in the ice-free
area to the north. Three null hypotheses will be addressed: 1) the vertical
distribution of acoustically-detectable fish in the epipelagic zone is the same
in ice-free and ice-cover regions; 2) the abundance of acoustically-detectable
fish in the epipelagic zone is the same in ice-covered and ice-free oceanic
regions; and 3) the movements of acoustically-detectable fish in the epipelagic
zone are the same in ice-covered and ice-free oceanic regions. This research
constitutes a short-term feasibility study. If hydroacoustic techniques prove
successful, scientists will then propose a more comprehensive, long-term study
to quantitatively examine prey-predator links between deep-sea and sea-ice fish
and bird communities. Given the broad extent of oceanic ice cover and the wide
dispersal capabilities of the extensive seabird populations in polar seas,
scientists expect such links to be important in the overall cycling of carbon in
polar regions.