* 9118346
* Physiological Basis of Metabolism and Activity:             The Thermal Dependence of Muscle Function
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Albert Bennett, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 01/31/1996
* USD 330,000.00

Temperature is an important environmental variable that directly influences all
levels of biological function. In spite of years of study, our knowledge of how
temperature affects organisms is still sketchy, especially in terms of maximal
behavioral capacities. This study will be the first comprehensive examination of
how body temperature influences burst escape and feeding capacities in fish.
These are probably important behaviors ensuring successful survival, growth, and
reproduction in natural populations, but we do not understand how rapid changes
in temperature may affect these capacities. Further, it will be the first study
to examine the plasticity of the of these behaviors during long term temperature
exposure (acclimation). The study will also begin to examine how genetic
structure (ploidy level) may influence acclimation ability, as previously
hypothesized by other workers. This study will also examine evolutionary
responses to different temperatures in a group of fish, some taxa of which have
very narrow and others very broad thermal environments. These types of
information, that is, understanding of how animals respond to acute and long
term temperature exposure, in both organismal and evolutionary time frames, is
important to both fisheries management (e.g., likely effects of water
temperature on stock performance in nature and the ability of those stocks to
adjust performance over longer term temperature exposure) and to our
understanding of how fish populations may adjust to range extension or climate
change.