* 9118316
* Measurement of Marine Cloud Droplet Size Distributions      and Analysis of Relationships to Chemical Fluxes, CCN       Concentration, and Boundary Layer Physics
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Richard Vong, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 03/31/1996
* USD 309,800.00

The investigator plans to make optical measurements of cloud droplet size
spectra and liquid water content (LWC) with simultaneous measurements of cloud
and rain water composition, aerosol size spectra, and three dimensional winds at
a marine site on the NW coast of Washington State. By combining the droplet
spectra and LWC with the other measurement the investigators will address both:
1) droplet and chemical eddy fluxes associated with interception of cloud water
by vegetation and 2) the relationship between droplet and CCN number
concentration in the marine boundary layer. Cloud droplet- cloud condensation
nuclei (CCN) relationships will be studied by comparing CCN concentrations
(inferred from aerosol size spectra) in clear air to cloud droplet
concentrations. Vertical wind speed, LWC, and droplet concentration will be
combined to produce eddy covariance estimates of integrated cloud droplet fluxes
and the size dependence of droplet deposition velocity. The measured cloud water
eddy fluxes will be compared to calculated droplet sedimentation fluxes and
cloud water interception by an artificial tree. The chemical fluxes associated
with rain will be compared to those associated with intercepted cloud water.
Understanding droplet/chemical flux and CCN/droplet relationships is important
for characterizing the chemical cycling of trace species between the atmosphere
and the biosphere and for understanding the response of climate to CCN cycling
in the marine atmospheric.