* 9118776
* RUI: Quantum Effects in Microcrystalline Silicon in an Amorphous Silicon Dioxide Matrix
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Edward Nicollian, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/1995
* USD 225,000.00

Fundamental investigation of the physics of quantum confinement and phase
coherence, with emphasis on charge quantization and processes related to
preparation, passivation, and characterization of the material properties of
microcrystalline silicon in an amorphous silicon dioxide matrix is being
conducted. The amorphous silicon dioxide serves both as a large energy barrier
for resonant tunneling, and for the passivation of electrically active interface
defects. This material combination broadens the type of quantum well structures
from those requiring lattice matching of materials with different band gaps to
include an established materials system that is not restrained by the lattice
matching condition. These materials and their behavior are of interest from both
basic science and technological perspectives. %%% This research is expected to
broaden and extend our knowledge of the properties and behavior of the primary
materials used in microelectronics, silicon/silicon dioxide, and provide
fundamental understanding of quantum effects in microcrystalline structures.
From an application point of view, understanding these properties will be
helpful to semiconductor device design and fabrication, and the fundamental
research results will be of importance in a general way to the technology of
advanced integrated electronic circuits.