* 9118311
* US-Poland Research on Hormonal Control of Calcium Transport Across the Plasma Membrane in Hepatocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1997
* Jerzy Duszynski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1997
* USD 28,486.00

This U.S.-Poland research project between Dr. Kathryn F. Lanoue of Pennsylvania
State University Hershey Medical Center and Jerzy Duszinski of the Nencki
Institute of Warsaw, Poland, is to identify and characterize the transporter
which catalyzes hormone dependent influx of extracellular calcium into liver
cells. The researchers will study fura-2 loaded hepatocytes in primary culture,
using a fluorescence digital imaging system in conjunction with whole cell patch
clamp microinjection techniques, to determine the current voltage relationships
of the putative calcium channel, as well as the enthalpy of calcium influx and
its Ph dependence. Preliminary experiments indicate the calcium transport into
the cell is not dependent on hormone occupancy of calcium mobilizing receptors
in the plasma membrane, or on IP3 levels in the cell but it is dependent on the
extent of depletion of intracellular hormone releasable calcium stores. Calcium
depletion of these stores stimulates calcium entry into the cell, in a graded
manner. The researchers will test the hypothesis that a calcium sensitive enzyme
in the endoplasmic reticulum elaborates and releases to the cytosol a metabolite
which regulates plasma membrane calcium permeability. They will design
experiments to demonstrate the existence of such a diffusible metabolite and to
characterize it. The researchers plan to use an inhibitor of the calcium plasma
membrane transporter as a means to monitor calcium transporter activity in
hepatocyte plasma membrane vesicles loaded with fura-2. They will use the
vesicular assay system to screen the influence of putative regulators and as a
basis for later solubilization, reconstitution, and purification. %%% This
project in biology fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to
combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.