* 9118435
* Japan Long-Term Research Visit:  The Effect of Vortex       Generation Devices on Diffuser Performance
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Stanley Skebe, United Technologies Research Ctr
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander P. DeAngelis
* 09/30/1996
* USD 130,810.00

This award will support a 24 month long-term visit by Dr. Stanley Skebe,
Aerodynamics and Environmental Sciences Division, United Technologies Research
Corporation (UTRC), Hartford, Connecticut, to Japan for a cooperative research
project with Professor Shunichi Tsuge, Institute of Engineering Mechanics,
University of Tsukuba. The research will include a study of the effect of vortex
generation devices on diffuser performance. The focus would be to conduct an
experimental investigation into the application of several standard and advanced
vortex generator shapes within a family of rectangular diffuser geometries and
over a range of flow parameters and to quantify their ability to alleviate
diffuser stall and improve diffuser performance through mixing enhancement.
Supporting theoretical calculations, based on 'first principles' analyses, would
also be performed. Smoke trace, tuft motion, and surface oil flow visualization
techniques would be used to document diffuser stall reduction while pneumatic
pressure transducer measurements would yield diffuser pressure coefficient
values upon which to base performance improvement. Finally, they will undertake
a detailed boundary layer survey and state-of-the-art laser sheet flow
visualization measurements. These measurements are expected to broaden the
applicability of the program results and deepen their significance with respect
to the field of fluid mechanics by providing a fundamental understanding of the
effect of embedded axial vortex arrays on adverse pressure gradient boundary
layer flow separation characteristics. Diffusers see frequent component
application in a wide variety of fluid dynamic-based products, such as consumer
appliances, home and building air handling systems, chemical plants, automobile
components, and aircraft engines. They are also often the key product component,
with their efficiency level restricting the upper limit of overall product
efficiency. Improved diffuser designs could improve product performance and
allow for a reduction in product noise generation and/or energy consumption.
This research combining United Technologies Research Center's accumulated
experience on vortex generation and forced mixing flowfields with the University
of Tsukuba's theoretical and experimental experience on the behavior of vortex
generation should provide a productive climate for advancing the research in
this important area. It is expected that this collaborative effort will continue
after the formal agreement has terminated.