* 9118571
* tRNA Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Eric Phizicky, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/1995
* USD 288,000.00

tRNA splicing is essential for the survival of some, if not all, eukaryotes. The
mechanism of tRNA splicing is highly conserved in eukaryotes, and best
understood in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Superficially, tRNA splicing
appears simple; an endonuclease excises the intron; a ligase joins the two half-
molecules; and a 2'-dephosphorylating activity removes the 2'-phosphate left at
the splice junction. Yet the mechanism of splicing, particularly of the last
step, is much more complicated than one would imagine. Removal of the splice
junction 2'-phosphatase, rather than being catalyzed by a phosphatase, is
catalyzed by an NAD-dependent, 2'-phosphate specific phosphotransferase. A
protein like this has never been described, yet it is likely essential in some,
if not all, eukaryotes in order to make functional TRNA. Moreover, the phosphate
from the splice junction of TRNA ultimately ends up as a cyclic phosphate on
NAD, or on a molecule similar to NAD. Such a molecule has also not been
previously described. The objects of this proposal are to identify the proteins
catalyzing this unusual but important dephosphorylation step in TRNA splicing
and to determine the structure (and mechanism of formation) of the unusual
phosphotransfer product. %%% The process of processing newly synthesized
transfer RNA (TRNA) in yeast is essential for the TRNA to act in the synthesis
of a protein. A significant part of the processing involves editing out
particular sequences of bases in the strand. This research involves an enzyme
which closes a gap in the TRNA strand (much like the process by which train cars
are linked up after the cars in the center have been removed). The enzyme has
some novel properties which merit investigation to distinguish it from other
ligating enzymes . The information resulting from these studies will be new and
important since the research is original.