* 9118757
* Genetic Regulation of the Glycerol 3-Phosphate Regulon of
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Timothy Larson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1996
* USD 248,611.00

This research is aimed at elucidation of the means by which the five operons
which comprise the sn glycerol 3-phosphate (glp) regulon of Escherichia coli are
negatively controlled by the proteins encoded by the glpEGR operon. The glpR
gene encodes a repressor protein which interacts specifically with operator
sites on DNA in each of the operons of the regulon. The glpE- and glpG- encoded
proteins are needed together with the repressor to achieve efficient repression.
This type of regulatory system containing three components has not been
described previously in prokaryotes. Results of the proposed research will
provide molecular details regarding the interaction of repressor with operator
DNA, and will reveal the roles of the GlpE and G1pG proteins in repression. In
addition, the mechanism of action of the repression system in each of the
operons of the regulon will be defined in greater detail. Specifically, the role
of repressor-mediated DNA looping and of integration host factor (IHF) will be
determined. The objectives will be achieved by using genetic and biochemical
approaches. The structure and function of the DNA-binding domain of the
repressor will be studied through characterization of altered forms of the
repressor generated by site-directed mutagenesis. The roles of G1pE in
repression will be determined by isolation and characterization of mutants
altered in G1pE and/or G1pG action, and by isolation and characterization of the
G1pE and G1pG proteins. The role of IHF-binding sites and of additional
potential operators in repression will be defined by determining repression in
mutants deficient in IHF, and by identification of these sites on the DNA. All
of the results will provide molecular details regarding the mechanism of action
of this "three-component" regulatory system. This knowledge will shed light on
how the cell uses specific DNA- protein interactions to respond to changes in
the supply of nutrients.