* 9118133
* Laboratory Experiments to Determine the Origin of High      Molecular Weight Hydrocarbons (&amp;gt;C40) in Geological Samples
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1993
* Richard Philp, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1993
* USD 51,669.00

Biomarkers are compounds in geologic samples whose basic carbon skeleton
resembles that of their precursors which occur in source materials such as
algae, bacteria and higher plants. For the most part the biomarkers discovered
to date have been in the C10-C40 range. Limitations in both chromatography and
mass spectrometry in the past, have prevented the successful investigation of
biomarkers in the region above C40. In the past two years we have taken
advantage in the development of high temperature capillary columns and tandem
mass spectrometers to enter into the frontier area of biomarker geochemistry in
the range of C40-C100. Extracts from a variety of samples have been investigated
by tandem mass spectrometry in combination with gas chromatography or the direct
insertion probe. Tandem mass spectrometry has been used in combination with
micropyrolysis techniques to investigate the high molecular weight fragments
produced by pyrolytic degradation of kerogens and asphaltenes. This work has
clearly demonstrated the presence of complex mixtures of high molecular weight
components in a wide variety of samples. These compounds are dominated by
n-alkanes and alkylclohexanes extending to at least C100. In addition to
analytical limitations, another reason why these components have not been
investigated as thoroughly as components below C40 is that in many cases their
low volatility precludes their presence in crude oils collected at the well head
for example. Furthermore the low volatility of these components also means it is
possible that they may not necessarily occur in the saturate fraction containing
compounds below C40. The present goal is to investigate how these molecular
weight compounds are formed. In some preliminary experiments we have shown that
artificial maturation of fatty acids will lead to polymerization of these
compounds to form high molecular weight alkanes, cyclohexanes and complex
mixtures of alkylated naphthalenes. It is proposed to expand these experiments
and perform them with a variety of lipids, as well as naturally occurring
organic material such as higher plant material and algae, in the presence and
absence of catalysts, such as bentonite, and at a variety of temperatures.
Preliminary experiments have also been conducted in the presence of elemental
sulphur and it has been shown that sulphur is incorporated into many of these
reaction products. Although similar maturation experiments have been performed
previously, the earlier experiments were typically designed to examine thermal
degradation products and not polymerization products. The work described herein
will provide us with information on the way in which these high molecular
components may be produced and conditions under which these compounds will be
formed.