* 9118031
* Use of Sedimentary Nitrogen and Carbon Isotopic Composition for Reconstruction of Past Surface Nutrient Utilization in  Antarctic Waters
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Roger Francois, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 05/31/1995
* USD 294,859.00

A major continuing question in paleoceanography is how the paleohistory of the
atmospheric carbon dioxide content is related to the contemporaneous
productivity of the oceans. In the Southern Ocean where nitrates are one of the
major phytoplankton nutrients, it is possible to estimate the regional
paleoproductivity by investigating the variability of nitrogen isotopes in
sediment cores. It is known that when nitrates are abundant in the euphotic zone
(as in antarctic waters today), phytoplankton discriminate against nitrogen-15,
resulting in biomass and sinking particulates isotopically lighter than the
dissolved nutrient pool. When nitrate concentrations decrease as a result of
biological utilization, the sinking particulates become isotopically heavier. It
is expected that the downcore variations in nitrogen-15 reflect time variations
in the predominance of these surface processes. Other productivity or nutrient
indicators, such as the Cadmium/Calcium ratio, carbon-13 in calcite, or opal
accumulation have presented conflicting interpretations of the paleodistribution
of both productivity and surface nutrients. Sedimentary nitrogen- 15 is expected
to specifically record past changes in biologically mediated nutrient depletion.
This study will confirm the relationship between nitrogen-15 and nitrates in
surface waters using recently collected samples in the Indian Ocean sector, and
use sediment analyses to reconstruct surface nutrient utilization in several
sectors of the Southern Ocean. Existing cores with established stratigraphy will
provide sufficient coverage of the targeted regions.