* 9119409
* Population Biology of the Anther Smut Fungus, Ustilago violacea: Genetic Processes Revealed by Molecular Markers
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Helen Alexander, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1995
* USD 196,171.00

Micro-organisms such as bacteria and fungi are the cause of many diseases of
plants and animals. The implement successful disease control, one needs to
understand the population biology of the infectious organisms. Knowledge of the
extent and patterns of genetic variation in the pathogen population is
particularly significant since disease control practices may not be equally
effective against all genetic forms of the pathogen. However, studies of the
population genetics and ecology of micro-organisms under natural conditions are
often lacking simply because the organisms are small, have little morphological
variation, and individual organisms are hard to distinguish. Studies will be
undertaken on the population biology of a naturally occurring fungus which
infects plants in the Pink family. Past studies of the plant revealed that host
populations can be genetically variable in their resistance to the anther- smut
disease. To investigate the extent of fungal genetic variation, a new-molecular
technique called RAPD (Random Amplification of Polymorphic DNA) which can detect
genetic differences among individuals will be used. This will allow
determination of the biology of the fungus, such as the degree to which host
plants are multiply infected and whether different strains of the fungus are
more successful at infection than others. This technique will also be used
characterize patterns of genetic variation among fungal populations, for
instance the degree to which spatially separated populations are genetically
distinct. The anther-smut disease is a model system to study evolutionary and
ecological interactions between hosts and pathogens. In particular, this
research will evaluate the usefulness of the RAPD technique for investigating
aspects of pathogen population biology that have been previously ignored because
of the lack of a method for distinguishing fungal individuals. RAPD techniques
have numerous potential applications in applied studies of host/pathogen
interactions. For instance, it will be important to track the spatial dispersal
of micro-organisms to evaluate the spread of human-designed organisms (such as
biocontrol agents) in the environment. The RAPD technique has considerable
promise in this regard because of the high resolution it offers in
distinguishing organisms. Further, since our model system makes use of naturally
occurring genetic variation, there are no problems in our study of introducing
unknown new genetic variants into the environment.