* 9119705
* RUI:  Morphology and Evolution of the Pectoral Complex in   Catfishes (Teleostei:  Siluriformes)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1994
* Alan Bornbusch, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1994
* USD 76,231.00

This study proposes an evolutionary analysis of the morphology of the pectoral
fin and related skeletal and muscular elements (henceforth referred to as the
pectoral complex) in catfishes. The pectoral complex exhibits remarkable
diversity in catfishes, with regard to both structure and function., However,
there is lacking a comprehensive survey of this character-rich complex in the
group. This scarcity of information is particularly acute for the musculature of
the pectoral complex. The goals of this study are: (1) to survey the pectoral
complex in catfishes to define the extent of its structural diversity; (2) to
determine the extent to which evolutionary modifications of elements within the
complex are correlated to each other and to modifications in pectoral fin
function; (3) to determine the significance of pectoral complex characters for
inferring evolutionary relationships of the 35 extant and fossil catfish
families. The results of this study will be used to develop hypotheses of the
structural evolution of the catfish pectoral complex that can guide
quantitative/experimental investigations. This study will generate hypotheses of
catfish relationships that can be combined with or tested by information from
other anatomical/functional complexes. This study will also contribute to a
better understanding of how the diversification of catfishes has been related to
earth history. Inasmuch as catfishes constitute approximately 30% of all primary
freshwater fishes, this work will assist in unravelling the complex evolutionary
history of the world's freshwater fish faunas - a significant component of
aquatic biological diversity.