* 9119376
* Paleomagnetism of Early Miocene Sediments on the Indo-      Pakistan Plate
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1993
* Lisa Tauxe, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Felicia Fauntleroy
* 06/30/1993
* USD 35,606.00

The docking of India onto the Asian continent has resulted in tremendous uplift
throughout much of the Cenozoic. Erosion of the uplifted mountain ranges and
deposition in tectonically depressed basins has also resulted in one of the
thickest and the most complete records of late Cenozoic. Sediments spanning the
last ~ 20 Ma are well exposed in the Siwalik and Rawalpindi Group rocks of the
Potwar Plateau of northern Pakistan. The earlier continental record is preserved
to the South in the Sulaiman foreland basin, located in central Pakistan.
However, the Sulaiman sequence lies almost completely within Tribal Territory
and cannot be accessed by foreigners (including the non-tribal Pakistani).
Fortunately, there is one corner of the SUlaiman foreland basin that is
accessible to non-native persons, the Zinda Pir Dome. We have targeted this area
for a combined magneto-biostratigraphic study in order to extend the vertebrate
fossil record into deposits older that the 18.3 Ma limit found in the Potwar
Plateau. This project was initiated by Dr. E.H. Lindsay of the University of
Arizona in 1987. Lindsay and co-workers have completed three field seasons
(1988, 1989 and 1990). During the last of these a number of paleomagnetic
samples were taken. However, skepticism in the community exists about the
potential for success of the paleomagnetic investigations. Since paleomagnetic
data are essential to provide a chronostratigraphic framework, we are requesting
limited support to analyze existing samples in order to assess their reliability
as paleomagnetic recorders. As this study necessarily carries some risk of
failure, we are seeking funds specifically designated for "small-scale,
exploratory, high-risk" research.