* 9119621
* Hierarchical Planning in a Pull Production Environment
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1995
* Michael Zazanis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 05/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

American manufacturers face increasing competition from abroad. In addition to
having low prices, being competitive requires outstanding quality, short lead
times, and increased responsiveness to customer's changing demands. Companies
that have successfully responded to this changing environment have done so by
decreasing work in process (WIP) and finished goods inventory (FGI) levels,
thereby allowing early detection of quality problems, shorter lead times, and
less vulnerability to changing demands. In some situations, the kanban system
has been highly successful at reducing WIP and FGI. However, kanban is
applicable only to repetitive manufacturing environments. In previous NSF-funded
research, the investigators have developed a more broadly applicable pull
production control system, called CONWIP (CONstant Work in Process). This system
promises to bring the benefits of kanban to a wider class of manufacturing
environments. But a production control system cannot operate in a vacuum; it
must be able to interface with the sales, customer service, quality control,
product development, and capacity management functions. In recognition of this,
the PI's have developed a hierarchical planning system for a pull production
control system, called Synchronized Production. A version of this hierarchy has
been designed and implemented for the case of a simple manufacturing environment
without assembly operations. Although the CONWIP production control mechanism
and some of its supporting models can accomodate assembly operations, a
consistent hierarchy for manufacturing environments with complex assembly
structures has not been developed. This project will extend the Synchronized
Production hierarchy to complex manufacturing environments with assembly
operations, shared resources, and floating bottlenecks. The ultimate goal is to
bring the performance benefits of pull production and the consistency provided
by hierarchical planning to a much broader class of manufacturing environments.
The initial development of the Synchronized Production concept was jointly
funded by NSF and the IBM Corporation. IBM will continue to fund aspects of the
research specifically related to their needs (e.g., coding of software for a
specific implementation). By combining industry and government support, this
project will develop both the theoretical and applied results needed to enable
Synchronized Production to play a role in restoring the competitiveness of
American manufacturing.