* 9119580
* On the Origin of Alfven Waves Required for Heating in       Solar Coronal Holes
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* Zdzislaw Musielak, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth H. Schatten
* 09/30/1994
* USD 90,000.00

The Earth is situated in a solar wind, whose origins are unclear. The source of
this is "coronal holes". This study deals with this plasma source. The fact that
Alfven waves may play a significant role in the energy balance in solar coronal
holes has been known for many years. The traditional view has been that these
waves are generated in the convectively unstable subphotospheric layers. Just
very recently Parker (1991, Astrophys. J., 372, 719) and Moore et al. (1991,
Astrophys. J., 376, in press) have suggested that these waves can be generated
by small-scale magnetic fields assoicated with the network and presented some
qualitative arguments to support this idea. Because there are also other
mechanisms of Alfven wave generation operating in the solar atmosphere, more
detailed calculations are needed to estimate which mechanism dominates in the
excitation of these waves. The PI propose to calculate the wave energy spectra
and energy fluxes for three different mechanisms of Alfven wave generation: (1)
excitation of transverse waves on magnetic flux tubes by the subphotospheric
convection, (2) generation of transverse tube waves by the photospheric
granulation, and (3) excitation of Alfven waves by the network microflaring. To
find out which mechanism is dominant in supplying the wave energy into solar
coronal holes, the PI will compare all three obtained wave energy fluxes with
total heat input required by observations. This study will be important in
ongoing efforts to understand the principal energy sources for solar coronal
holes and the basic physical processes responsible for creating the heliosphere,
in which the Earth resides.