* 9119618
* Ecosystem and Population Consequences of Alien Grass        Invasion of Seasonally Dry Hawaiian Woodlands
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1998
* Carla D'Antonio, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1998
* USD 591,273.00

Invasions by introduced grasses are a common phenomenon worldwide, with the
potential for dramatic community and ecosystem-level effects. This study will
investigate changes in ecosystem properties induced by alien grass invasion in a
nitrogen-limited, seasonally dry woodland in Hawai'i and a natural savanna lands
in Venezuela. Hawaiian ecosystems are ideal for such tests because of the
relative simplicity of the communities and the ease with which invasions can be
documented. Two grass species have a distinct pattern of invasion into theses
woodlands: Schizachyrium condensatum invades undisturbed woodland and promotes
fire. After fire, Melinis minutiflora largely replaces both Schizachyrium and
native woodland species resulting in a low diversity, more readily burned
grassland. Nutrient availability changes predictably with fire, yielding, a
clear pattern of vegetation change that likely coincides with a predictable
change in soil nutrients. The researchers propose to investigate the processes
driving vegetation and soil nutrient changes and to examine the influence of
fire and the post-fire presence of alien grasses on nutrient limitation.
Specifically, they will test the hypothesis that grass invasion induces
largescale changes in nutrient cycling and that these changes feedback to
influence population-level processes involving both native and introduced
species. The Venezuela study will permit tests of the generality of any
conclusions.