* 9119280
* Phylogenetics of Aphids and Their Intracellular Associates  and Implications for the Evolutionary History of the        Endosymbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Nancy Moran, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1994
* USD 100,000.00

Many animal and plant species contain bacteria, called endosymbionts, that
inhabit specialized cells of their hosts. These associations are widespread in
insects that feed on plant sap, including aphids and their evolutionary
relatives. The insects cannot grow or reproduce without their endosymbionts, and
specialized mechanisms ensure that offspring are infected at birth. Dr. Nancy
Moran of the University of Arizona, collaborating with Dr. Paul Baumann at the
University of California-Davis, is working to reconstruct the evolutionary
history of the endosymbioses of aphids and related insects, in order to
determine how the bacteria and insects have diversified in association with one
another. They are analyzing nucleotide sequence data from ribosomal DNA from
both bacteria and their hosts in order to infer phylogenetic trees of the
species, by measuring mutational differences among the taxa. Analysis of the
correspondence, or lack thereof, of these phylogenetic trees will permit a
determination of whether the bacteria have diversified in parallel with hosts or
whether unrelated groups of bacteria have frequently invaded new insect hosts
through time. The data will also allow an estimate of the ages of the
associations and of rates of molecular change. The findings should illuminate
the nature of endosymbiotic associations in general and will aid in
understanding the evolution of this important group of insects.