* 9119804
* Integration and Computerization of Pierce Brodkorb          Ornithology Collection into Florida Museum of Natural       History
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* S.David Webb, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James R. Estes
* 06/30/1995
* USD 206,870.00

This award will allow the Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) to
incorporate and computerize the Pierce Brodkorb collection of Recent and fossil
birds (PBOC) into their ornithological and paleontological collections,
respectively. Brodkorb, a distinguished ornithologist, amassed an
internationally important collection of 31,000 skeletal specimens of extant and
fossil birds, which he donated to FLMNH upon his retirement in 1989. The
osteological material represents some 2500 species and is 11th largest in the
world in terms of specimens and fifth largest in number of species. The fossil
material includes the type specimens of 42 new species and the collection as a
whole figured in 29 projects for graduate degrees at the University of Florida.
After incorporation, the FLMNH avian osteology collection will rank fifth in
size in the United States, and the fossil bird collection fourth. The latter is
one of the finest in the world. Each collection is integral to biological
research and education at the University of Florida - - each collection is well
used by researchers and students at FLMNH and elsewhere. This use will increase
with incorporation of the PBOC. The incorporation plan involves identification
of 5000 fossil specimens, cataloguing, computerization and rehousing of the
entire collection. FLMNH is providing the equipment.