* 9119750
* RUI:  A CCD Camera and Image Processing System for          Astronomical Research
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Daniel Caton, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 05/31/1995
* USD 68,850.00

A modern, research quality, Charge Coupled Device (CCD) camera will be acquired
for implementation at Appalachian State University's Dark Sky Observatory (DSO).
It will be used to capture images that will yield fundamental data in stellar
and extragalatic astronomy. A high-speed computer workstation will also be
implementted, using the IRAF image processing system already developed by the
national observatories. The complete system will allow observational work of the
highest quality, as well as extend the limits set by existing equipment. The CCD
camera will be used for a number of existing and planned projects. The current
program of eclipsing binary photometry will benefit from the CCD's high
efficiency and CCD photometry's relative insensitivity to less than ideal
observing conditions. The CCD will be used as the detector in a spectrograph
being built for use at DSO. The spectrograph will be used for work in stellar
classification and studies of chemical abundances in stars. The CCD camera will
also be used for studies of optical outbursts in quasi-stellar objects. We would
also expect that new projects will be conceived based upon the capabilities of
the system. Additionally, the new system will expand the opportunities for
astronomy students in the regions, and will help attrack students into the
sciences.