* 9119413
* The Biomechanics of Bat Flight: Skeletal Architecture and   Functional Performance
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Sharon Swartz, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* John Fray
* 08/31/1995
* USD 190,447.00

Flight is a truly distinctive locomotor mode: it makes extreme demands on an
organism's morphology and physiology, and produces profound ecological and
behavioral consequences. In the hundreds of millions of years that vertebrates
have inhabited the earth, only three lineages have evolved the capability of
sustained flight: the extinct pterosaurs among reptiles; the birds; and within
mammals, the (Order Chiroptera). Perhaps because of the ecological opportunities
available to nocturnal flying animals, the success of bats has been
extraordinary by any measure. Today, bats are more abundant than any other
mammalian order in number of individuals and are second only to the rodents in
number of species, with over 900 species of living bats described. Furthermore,
bats are more widely distributed than any other mammals except humans and
cetaceans (whales and porpoises). Most authors have attributed the tremendous
evolutionary radiation of bats to the key adaptive innovation of powered flight,
even while our understanding of this evolutionary transformation has remained
rudimentary. Bats fly using wings that are clearly derived from successive
modifications of the primitive mammalian limb design, retaining the basic
topological interrelationship of forelimb skeletal elements even while certain
aspects of the morphology of the bony elements and the surrounding soft tissues
have been greatly altered. In particular, changes have occurred in the
proportions and shape of the limb skeleton; the geometry and mobility of the
forelimb joints; the attachment points, internal architecture, and physiological
capabilities of muscle tissue; and the distribution of mass within the body. We
have yet to explore how the wing skeleton functions during flight or the nature
of the bony material in wings. This project will test the hypothesis that
skeletal composition and limb bone architecture in bats relate directly to the
strenuous mechanical demands placed on the wing skeleton during flight. We will
explore the possibility that the mineral content and basic properties of bat
wing bones differ significantly from other mammals, and determine the stress
flight places on wing bones during flight. This case study will be an important
test of the general hypothesis that the structural design of limbs in
vertebrates is determined by the functional requirements of locomotion.