* 9119127
* Dissertation Research: Cultural and Linguistic Factors in   Health-Related Discourse in Bangladesh
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 07/31/1994
* USD 8,082.00

ABSTRACT Health complaints in Bangladesh will be studied in order to understand
what they accomplish and how they help constitute Bengali personhood. Methods
will include: 1) participant- observation in homes and medical settings in a
small town, and 2) recording of complaints to be submitted to 3) ethnographic
discourse analysis. Discourse analysis will focus on the form and function of
the complaints as speech acts. Off-record goals of these acts will be explored
through conversation-internal indications and in interviews (with participants
and others). Defining characteristics of "health complaints" will be described.
Parameters of variation to be explored include gender and relative age of
speakers and hearers and the nature of the speech setting (home versus medical).
Analysis will produce taxonomic, pragmatic, and cultural-symbolic models for the
understanding of complaints in their contexts. Because complaints-- particularly
by females-- may themselves be viewed as selfish actions by Bengalis
(particularly males), models will relate complaints to ideals and actualities of
self-other boundaries, much discussed in South Asian ethnography. Psychological
and medical anthropologists in South Asia have considered whether somatic
symptoms can be considered indirect expressions of social or psychological
distress; the research will uncover linguistic and other behavioral evidence
relevant to this question.