* 9119617
* Joint US-CRIMEA Helioseismic Studies of Solar Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1997
* Edward Rhodes, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 04/30/1997
* USD 120,000.00

This proposal is to investigate two main areas of solar research. The first is
an improvement in our current knowledge of the thermodynamic structure and
dynamical motions of the solar interior through the application of the tools of
helioseismology. This goal will be reached through the continuation of an on-
going, dedicated observing program which is located at the 60- Foot Solar Tower
Telescope of the mount Wilson Observatory and through the continued analysis of
the observations of solar oscillations which have already been obtained by that
program. The second goal is the establishment of a two-station ground- based
network for the observation of high-degree solar oscillations through the
installation of an additional dedicated observing system, which will be located
at the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory in the USSR. Through the installation
and operation of this second station the PI will foster a strong collaboration
between U.S. and Soviet helioseismologists and enhance the scientific return of
our future U.S. observations beyond the return which we would get from the Mt.
Wilson observations alone. The observations of the sun's surface motions will be
converted into measurements of the frequencies, rotationally and magnetically
induced frequency splittings, amplitudes and lifetimes of global solar
oscillation modes. These results will then be inverted to map the sun's internal
sound speed and angular velocity as functions of radius and latitude.