* 9119834
* Clovis-Folsom-Plainview Geochronology, Climate Change, and  the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1996
* C. Vance Haynes, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1996
* USD 150,001.00

Dr. C. Vance Haynes and collaborators will examine geological sections in 16
U.S. archaeological sites which bracket the Pleistocene-Holocene transition
which occurred from ca. 11,500 to 10,500 years ago. During three seasons of
fieldwork they will conduct geologic mapping and microstratigraphic recording in
sufficient detail to understand the processes and origins, and to provide a
precise stratigraphic framework for sampled sediments, fauna, pollen, diatoms,
artifacts and radiocarbon samples. Pollen and diatom analyses will be conducted
by appropriate specialists and a large number of samples will be dated to a
precision of +- 80 years by radiocarbon accelerator mass spectrometry. This
research will provide increased insight into the climatic and environmental
changes which marked the end of the last Ice Age and the response of humans as
well as other species. Archaeological evidence clearly indicates that humans
were present in North America prior to the end of the last Ice Age. These
groups, known as "Folsom", which is the name of a specialized stone point type
they employed, were widely distributed and hunted species such as mastodon.
However, within what appears to be an extremely limited interval a transition
occurs and "Clovis" peoples first appear in the archaeological record. At about
the same time, several other changes seem to take place as well. Preliminary
evidence indicates climatic drying and the rapid extinction of many species.
While a number of archeological sites exist which span this interval, it is
difficult to compare across them because of varying analytic techniques
employed. The work by Dr. Haynes and his colleagues will provide the basis for
synthesizing large amounts of data from these individual sites. It will also
allow him to test his hypothesis that a rapid and marked reduction in rainfall
was responsible for associated environmental and cultural changes. This research
is important because it will shed light on a poorly understood aspect of U.S.
prehistory. It will also increase our understand of climate change and human and
other animal response to it.