* 9119995
* Template Effects and Self-replicating Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Julius Rebek, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Paul W. Jennings
* 10/31/1995
* USD 355,140.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of
Professor Julius Rebek, Jr. at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Systems
designed to precisely fix the positions of molecules in space in order to
control their reactivity with neighboring molecules will be studied. In
particular, a previously reported self-replicating system will be examined in
greater detail. An imide-ester that can bind adenine, but not undergo internal
acylation, will be used to shut down the intramolecular base pair components and
promote exponential growth. More lipophilic and soluble Kemp triacid imides will
also be used so that the concentrations can be increased. Proximity complexation
in order to enhance the rate of amide formation between two nucleic acid
components will also be examined. %%% Self-replicating reactions in which the
product acts as a template for its own formation will be studied. Such systems
stand at the interface of chemistry and biology, and provide models for
selection, competition and mutation; the essential components of chemical
evolution. The synthesis of efficient replicators and the design of nucleic
acid-like templates for the synthesis of peptide sequences will be undertaken.
These new molecules are expected to offer a link between today's biological
structures and their prebiotic counterparts.