* 9119319
* A Harmonic Approach to Learning and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Merrick Furst, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Dana May Latch
* 01/31/1996
* USD 400,073.00

Harmonic analysis has played an important role in a broad range of areas.
Computer scientists have begun using it as a tool for resolving questions about
combinatorial circuits. In number theory and other mathematical disciplines,
proofs obtained via harmonic analysis turn out to be astonishingly powerful.
This research will develop new, efficient and useful learning algorithms, new
computational models and new mathematical relationships among finite functions
through the use of harmonic expressions. It will consider harmonic expressions
themselves (independent of their relation to circuits) as models of finite
functions. The computational theory of finite functions has grown over the last
several decades. The ability to discern and exploit the structure of finite
functions in computational settings has improved dramatically. The improvements
have basically followed innovations in the models of computation which are
studied. For the past fifteen years, the model which has dominated the
interpretation of how finite computations should be examined is the
combinatorial circuit, wherein calculations are performed on Boolean values
passing through logic gates. Placing constraints on the measurable aspects of
circuits (e.g., their depth, their size in gates and which logic-gates are
employed) isolates and delineates understandable classes of finite functions.
The most important and famous of these are the log-depth, polynomial-size
functions (NC), the constant-depth, polynomial-size functions (AC), the
constant- depth thresh-old circuits, whose gates are threshold functions (TC),
and the monotone polynomial-size circuits, which allow no negations. These
classes play both theoretical and practical roles. The class NC corresponds well
with functions that have a hope of being computed fast in parallel by plausibly-
sized parallel machines. The class AC corresponds with the functions that can be
expressed by reasonably-sized programmable logic arrays. And the class TC is
intimately related to the class of functions represented by artificial neural
networks, and may well model newer optical computing devices. Thus, the strong
motivation for studying circuits is to obtain improved insights into parallel
programming, VLSI chip design, theories of learning and brain-like computation,
and the potentials of new computing technologies.