* 9119163
* Geologic Records Inferred Form Cosmic Ray Produced Neon at  the Surface of the Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Kurt Marti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1993
* USD 59,585.00

In the last few years, several cosmic-ray-produced radionuclides (10Be, 14C,
26Al, 36Cl), as well as stable, 3He, Ne and 22Ne have been discovered in
terrestrial surface materials. Some of these nuclides are already employed as
tracers in studies of geophysical and geological phenomena and open up a new
field of study and are expected to provide essential data on rates of change in
global change research. Such studies require an accurate knowledge of the
production rates, present and past, which are not currently available. The
relevant excitation functions for different nuclides are not known. A simulation
of the cosmic ray flux is a rather complex endeavor. We propose a direct method
for the determination of some of present production rates, by exposing relevant
targets at mountain altitudes. Production rates averaged over the last solar
cycles can be obtained by comparing production rates with neutron monitor data.
We propose to determine the relevant production ratio P21/P26 of the cosmic-ray-
produced nuclides 21Ne and 26Al by isotopic measurements of Ne in quartz
samples. Average production rates over 104-105 years can be obtained from
measurements of samples of known age. Measurements of the 3He/21Ne ratio show
and that 3He is often incompletely retained in quartzites. Therefore, 21Ne
production rates and 21Ne/10Be and 21Ne/Al ratios provide essential information,
which is required to evaluate erosion rates and to define geological processes
(uplift, variations in ice cover etc).