* 9119032
* Support for the 27th International Geographical Congress;   Washington, D.C.; August 1992
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1991,03/31/1993
* Melvin Marcus, 27 International Geographical Congress
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 03/31/1993
* USD 523,000.00

Geographic research has been extremely dynamic in recent decades, making the
quadrennial congresses sponsored by the International Geographical Union (IGU)
extremely important settings at which geographers and scholars in related
disciplines meet to exchange the most recent results of their research and to
plan future collaborative activities. The 27th Congress of the IGU will be held
in Washington, D.C., in August 1992, providing an excellent opportunity for
American geographers to meet directly with colleagues from other parts of the
world. This award provides support for the 27th International Geographical
Congress (IGC) in two ways. First, it provides financial assistance from NSF to
offset costs of planning and operating the congress. Second, it provides a means
through which other federal governmental agencies may provide financial support
through interagency agreements that will fund supplements to the initial award.
This award is effectively a renewal of NSF Award SES-9000186, but it is made as
a new award because financial responsibility for administration of the award now
will be handled directly by the Organizing Committee of the 27th IGC. This award
will provide valuable financial assistance for the planning and operation of the
largest and most significant gathering of geographers from throughout the world.
As has been true with past IGU activities, enhanced scholarship and increased
involvement in international collaborative activities by American geographers
will result. Further positive consequences of this grant will be realized if NSF
can assist in channelling contributions from other federal agencies to this
important activity.