* 9119317
* Examination of Characteristics of Atmosphere Fluctuations   of Importance to Ground-Based Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* Charles Townes, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 03/31/1994
* USD 297,900.00

This award supports measurement and analysis of the nature of fluctuations in
optical paths through the atmosphere. The results should be of importance for
optimizing designs for adaptive optics, for large telescopes, and for spatial
interferometers operating from the ground. Measurements will be made with the
Infrared Spatial Interferometer (ISI) now installed on Mount Wilson, which has
already been useful in initiating such measurements. The initial measurements
appear to show that for conditions encountered in ground-based astronomy,
pathlength fluctuation often differ significantly from those expected on the
basis of the standard model of Kolmogorov turbulence and Taylor's approximation.
Furthermore, these deviations can have a significant bearing on the design of
future large aperture instruments and their extension into the infrared region.
The program will measure fluctuations in pathlength differences from a stellar
object to the two telescopes and also fluctuations near the ground at the
position of the two telescopes. These will be correlated with such parameters as
wind speed, time of day, astronomical seeing, and cloud cover. The measurements
will yield the structure function of time, Allan variances, and power spectra.
In addition, examination of correlations between the laser interferometers and
the IR interference fringe signals with various telescope separations will
provide direct information on the structure function of distance. Observations
over a period of time and under various conditions applicable to astronomical
observations from the ground are needed in order to obtain an adequate
statistical sample.