* 9119724
* Systematics and Biogeography of the Desert Crane Flies of   Western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1996
* Jon Gelhaus, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 135,000.00

Dr. Jon Gelhaus of the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia is studying
the biological diversity and taxonomic relationships of crane flies inhabiting
desert regions of the North American Southwest. Although crane flies are
typically most diverse and abundant in moist habitats, several subgroups show
repeated, independent evolution and diversification into arid habitats, a
phenomenon apparently unique to the American Southwest in this otherwise
worldwide group of insects. Three main objectives are being pursued: (1) Define
the species subgroups within the crane fly subgenus Lunatipula of genus Tipula
in the northern hemisphere, from which nearly all of the desert crane fly
species groups have arisen; (2) Examine in detail three desert crane fly groups
of Lunatipula, describing and illustrating all new and previously known species,
determining the geographical distribution of each species and inferring each
group's phylogenetic history; and (3) Use knowledge of the geographic ranges and
evolutionary history of these three crane fly groups, as well as those
previously published for other North American desert insects, to synthesize a
general hypothesis regarding development and diversification of the North
American desert insect fauna. The studies will utilize specimens already in
museums as well as those secured on three collecting trips to the Southwest and
northern Mexico.