* 9119560
* Hydraulic Limitations in Arid Land Shrubs
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1993
* Jonathan Comstock, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 07/31/1993
* USD 90,537.00

Hymenoclea salsola is a warm-desert shrub with a large geographic range in
North American deserts. When plants originating from diverse geographic
locations were grown in a common garden, genetic differentiation was observed in
plant characters influencing the rate and photosynthetic efficiency of water
consumption. It is hypothesized that environmentally- imposed variation in
water-loss rates alters the balance between water acquisition and consumption,
and accounts for the genetic differentiation of different geographic races. To
investigate the underlying mechanisms, separate measures of root, stem and whole
plant hydraulic conductance (water transport capacity between soil and leaf)
will be make using several techniques applying known pressure differentials over
the respective pathways and determining consequent flux rates. These data will
be integrated with measures of whole canopy gas-exchange (water- loss and
photosynthesis), and carbon isotope discrimination during photosynthesis. The
plasticity of individual genotypes to short-term changes in growth conditions
will be compared with genetic differentiation to contrasting conditions over
evolutionary time. The importance of hydraulic limitations will be evaluated in
terms of immediate feed-back control on stomatal behavior, and also long-term
adaptive differentiation across geographic races. The results will enhance our
understanding of 1) the integration of resource capture and consumption in plant
water relations, 2) limitations imposed by plant morphology on physiological
activity, 3) mechanistic relationships between plant water-use characteristics
and climatic variation, and 4) the relationship of a unique arid-land plant
habit, a canopy of photosynthetic stems, to general principles of plant water-
relations.