* 9119295
* US-Hungary Research on Prediction of Local Hydrology under  Global Climate Change
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1997
* Lucien Duckstein, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 34,696.00

The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary research project between Drs. Istvan
Bogardi of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and Lucien Duckstein of the
University of Arizona-Tucson, with Dr. Ferenc Rakoczi of the Department of
Meteorology, Eotvos University, Budapest, Hungary, is to develop methods to
predict local hydrological variables influenced by climate fluctuations by
defining a probabilistic linkage between the occurrence and type of atmospheric
circulation patterns and (a) local precipitation, (b) flood events, (c) dry
periods, and (d) lake levels. With that linkage, they will use available general
circulation model scenarios to predict the hydrological quantities reflecting
climate change. They will use and compare these concepts to two drainage basins,
in Hungary and the U.S., and study lake level fluctuations at Lake Balaton in
Hungary and the Great Salt Lake in Utah. The results should constitute a major
input into water resources decision-making, including the mitigation of the
effects of climate fluctuation and global change on local hydrology. This
project in civil engineering fulfills the program objectives of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
Eastern Europe to combine complimentary talents and pool research resources in
areas of strong mutual interest and competence.