* 9119933
* Silica Surface Modifications for High Performance Liquid    Chromatography (HPLC) and Capillary Electrophoresis (HPCE)
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Joseph Pesek, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* David J. Curran
* 01/31/1996
* USD 186,107.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of separation science. During the tenure of this three-year
continuing RUI grant, Professor Pesek and his students will pursue the
development of chemical modification procedures for alteration of porous silica
stationary phases for high performance liquid chromatography and glass capillary
walls for high performance capillary electrophoresis. The synthetic approach
involves converting surface silanol functionalities to hydrides which can be
further reacted by hydrosilation reactions to produce bonded organic moieties.
These bonded materials have a direct carbon-silicon bond to the surface instead
of the more common siloxane linkage which arises from standard organosilane
reactions procedures. The direct linkage has been proven both
chromatographically and electrophoretically to be more stable than the siloxane
linkages to a much wider range of analytical solution environments.
Additionally, bonded liquid crystal stationary phases will be further developed
and characterized spectroscopically, thermally, and chromatographically. %%%
This research builds upon results obtained under Dr. Pesek's previous NSF grant,
CHE-8814849, and will enable a clearer definition of the mobile phase/stationary
phase interface. Additionally, this research should provide insightful guidance
for the more rational and efficient design and synthesis of liquid crystal
chromatographic stationary phases.