* 9119827
* Related Wasp and Polydnavirus Genes: Role in Parasitism
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Max Summers, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Stacia A. Sower
* 03/31/1996
* USD 234,000.00

Some insect parasites inject secretions into the host along with their egg
which results in avoiding immune defenses and causes host developmental arrest.
For Campoletis sonorensis, both phenomena may be induced by a polydnavirus
(PDV). PDV is the only animal DNA virus with a heterogeneous, segmented genome.
Several viral gene families have been identified that are expressed during
parasitism, and viral gene expression is tissue and/or host specific. Through
evolution the parasite has acquired to assemble, amplify and transfer this
genetic information in a viral form to another eucaryotic host which is
essential for parasite survival. We have shown one family of the venom related
(VR) wasp and PDV genes encode structural motifs that belong to "DEAD" protein
family. This suggests that these unique genes may encode products involved in
regulating, splicing or translation. Our recent studies show also that CsPDV
genes contain sequences that encode a cysteine motif characteristic of peptide
toxins. The presence of this motif is unlikely to be fortuitous, rather it may
reflect a function as a ligand of cell surface receptors which may also be
correlated with functions related to parasite survival. The significance of this
study emphasizes the molecular basis of parasite induced avoidance of insect
defense systems and the research conducted with NSF support will be directed to
identifying these expression products and determining their functional
significance.