* 9119879
* Molecular Phylogenetic Studies of Anaerobic Microbial       Community Population Structure and Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1995
* David Stahl, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William S. Armbruster
* 05/31/1995
* USD 100,000.00

The governing position of microorganisms in biogeochemical cycles has long been
appreciated, yet the ecology of the contributing natural microbial populations
remains poorly resolved. This is principally a consequence of the technical and
historical limitations of pure culture isolation and phenotypic classification.
However, the advent of molecular systematics and newer techniques of molecular
biology and recombinant DNA have markedly changed the repertoire of tools
available to the microbial ecologist. It is now feasible to define microbial
communities at the level of populations and even single cells. The proposed
research will use and, to a more limited extent, develop phylogenetically-based
molecular techniques to study the population structure of complex anaerobic
communities. These studies will emphasize the characterization of methanogenic
and sulfate- reducing bacterial populations. Sulfate-reducing and mentanogenic
bacteria comprise anaerobic populations which perform the terminal
mineralization of organic matter within the microbial communities of aquatic
sediments and other anaerobic settings. They are generally considered to be in
competition for substrates, the outcome of which is dependent upon the
availability of sulfate as the electron acceptor. Comparative 16s rRNA
sequencing will provide the framework for developing and applying analytical
molecular techniques to determine the population structure of each functional
group in different communities. The molecular techniques will include: 1)
Selective PCR amplification, cloning and sequencing of 16s rRNA genes, and 2)
Phylongentically-based hybridization probes. Differences (and similarities) in
population structure within these communities will be evaluated in relationship
to community activity (i.e. sulfate reduction, methanogenesis or acetate
catabolism).