* 9119292
* Crystallographic and Mechanistic Studies of Cytochrome c    Peroxidase
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Joseph Kraut, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1994
* USD 444,134.00

The long term goal of this research is to understand the structure and
catalytic mechanism of cytochrome c peroxidase (CCP). CCP is a 34,000 M.W.
monomeric heme protein that catalyses the reductive cleavage of peroxide to
water, using ferrous cytochrome c as the electron donor. The crystal structures
of CCP, its two-electron oxidation product, Compound I (formed by the reaction
of the enzyme with peroxide), enzyme:inhibitor complexes, and several mutant
CCPs have been solved. The available structural information makes CCP an
attractive system for the study of intermolecular electron transfer and O-O bond
activation by heme proteins. The proposed investigation will employ site-
directed mutagenesis to perturb the enzyme structure and X-ray crystallography
to describe the resulting structural changes. Subsequent characterization of
these mutants by spectroscopic and kinetic techniques will be used to relate the
changes in structure to changes in the primary reactions of the enzyme. The
results of the proposed research will provide insight into the structural
features that are involved in electrostatic recognition between macromolecule
and rapid transfer of electrons between heme proteins. The proposed work will
also provide insight into the mechanisms that proteins use to modify the
reactivity of the heme prosthetic group to accomplish a characteristic reaction.