* 9119270
* Dissertation Research:  Patterns of Genetic Variation in    Natural Populations: Chromosomal, Single Gene, and Polygenic
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Elizabeth Lord, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1994
* USD 5,330.00

Understanding the population genetic structure of organisms distributed in
discrete populations is essential to understanding the subsequent evolution of
such populations. Most studies examine the pattern of genetic variation within
and among populations using allozymes, neglecting sources such as chromosomal
and morphological variation. These additional sources of variation are expected
to contrast with allozyme variation. Random processes such as drift should be
important in the spread and/or fixation of chromosomal variants since
individuals heterozygous for chromosome arrangements are often observed to have
reduced fertility. Selection acting on morphological traits, however, can
counteract such random processes. Allozymes, assumed to be neutral genetic
markers, will be affected by random processes potentially important in fixation
of chromosomal variants. Considering all three sources of variation together,
chromosomal variation should coincide more closely with allozyme than with
morphological variation. The coPI will examine the within and among population
patterns of chromosomal variation in relation to both single gene (allozymes and
discrete morphological traits) and polygenic (quantitative genetic) variation in
Clarkia dudleyana, a species known to contain chromosomal polymorphism between
populations. The coPI will examine the chromosomal relationship, estimate gene
frequencies of both allozymes and morphological traits, and examine the pattern
of polygenic variation for eight natural populations. The coPI will also study
selection to determine whether current selection regimes are consistent with
differences in the pattern of morphological variation as compared to allozyme
and chromosomal variation. The general significance of the study is that it will
improve our understanding of the survival and spread of natural plant
populations.