* 9119588
* Quantitative Genetics and Phylogenetics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1997
* Stevan Arnold, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 08/31/1997
* USD 502,000.00

Most of the observable traits of plants and animals are affected by many
genetic factors. The theory for the inheritance of such traits is known as
quantitative genetics. For the past 60 years, animal and plant breeders have
used quantitative genetics to improve domestic animals and crop species. In the
past 20 years, quantitative genetics has swept into evolutionary biology and is
revolutionizing our understanding of evolutionary processes and the genealogy of
living species (phylogenetics). In applying quantitative genetic theory on an
evolutionary time scale, one needs to assume that the system of inheritance
remains unchanged. To make a strong test for constancy of inheritance, one needs
good estimates of the inheritance systems for multiple populations which, in
turn, have known evolutionary relationships. These requirements are difficult to
meet and so strong tests for constancy of inheritance have not yet been
conducted. The current project is a proposal for such a strong test using
natural populations of garter snakes and water snakes. The strength of the
proposal rests on the facts that: (1) large numbers of families can be sampled
in each population to give good estimates of inheritance, (2) multiple
populations and species can be sampled and (3) the phylogenetic relationships of
the populations and species have already been established using modern molecular
techniques. The rationale of the proposal is that by using natural populations
of snakes that are ideally suited for comparative studies of inheritance, one
can test a key assumption in evolutionary studies and perhaps uncover a
principle of genetic constancy that applies to all species of plants and
animals.