* 9119091
* Molecular Systematics and Tests of Monophyly Within         the Small-bodied, Small-scaled Radiation of Sceloporus      (Phrynosomatidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1999
* Marek Kaliszewski, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1999
* USD 420,539.00

This project includes an intensive field collecting phase and a follow-up
laboratory analysis phase, in that order. The field research centers on making
research collections almost entirely in Mexico, under the direction of a Mexican
scientist and his students, of the conspicuous and extremely diverse lizard
genus Sceloporus. Of the specimens collected, at least 60% will be deposited as
standard museum vouchers in a research collection at Mexico's National
University, and the remaining specimens (the final proportions will be
determined by permit requirements) will likewise be catalogued in U.S.
collections. Simultaneously, large collection of frozen tissue samples will be
made from these animals upon their capture, and all frozen tissues will be
returned and catalogued into U.S. tissue collections. Species and distinct
populations will be collected nonrandomly so as to maximize the utility of the
samples for addressing a variety of basic questions in ecology and historical
biogeography. For example, selected species are to be collected from the Baja
Peninsula, some islands in the Sea of Cortez, and the western mainland of Mexico
for the purpose of testing alternative ideas concerning the derivation of island
populations relative to those of Baja and the mainland. These data will have
important implications for understanding the origins of entire island biotas,
since all species present on these islands were subjected to the same geological
events which formed the Baja Peninsula and the Sea of Cortez, and for
emphasizing the value of these still largely intact systems for conservation. A
second group of lizards will be collected from the transverse volcanic range of
central Mexico because these populations display different stages of the
transition from egg-laying to live- bearing reproductive modes associated with
adaptions to high elevations. In both cases, laboratory work will utilize two
independent classes of molecular markers, including proteins and DNA molecules,
to reconstruct the genealogies of the populations sampled. The lab work will
support extensive training opportunities and collaboration for both Mexican and
U.S. graduate students and research associates.