* 9119144
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Hydrology and Geochemistry of   Holocene Mud-Islands in Florida Bay
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Peter Swart, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 03/31/1995
* USD 153,991.00

This study will examine the hydrology and geochemistry of pore fluids from
Holocene Islands in Florida Bay over a two year periods. In particular we intend
to test the following hypotheses: 1) Fluid movement is taking place beneath
supratidal carbonate mud islands in Florida Bay in response to the reflux of
hypersaline fluids formed on the island surfaces; 2) Dolomite is forming in
response to the movement of these fluids and therefore dolomitization is more
extensive in islands which have been islands throughout their entire history
than in islands which have formed more recently; 3) The difference in fluid
density amongst the various islands is a result of a climatic gradient, the
highest salinities occurring in the areas of the bay with the lowest rainfall.
The magnitude of the reflux is greater in those islands which show a greater
difference in fluid density between the island and the adjacent bay. In order to
test these hypotheses, we will (i) core between 10 to 20 islands which span the
climatic gradient present in Florida Bay and which on the basis of previously
published work have experienced sedimentological different histories, (ii)
instrument two islands which occur at the ends of this climatic gradient with a
series of nested piezometers and carry out geochemical analyses at regular
intervals throughout the wet and dry seasons.