* 9119535
* The Role of Mago Nashi in Drosophila Development
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Robert Boswell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 08/31/1996
* USD 310,000.00

In many organisms early determinative events are established by the
differential distribution of informational molecules(cytoplasmic determinants).
In Drosophila,the distribution of these determinants is established by genes
that make a strictly maternal contribution to the developing embryo. Drosophila
serves as a model system for studying genes that produce these determinants
and/or are involved in properly distributing these determinants within the
embryo. The PI is studying Mango Nashi a maternal effect gene required both for
the determination of the primordial germ cells and establishment of the
anteroposterior axis of the embryo. The mago locus is novel in that mutations of
the locus disrupt germ cell formation and are also capable of causing a
replacement of anterior embryonic structures by posterior tail and abdominal
structures. Double mutants between mago and alleles of loci crucial for
delineation of the anteroposterior axis of the embryo will be used to better
define the role of mago in specifying the anteroposterior axis of the embryo.
Genetic isolation of new mago alleles and developmental analysis of thes alleles
will provide information necessary for refining models dipicting the role of
mago+ in early embryonic development. A molecular characterization of the mago
locus will include: (a) identification of mago mRNA(s), and isolation and
sequencing of cDNA clones representative of mago mRNA; and (b) determination of
the distribution of the mago transcript(s) and protein(s) in oocytes and
embryos. This combined analysis should significantly improve our understanding
of mago+ function in early Drosophila development. Thus, these studies should
provide insights into the mechanisms underlying germ cell formation and the
establishment of positional information in the early embryo.