* 9119312
* SGER:  Initial Prototype of an Optical Multi-Processor      Interconnect
* CSE,MIP
* 09/01/1991,05/31/1993
* Jon Sauer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul T. Hulina
* 05/31/1993
* USD 49,966.00

This project is for the development of the initial prototype of one of the nodes
of an optoelectronic interconnection network ultimately capable of reaching
terabyte-per-second capacities. Such a network is a crucial component in a
future teraflop, distributed processing system. The required capacity is
reachable through innovations in architecture, further development of a few
devices that have been demonstrated, and careful systems integration. This
project describes the first stage in the development of a single-word
transmission, multiply-connected network, ultimately capable of delivering and
extracting a sustained average rate of a few 10s of Gb/s from many 100s of
electronic hosts simultaneously. The electronic hosts would be at multiway low-
latency optical switching nodes separated by a few meters to 10s of kilometers.
The techniques to be used are a hot- potato self-routing protocol with no opto-
electronic conversion, a minimum-depth and physically flexible topology, optical
packet compression by optical wavelength and microwave subcarrier- division
multiplexing per word, optical amplification, multiwavelength optical switching,
and multitechnology opto- electronic integration and packaging. The principal
innovation is to architect and engineer a system that exploits these strengths
simultaneously. A large multi-year project will be staged as a series of
mutually dependent, increasingly sophisticated system demonstrations and device
development efforts. This project will construct the first rudimentary
demonstration of the node in a few months with (nearly) off-the-shelf
components.