* 9119889
* Geomorphic Complexity as a Disturbance Modifier
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Donna D'Angelo, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Clifford N. Dahm
* 12/31/1995
* USD 200,000.00

Current theory suggests that ecosystem stability is a function of physical and
biological complexity. Frequent disturbances may reduce this complexity and
thereby destabilize ecosystems, making them more susceptible to future
perturbations. Theory predicts that ecosystems with large scale physical (i.e.
geomorphic) complexity can effectively maintain structural integrity when
impacted by catastrophic disturbances. This project will develop a quantitative
model that links changes in ecosystem structural complexity resulting from
disturbances, to stability. Because streams are strongly influenced by landscape
geomorphology and respond relatively quickly to disturbances, stream ecosystems
will be used. Disturbance-stability relationships will be assessed in terms of
logging impacts, landslides, and floods on general stream ecosystem dynamics,
with special emphasis on fish population responses. To address the importance of
large and small scale physical complexity, the model will be hierarchically
structured (i.e. contain basin, stream reach, and channel unit scales), and
focus on examination of logging impacts at the stream reach scale. Hypotheses
developed and evaluated with this model should provide new insights into how
geomorphic complexity interacts with disturbance to structure ecosystems and set
the stage for the success or failure of biotic components.