* 9119009
* XVII International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote    Sensing (ISPRS) Congress, Washington, D.C., August 1992.
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* William French, American Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 12/31/1994
* USD 38,440.00

Photogrammetry, remote sensing, and geographical information systems have
become increasingly important in the conduct of research in recent decades. The
quadrennial congresses of the International Society for Photogrammetry and
remote Sensing have traditionally served as venues for the presentation of the
latest research on and with these methodologies. This international gathering of
scholars permits scientists and practitioners the opportunity to see, hear, and
discuss the most recent advancements in research employing photogrammertric
techniques, data from remote sensing satellites, and geographical information
systems. The 17th Congress of the ISPRS will be held in Washington, D.C. in
August of 1992, and it will provide American scientists with the opportunity to
meet and converse with other scientists from throughout the world on matters of
mutual scientific interest. This award provides support for the congress by
assisting in the distribution and publication of proceedings which will be
distributed widely, and by providing a vehicle for other federal agencies to
support the congress through interagency funds transfers as supplements to the
award. By providing a partial subsidy for the congress, the costs of
disseminating the congress's proceedings will be reduced. This will make the
proceedings more widely available. Additionally, NSF will be in a position to
further assist the congress through its ability to supplement the award with
funds provided by other federal agencies.