* 9119275
* FASEB Summer Conference Transcription Regulation:           Differentiation, Development and Disease,                   June 14-19, 1992, Copper Mountain, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1993
* Michael Green, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 05/31/1993
* USD 5,000.00

One of the major challenges facing molecular geneticists and developmental
biologists is understanding the mechanisms which control tissue specific gene
expression in higher animals. During the past few years, there has been
extensive progress in this direction. A variety of novel in vivo and in vitro
systems have been developed, a number of transcription factors involved in cell-
type specific gene expression were identified and the genes encoding such
factors were isolated. The hormonal and developmental mechanisms controlling the
activity of these regulatory genes are subject to extensive investigation. This
proposal requests funds to finance a summer FASEB conference on the topic of
Transcription Regulation: Differentiation, Development, and Disease. This
meeting will congregate researchers actively engaged in studying various aspects
of tissue specific gene expression. In addition to discussing the basic
mechanism of gene regulation, special emphasis will be placed on discussion of
both normal and aberrant gene regulation in the following organ systems: liver
and pancreas, muscle, blood and the nervous system. We will also have special
sessions dealing with the regulation of development and embryogenesis. The
emphasis will be on gene regulation in vertebrates and expecially in mammals.
%%% The conference will be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado from June 14-19,
1992. The meeting is designed to have formal slide presentations, informal
poster sessions, a workshop, periods of group discussions, and plenty of
opportunity for individual interaction. The conference will summarize the
current understandings of tissue specific gene expression and should lead to
dissemination of new information, concepts, and methodologies.