* 9119651
* Phylogenetics and Historical Biogeography of Otocinclus
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Scott Schaefer, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1996
* USD 135,501.00

This project will conduct a three year study of the systematics and taxonomy,
natural history, and biogeography of the catfishes of the genus Otocinclus. This
group of approximately 20 species belongs to one of the largest radiations of
freshwater fishes in the Neotropics, the family Loricariidae, which includes
over 600 species. These fishes are an important component of the fish fauna of
the Atlantic coastal region of southeast Brazil, which includes remnants of the
Atlantic Coastal Forest and has been identified as a region of high biodiversity
under severe threat of degradation. Relevance of the study of this particular
group of fishes lies in their contribution toward understanding the complex
historical processes which have shaped the biogeography of organisms inhabiting
the Atlantic coastal region of Brazil. Several inherent biological properties,
as well as previous work on the group, lend particular significance to study of
Otocinclus for achieving these broader goals. Representatives of this group of
fishes are presently widely distributed throughout South America, with one or
more species occurring in every major river drainage basin. Their small size,
coupled with low capabilities for dispersal and wide geographic distribution,
predispose them for this kind of biogeographic analysis. Knowledge of the
relationships among species of Otocinclus, coupled with similar data for other
groups of animals and plants having representatives in the Atlantic coastal
region, will provide the basic data for reconstructing the biogeographic history
of this particular region and seeking the common causal factors responsible for
producing the distributional properties of groups of organisms observed today.
This information can then be used to formulate conservation and management
strategies. Despite their importance, aspects of the basic biology and taxonomy
of these fishes are poorly known; the systematics of this group must be revised,
new species described and illustrated, their inter-relationships determined, and
present distributions defined before progress in understanding the biogeography
of the Atlantic coastal region can be made. Analyses of shape, coloration
pattern, and morphological characteristics will be used to determine the
taxonomic limits to the species of Otocinclus. Expeditions to two poorly known
areas of the Atlantic coastal and neighboring river systems will be undertaken
to sample previously undocumented species and to define their distributions.
General ichthyological collections will be made and specimens deposited in major
museums in both North and South America, forming the material basis for
continued study. Laboratory based morphological studies will be used to
reconstruct the relationships among Otocinclus species. This project will then
provide one additional component toward building a comprehensive dataset for
testing competing biogeographic hypotheses in the Neotropical region.