* 9119476
* The Ecology and Population Biology of the Fungus            Aureobasidium pullulans on Leaf Surfaces
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,06/30/1994
* John Andrews, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1994
* USD 50,000.00

Fungi that grow on leaf surfaces alternate between a life cycle phase on the
leaf, a transport phase in the atmosphere, and growth on another leaf of the
same host or host of species, on a different host species, or on some other
substrate. Essentially nothing is known quantitatively about the demography of
these fungi in situ. The ultimate goal of this research is to produce a model
for the yeast-like fungus, Aureobasidium pullulans, on apple leaf surfaces. To
provide the foundation for the demographic study, the further development of
molecular methods to track all epiphytic members of the A. pullulans population
in situ is proposed. Second, to discriminate introduced from background
populations, the (GUS) gene from E. coli will be installed into A. pullulans
thereby allowing the detection of fungus chromogenically or fluorogenically in
situ. Live versus dead cells will be confirmed independently by a vital staining
method. The system will be evaluated and modelled under controlled and
uncontrolled systems and then used to test the hypothesis that "source" areas
(growth>immigration; and growth>death + emigration) exist for A. pullulans on
leaves at different positions within the tree canopy. The project has
implications for both basic ecology (community processes and structure) and for
the biological control of plant pathogens.