* 9119006
* Synthesis of Ultrafine Particles of Nanosize Reinforced     Composites
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1991,12/31/1997
* Kenneth Kelton, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Paul Werbos
* 12/31/1997
* USD 676,078.00

This project investigates the combustion synthesis and wet-chemical synthesis
methods for producing ultrafine alloy particles in the form of nanosize
reinforced in situ composites. Emphasis will be given to the production of
Ti/TiB2 composites, although the processes employed are applicable to a wide
range of intermetallics. The methodology for combustion synthesis involves
reacting Na with TiCl4 and BCI3 to produce a Ti/TiB2 alloy. A flow reactor will
be constructed which simulate the processes that would occur in a production-
scale system, but also allow for a detailed investigation of the particle
formation, growth and cooling processes. Measurements will be performed by a
combination of probe sampling and light scattering techniques. The wet-chemical
approach will be a low- temperature, solution-phase technique using metalorganic
precursors and intermediates. Inverse micelles and polymeric stabilizers will be
used to control the syntheses, sizes, and stabilities of the nanocrystals. The
microstructural stability and mechanical properties of the materials obtained by
consolidation of the nanosize particles produced by the two processes outlined
above will be also studied. In synthesizing these alloys a new class of
materials is expected that will exhibit high strength, high elastic modulus,
high toughness and impact properties, low sensitivity to temperature chance or
thermal shock, high surface durability and low sensitivity to flaws.