* 9119619
* Expansion Rates and Defenses in Young Leaves of Tropical    Species
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Phyllis Coley, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1995
* USD 209,050.00

Plants have evolved a battery of physical and chemical defenses which protect
them against grazing damage (herbivory). Most of our understanding of herbivory
and plant defenses derives from research on mature leaves. However, young
expanding leaves are the most vulnerable stage during the life of a leaf. Eighty
percent of the lifetime damage occurs during this short window, because
expanding leaves suffer 10-100 times the rates of damage from fungi and
herbivores as mature leaves. We are interested in understanding the
effectiveness of young leaf defenses, and the interactions among defenses. In
particular, we hypothesize that rapid leaf expansion, which reduces the
vulnerable period, is incompatible with other defenses such as toughness,
chemical defenses and greening. Although chemical defense and rapid expansion
are the two most effective defenses for young leaves, synthesis of chemicals
during leaf expansion may cause auto- toxicity as well as compete for resources
used in rapid leaf construction. Species which have slowly expanding young
leaves may therefore rely more extensively on effective chemical defense. We
will characterize the chemical defense profiles of fast- and slow-expanding
young leaves in rainforest plants, and quantify the effectiveness of these
chemicals as defenses against insect herbivores and fungal pathogens. In
addition to giving us insight into the ecology of this important interaction,
the research will provide data on novel and effective chemical compounds. Out of
convenience, most screening for biologically active compounds has used mature
leaves, even though this age-class is primarily defended by toughness and
tannins. Since young leaves are tender, they rely primarily on defensive
chemicals to protect them from herbivores. We predict that the types of
chemicals found in young leaves will be mobile, effective in small
concentrations and of small molecular weight, all attributes that make them much
more tractable for medicinal and agricultural development.