* 9119235
* Comparative Stem Photosynthesis between Desert and          Mediterranean Legumes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Erik Nilsen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 01/31/1995
* USD 85,001.00

Although stems are the second most important photosynthetic organ, very little
is known about stem photosynthesis. Little is known about adaptation or
acclimation of stem photosynthesis to different climatic conditions. Studies of
comparative leaf photosynthesis on plants from different climates have been
pivotal to understanding the mechanisms by which plants survive in a diversity
of habitats. Similar studies on stem photosynthesis, particularly in
mediterranean and desert taxa, are required to understand the significance of
stem photosynthesis. The objective of this proposal is to measure stem
photosynthesis for mediterranean and desert taxa during the winter and summer.
Comparisons of these results will test for stem photosynthetic adaptation to
these different habitats. Furthermore, a mathematical model of canopy stem
photosynthesis will be developed. The model will be able to predict the
importance of stem photosynthesis to a diversity of species in a series of
different habitats. This research will greatly expand our knowledge about the
significance of stem photosynthesis to plants. This information can be applied
to analyses of plant success in various environments. Furthermore, the data
collected in this study are crucial for understanding the importance of stem
photosynthesis to growth of legume crops in agroecosystems.