* 9119005
* Nanocrystalline Materials Prepared by Spark Erosion
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1995
* M. Brian Maple, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 09/30/1995
* USD 596,161.00

This project on nanocrystalline materials has three primary objectives. First,
the spark erosion technique for producing nanoparticles of a very wide range of
materials will be investigated and optimized for maximum yield of the desired
particle sizes and compositions. Second, a variety of nanoparticle systems
representing superconducting, magnetic and structural properties will be
extensively characterized. Third, the consolidation of the nanoparticles into
macroscopic samples retaining the unusual properties of the precursors,
utilizing dynamic extrusion and shock consolidation as well as conventional
processing methods, will be implemented. Using liquid dielectics, the spark
erosion technique has been shown to yield high purity particles of metals,
alloys, oxides, carbides, and semiconductors in sizes from nanometers to
micrometers at significant production rates. Sparks erosion may be carried out
also in ultrapure gases. This approach increases the performance of this method
in the synthesis, treatment and subsequent handling of nanoparticles. The
characterization of various types of nanoparticles produced will involve
diffraction (x-ray, electron, neutron), high resolution TEM, surface analysis,
as well as methods particularly suited to specific systems such as optical and
Mossbauer spectroscopy, transport measurements and magnetic properties. Research
is planned to demonstrate and extend the capabilities of the spark erosion
method to produce economically significant quantities of various types of
nanoparticles, as well as to investigate some of the unique properties of these
systems in particulate and consolidated form.