* 9119446
* Collaborative Research: The REVELATION Project Query        Processing In Behavioral Object-Oriented Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Leonard Shapiro, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 08/31/1996
* USD 127,000.00

Many new data management systems are being developed to support applications
with advanced data management requirements, such as extended relational models,
persistent programming languages and object-oriented databases. Such systems
enhance semantic expressiveness, but they must offer good performance to be
viable commercial technologies. An area particularly needful of improved
performance is query processing, where new modeling features such as
encapsulation, type hierarchies, complex values and object identity make
conventional set-processing methods difficult or ineffective to apply. The
overall goal of the Revelation project is to expand query processing to address
and exploit these new modeling extensions at all levels of query processing,
from schema management, through optimization and physical planning, to runtime
support. For encapsulation, a Revealer is incorporated, a trusted system
component that can access type implementations. Heterogeneity in collections
arising from subtyping and polymorphism is handled by an Annotater that reasons
across schema definitions. Complex values and identity are addressed both at the
logical algebra level, with new operations to deal with ordered structures such
as sequences and arrays, and at the physical level with new operators such as
one to assemble complex objects. This project will construct a prototype query
processor, exploiting existing software technology such as the Volcano optimizer
generator and the Volcano query evaluation system.