* 9119516
* Sondrestrom Radar Observations of Plasma Processes on       Polar Cusp and Discrete ARC Field Lines
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1993,10/31/1997
* Michael Schulz, Lockheed Missiles and Space Company Inc
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 10/31/1997
* USD 175,000.00

Experiments are proposed using the incoherent scatter radar facility at Sondre
Stromfjord, Greenland, and to study plasma processes on magnetic field lines
connected to the dayside auroral oval and discrete arcs in the evening sector.
Recent upgrades to the radar have made several new operating modes possible that
will enable measurements of ionospheric properties such as vertical and
horizontal ion drift, electron densities, and ion and electron temperatures with
greatly improved temporal and spatial resolution. A carefully planned
experimental program will be conducted that takes advantage of these new
capabilities as well as additional data from other ground-based instruments and
satellites. The objectives are (1) to study the spatial and temporal variations
of ionospheric properties in the dayside auroral oval, (2) to characterize the
source region for ions that are transported from the dayside oval to populate
the magnetosphere, and (3) to develop radar methods for observing plasma
properties at high altitudes on field lines connected to auroral arcs. The
dayside observations will be used to define the initial conditions for
theoretical modeling of upward ion fluxes and their effects on magnetospheric
pressure balance in the near-Earth plasma sheet. The high altitude measurements
on auroral field lines will be used to determine the presence of coherent echoes
from plasma turbulence associated with the auroral acceleration region. The
results of these experiments will establish a firm observational framework for
ground-based studies of auroral precipitation and will have important
implications for our understanding of magnetosphere/ionosphere coupling on the
dayside and how it relates to auroral substorm processes.