* 9119673
* Continuing Support for Linnaean Plant Name Typification     Project
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* James Reveal, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1994
* USD 117,406.00

The scientific "types" of species names are the actual plant or animal
specimens, housed typically in natural history museums, that were used by
biologists when describing and naming a new species. Unfortunately, natural
historians of the 18th and 19th centuries rarely designated a single specimen as
type, and consequently there can be confusion over the correct application of a
scientific species name. The Linnean Plant Name Typification project is designed
to provide a thorough and scholarly assessment of the types for each of the
approximately 9800 species names published by the great Swedish naturalist Carl
Linneaus in the 18th century. Many of these names pertain to economically or
commercially important plants including numerous crops, spices, medicinals, and
horticultural items. Hence, the use of correct and stable names is paramount
both for scientific and practical reasons. Drs. Porter Lowry and Fred Barrie of
the Missouri Botanical Garden, working with Dr. Charles Jarvis of the British
Natural History Museum, are continuing their careful studies of type specimens
housed in herbaria in Europe and elsewhere, pertinent to the application of
Linnaeus's names. These names have priority as the first correct scientific
names of plants, under conventions established at international botanical
congresses, and ratified every five to six years at regular meetings of these
organizations. A computerized database of names and specimens and associated
information is being developed in conjunction with this work, and will be
available through the Missouri Botanical Garden to all researchers on plants.