* 9119867
* Molecular Phylogeny of the Poeciliidae (Pisces, Teleostei)
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1996
* A. Meyer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 03/31/1996
* USD 230,000.00

Poeciliids (Pisces, Poeciliidae), the guppies, swordtails, and mollies, are a
family of small fishes that are frequently used as a model system in many
biological studies. Research topics range from zoogeography, cancer, mating
systems, natural and sexual selection, comparative ecology, to conservation
biology. Despite their widespread use, very little is known about the
phylogenetic or genealogical relationships of poeciliids. The aim of this
project by Dr. Axel Meyer at SUNY-Stonybrook is to establish such a phylogeny
for the poeciliids using mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequence data as measures
of mutational differences between species. The complete sequence of the
mitochondrial gene cytochrome b (about 1100 base pairs) and partial sequences of
a nuclear gene, the proto-oncogene X-src (about 520 base pairs), will be
obtained from several representatives of the species and genera in this family.
The use of both mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data permits the inference of
phylogenetic relationship across broad taxonomic levels, from species to family,
and also provides independent checking of the resulting phylogenetic estimates.
These estimates will then permit testing of vicariance models of biogeography
and other aspects of evolutionary diversification in this group of fishes.