* 9119034
* Mineral-Water Geochemistry and Proton Nuclear Magnetic      Resonance (1HNMR) in Porous Sandstones
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Carl Moses, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1995
* USD 109,274.00

The need to understand the physicochemical environment of solution-filled pores
in rocks has geochemical implications for solute transport and mass transfer
between solid and solution phases and petrophysical implications for formation
evaluation and magnetic resonance imagining. The proposed project will help
build that understanding through an investigation of proton nuclear magnetic
resonance relaxation in sandstone pore-filling solutions. The overall goal of
the project is to quantify the effect of solution composition on relaxation
rates. Both intact rock cores and disaggregated grain packs will be used. The
mineral surfaces will be consistently pre-conditioned, and the materials will be
well-characterized, with determinations of rock physical properties (porosity,
pore-size distribution, surface area: volume ratio, permeability, paramagnetic
susceptibility, and BET surface area) and geochemical properties (mineralogy,
extractable paramagnetic species, and cation exchange capacity). Experimental
controls on permeability and relaxation rate include solution composition,
surface pre-treatment, temperature, and for the grain packs, grain size and
mineralogy. The data will be interpreted to provide three types of quantitative
information: (1) the influence of different surfaces on relaxation, (2) the
influence of solution composition on relaxation, and (3) relaxation mechanisms
(with activation energies for bulk-solution and surface-induced relaxation
processes.