* 9119523
* Accretion Events in the Northern Andes
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* William MacDonald, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 08/31/1994
* USD 16,470.00

This Science in Developing Countries award will support the dissertation
research of Juan Jose Estrada, A Colombian graduate student in geology at the
State University of New York, Binghamton, under the supervision of Professor
William MacDonald. The project aims to evaluate hypotheses of major accretionary
events in the Colombian Andes Mountains. The researchers will collect
paleomagnetic evidence from three major suspect terranes; make structural
measurements on sense of shear on intervening suture zones; and integrate the
results into computer models of tectonic trajectories and plate motions. Field
emphasis will be on three main geographic regions of suspect terranes in the
Colombian Andes. The investigators will identify latitudes of origin of these
terranes. Outcrops in a mapped region will receive primary focus. Sense of shear
and sequential changes will be sought along several fault zones. A major goal
will be to verify ages of these zones' initial appearance. These new data will
permit new computer-generated maps of collision events in relation to plate
motions. With this award, the Colombian collaborator will acquire training in
modern techniques of paleomagnetic field-oriented research, which will help
train the next generation of Colombian geologists. The U.S. side will gain from
the opportunity to obtain new insights into plate processes.