* 9119194
* Quaternary Marine Stratigraphy and Sedimentology of Chilean Fiords and Continental Shelf, Western Patagonia
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1997
* Jay Stravers, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/1997
* USD 188,786.00

This award supports two marine geological cruises to the fjords and continental
shelf of southern Chile. Research will concentrate on the collection and
analysis of single channel seismic reflection data, 3.5 KHz profiler data, and
piston cores. This work will examine fundamental questions concerning the
dynamics of the Patagonian ice sheet during the late Wisconsin glaciation and
how it responded to changing marine and terrestrial climate during the last
glacial/interglacial transition. This project represents an extension of current
investigations into the marine geology of the Antarctic Peninsula to include
glacial marine environments from a wider latitudinal range. In order to enhance
the applicability of litho and seismo- stratigraphic studies to a broader range
of Quaternary science, this research will be conducted in cooperation with other
researchers investigating marine and terrestrial paleoclimate. Down core changes
in micro-flora (diatoms) and micro-fauna will be examined in conjunction with
geochemical and isotopic analyses. Palynological studies of some cores will be
undertaken in an attempt to refine our misunderstanding of the relationship
between terrestrial and marine paleoclimates. The project will also be
undertaken in cooperation with Chilean researchers who are interested in the
sedimentary and tectonic history of the region. By extending the marine studies
of the Antarctic Peninsula to Patagonia, and by broadening their scope to
include land-sea correlations, valuable insight will be gained into spatial and
temporal changes on climate along a broad range of latitudes.