* 9119948
* Consequences of Adaptive Individual Behavior, Higher Order  Interactions, and Food Web Structure in a Larval Anuran     Community
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Earl Werner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Auerbach
* 01/31/1996
* USD 320,321.00

The manner in which food web structure regulates the size of animal populations
is currently receiving much theoretical and empirical attention.. This proposal
seeks to develop a mechanistic understanding of the strength of interactions in
a food web consisting of fish, invertebrate predators, and two anuran larvae.
Indirect effects mediated through this food web are central to changes in
relative success of the two anurans along the environmental gradient from
permanent to temporary ponds. The food web interactions are approached at
several levels ranging from individual behavior to large scale food web
manipulations to build from mechanisms to an understanding of community
phenomena. A focus of the proposal is an experimental evaluation of the
importance of higher order interactions generated by behavioral responses of
prey to the presence of their predators. These higher order interactions alter
the nature of competitive interactions among prey in the absence of any direct
mortality effects of predators on prey. Because of the widespread occurrence of
behavioral responses of prey to predators, such higher order interactions are
likely important in many ecological systems. The behavioral responses of the
anurans in turn are mediated by growth (competitive ability)-risk tradeoffs, one
through activity levels and the other through habitat choice. Theory at the
individual behavioral level will be developed, tested and used to provide a
theoretical basis for understanding the community consequences of adaptive
individual behavior. Both of these tradeoffs are relevant to interactions in
many taxa. Finally, because behavioral responses are often functions of
individual size, the work will explore ontogenetic constraints on behavioral
expression and the consequences to species interactions.