* 9119957
* Reactive Intermediates and Reaction Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Jerome Berson, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 01/31/1996
* USD 593,742.00

The basic kinetics of reactions which involve the formation and subsequent
reactivity of unstable chemical species such as multiradicals and zwitterions
will be probed. The concurrent use of ESR, NMR, and optical transient
spectroscopy will provide basic mechanistic information which will aid in
designing chemical reactions involving highly reactive intermediates from a
rational viewpoint. The research topics to be investigated include: (1) the
trapping of oxyallyls via dimethylfulvene and related agents; (2) production of
disjointed biradicals; (3) confirmation of the spin multiplicity and reactivity
of tetramethylene benzene; (4) adjustment of the multiplet gap of biradicals
based upon disjointed tetramethyleneethanes; (5) synthesis of polyradicals based
upon coupling of two dimethyleneheterocycles via a benzene ring; and (6)
synthesis and characterization of stable biradicals. These chemical systems will
serve as models for materials with optical, conducting, and magnetic properties
of practical importance. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program
supports the continuing work of Professor Jerome A. Berson at Yale University.
Professor Berson and his research group will probe very reactive species, called
diradicals, which are formed in the intermediate stages of chemical processes
and often live for only a few billionths of a second. Information about these
intermediates may make it possible design totally new molecules with important
chemical and technical properties. The concepts to be derived from this work are
critical to the understanding of how molecules conduct electricity and interact
with light, and will also aid in the design of chemical systems which can be
used to make optical fibers to transmit information in the form of light pulses
faster and more efficiently over long distances.