* 9119676
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Thermal Motions in  Liquids and Polymer Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Robert Pecora, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 12/31/1995
* USD 337,330.00

Professor Robert Pecora is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to perform theoretical and experimental research
on thermal motions in liquid and polymer systems. Professor Pecora will emply a
number of experimental methods including interferometry, photon correlation
spectroscopy, forced Rayleigh scattering and transient electric birefringence to
study dilute and non-dilute solutions of rigid and semi-rigid rod-like
molecules. He will also study composite solutions consisting of various
combinations of rods, spheres, and coils. Some of the rod-like molecules he will
study are DNA restriction fragments. The theoretical effort will involve both
formal theoretical modeling and Brownian dynamics computer simulations. %%%
Composite liquids are a ubiquitous class of materials which contain polymer,
particles and solvent. They are used as ceramic precursors, lubricants, paints
and coatings, adhesives, and in chromatographic columns. Due to their complexity
and the lack of adequate model systems, the interactions between the species in
such systems are not well understood. Pecora has constructed a model rod/sphere
composite liquid whose dynamics can be studied over a wide range of composition
of both the rods and the spheres using an experimental technique known as
dynamic light scattering.