* 9119437
* Use of the Homeobox System to Elucidate Metazoan            Sister-Group Relationships
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Frank Ruddle, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Hecht
* 09/30/1995
* USD 300,000.00

Drs. Buss and Ruddle propose to initiate a research program directed at the
resolution of the metazoan phyla. The current state of metazoan phylogeny is one
of considerable uncertainty, with morphological and molecular data sets
supporting conflicting hypotheses. They suggest that examination of Antp-class
homeobox genes will prove capable of resolving the principle uncertainties. The
extreme conservation of sequence of homeoboxes and their distinctive pattern of
genomic organization provide an abundance of characters ideal for higher level
phylogenetic analysis. In this proposal, they will re-examine the relationship
between annelids and arthropods by characterization of the genomic diversity,
organization, and sequences of homeoboxes from crustaceans, chelicerates,
arachnids, molluscs, onychophorans, and annelids. Combined with the growing
existing database on homeoboxes in cnidarians, nematodes, uniramians,
echinoderms and chordates, this work holds the realistic promise of resolving
not only the annelid-arthropod relationship, but also of shedding light on the
relationships within and between the most speciose protostome and deuterostome
phyla. The use of the homeobox system for phylogenetic analysis is particularly
compelling because these genes have proved to be central components of the
regulatory networks involved in early embryonic pattern formation and
specification of cell fate. Thus, as our understanding of the molecular genetics
of development grows, it is likely that the information generated in the
progress of this research will permit study of the origin of the developmental
novelty. To accomplish these goals it will require the collaboration of
developmental geneticists and evolutionary biologists.