* 9119958
* Radiocarbon Dating of Collagen-degraded Bone: The Use of    Ostecalcin
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1991,10/31/1992
* R. Taylor, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1992
* USD 19,950.00

Dr. Taylor and his colleagues will conduct exploratory research to determine the
feasibility of using osteocalcin to radiocarbon date bone. The project consists
of three parts. First osteocalcin will be extracted from sample bone and its
purity determined through analysis of amounts of Gla and Hyp present. Secondly
osteocalcin will be extracted from bone with known age of greater than 100,000
years and then radiocarbon dated. One would expect that radioactive activity
would not exceed background levels. Finally osteocalcin will be extracted from
degraded bone which derives from Clovis age sites (ca. 10,000 years old). This
also will be radiocarbon dated and the accuracy of the results determined. Most
of the organic fraction of bone consists of collagen and many experiments have
shown that if this collagen is not seriously degraded by post depositional
processes it can yield accurate radiocarbon ages. However it is also clear that
degraded collagen often given anomalous results. Osteocalcin is a non- collagen
organic material which is also present in bone and preliminary results lead
Taylor and his colleagues to believe that it may provide accurate dates for
degraded bone. This preliminary exploratory project will serve to evaluate this
approach and hopefully provide the basis for more large scale work. This
research is important not only for archaeologists but other scientists who wish
to date the past. Bone is often the only organic material preserved in
archaeological sites and other prehistoric contexts. While it is sometimes
datable, often it is too chemically altered to give good results. The technique
developed here may remedy this problem.