* 9120818
* Functional Organizations of Segmental Reflexes During       Natural Multi-Articular Movements
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Carol Pratt, Good Samaritan Hospital and Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Carol Colby
* 10/31/1995
* USD 234,671.00

The control of complex movements involves the integration of central motor
programs and inputs from sensory receptors in muscles and skin that are
activated by the movements themselves and by external stimuli. These sensory
receptors provide powerful inputs to spinal reflex circuits that can
significantly modify ongoing movements. Each modality of sensory input from the
periphery has multiple, parallel connections with the spinal cells (motoneurons)
that activate muscles. These pathways can be either excitatory or inhibitory,
and they can be distributed to motoneurons that activate either extensor or
flexor muscles. The purpose of this award to Dr. Carol A. Pratt is to study the
role of peripheral sensory inputs in the control of standing (stance). The
hypothesis to be tested is that the functional organization of spinal reflexes
dynamically changes depending on the characteristics and requirements of the
movement so that sensory feedback can be used optimally to fine tune the
movement. This research will provide information about the role of sensory
inputs in the control of the complex, multi-articular movements, which comprise
stance. This basic knowledge will contribute to our understanding of posture
control, and will provide important information that can be used in the
technical development of prosthetic devices.