* 9120388
* Evaluation of Seismic Retrofit Strategies for Non-ductile   Concrete Frame Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Stephen Pessiki, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1994
* USD 80,761.00

This project is supported under Phase 2 of the Seismic Repair and Rehabilitation
Initiative (NSF 90- 23). Reinforced concrete frame structures constructed in the
U.S. during the 1950's and 1960's often include non-ductile details associated
with poor seismic performance. The behavior of these details has been studied
experimentally. This project addresses strategies for improving the seismic
performance of these structures. The objectives of the research are: (1) to
outline strategies for retrofit of non-ductile concrete frame structures, (2) to
investigate retrofit strategies based on improving the strength and ductility of
critical frame details and regions, (3) to provide a methodology for evaluating
retrofit frames, (4) to use the methodology to estimate the levels of strength
and ductility needed for critical regions, and (5) to recommend guidelines for
strength and ductility improvement. A series of non-ductile concrete frame
structures will be analyzed and retrofit strategies will be formulated.
Analytical models will be calibrated with recent experimental results. Retrofit
frames will be analyzed and retrofit strategies will be evaluated. Guidelines
for appropriate levels of critical region strength and ductility will be
developed, and a methodology for assessing retrofit strategies will be provided.
The guidelines and methodology will assist other researchers in developing
retrofit techniques, and will assist practicing engineers in the retrofit of
existing structures. The project will include interactions with other
researchers and practicing engineers in the seismic design of buildings.