* 9120965
* The Organization of Activity in Leptothorax Ants:  Colony   Periodicity and Worker Chaos
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1992,11/30/1993
* Blaine Cole, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 11/30/1993
* USD 70,823.00

Recent developments in the study of nonlinear systems have shown that simple
theoretical models are capable of extremely complicated dynamics that cannot be
predicted over the long term but that are nonetheless deterministic. The
dynamics of such systems are "chaotic," rather than random. The emergence of the
behavior of a social unit from the actions of the individuals that comprise it
is one of the central problems in the study of behavior. Dr. Cole is studying
how the patterns of movement activity of ant colonies are derived from the
actions of individuals. Individual worker ants appear to have chaotic activity
patterns, spontaneously becoming active and reverting to inactivity. Colonies go
through periodic episodes of activity about every 30 minutes. The transition
from the chaotic dynamics of individual workers to the periodic dynamics of
colonies provides an opportunity to study the mechanisms by which a social
phenotype is produced. Furthermore, the fact that the activity of an individual
is chaotic, and therefore deterministic, suggests that short-term predictions
can be made about the activity of workers. Comparing the actual activity of ants
and computer models of chaotic systems, Dr. Cole will study the transition from
chaos to periodicity in two situations: first, in artificial aggregates of
workers constructed from mature colonies, and second, during the pattern of
normal colony growth as the colony passes from a single individual (the queen)
to a mature colony with many workers.