* 9120407
* Experimental Evaluation of Retrofit Mechanisms for          Precast R/C Tilt-up Wall-Foundation Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1993
* Said Hilmy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 02/28/1993
* USD 80,039.00

This project is supported under the Phase 2 (second year) program of Seismic
Repair and Rehabilitation Initiative (NSF 90-23). This project focuses on an
experimental research program for seismic rehabilitation of existing connections
between precast, reinforced concrete tilt-up walls and their foundation to
improve their seismic performance. This cost-effective construction type is
widely used for office buildings, factories, stores, and warehouses. It is
estimated that about half of the R/C industrial facilities are built using tilt-
up construction. Much of the work performed recently in retrofitting tilt-up
walls concentrated on the roof-wall connection as it is considered the weakest
link in the assembly. Little attention has been given to another weak link which
is the wall- foundation connection. Many of these existing connections lack
adequate ductility and detailing and could experience shear slip failure under
strong ground shaking. The project includes a detailed comparison between
assumed and actual elastic and inelastic capacity of the foundation-wall
connection; an evaluation of the effectiveness of the corrective measures
intended to increase the connection strength and ductility; and recommendations
on evaluation criteria and design guidelines for the rehabilitation of existing
structures.