* 9120185
* Genetic Drift and Gene Flow in Post-Famine Ireland
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1994
* John Relethford, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 04/30/1994
* USD 22,988.00

The objective of this proposal is to determine the differential effects of the
evolutionary forces of drift and migration on patterns of biological variation
in Ireland resulting from demographic shifts following the Great Famine of the
1840s. This project will provide insight into human evolution and variation from
a unique perspective afforded by several generations of data. This project will
also provide general information on the effects of changes in population size
and migration on human genetic variation. Physical anthropologists are
interested in the relationship of evolutionary process with cultural and
demographic changes. The Irish Famine of the 1840s resulted in major demographic
shifts, including a rapid reduction in population size that persisted through
the early 20th century and an increase in migration between depopulated regions.
These rapid changes could increase genetic differentiation through drift (random
genetic change) or decrease it through migration (gene flow). The opposing
forces of drift and gene flow have been studied in numerous human populations to
date, but almost always at one point in time. Using extensive physical and
demographic data from Ireland (originally collected in a survey during the
1930s), the PI will be able to examine these changes over at least three
generations of people born after the Famine. The results from this study will
provide a unique perspective on the process of human microevolution by examining
genetic changes over several generations (such data are rare in human studies).