* 9120013
* UNIDATA: Plymouth State Meteorology Network
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1993
* Joseph Zabransky, Plymouth State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Jacobs
* 02/28/1993
* USD 11,480.00

Funds are provided for the purchase of hardware and software to install a local
area network among the computers (a PS/2-70, two PS/2-60's, a RISC 6000/320)
that serve the Meteorology Program at Plymouth State College. Plymouth state is
an active and innovative participant in the UNIDATA program and this award will
enable this college to sustain and enhance their UNIDATA participation. In
addition, the proposal seeks monies to network the computers serving the
Meteorology Program to the PC cluster supporting the Natural Science Department
at Plymouth State. Networking has essentially become a necessary part of the
UNIDATA Program. The lack of a local area network has limited both the
educational and research value of UNIDATA at Plymouth State even though UNIDATA
terminals have been in place for over three years. As a result of being
networked, the Meteorology Program can be enhanced significantly. A UNIDATA
computer laboratory will be taught on the PC's in the microcomputer cluster.
Current weather graphics and satellite images will be integrated directly into
course work by displaying them in meteorology classrooms and lecture halls. The
UNIDATA Campus Weather Display System will be installed to give campus personnel
and students direct access to simple WXP and McIDAS graphics and forecasts.
Finally, a network will provide an easy method of file transfer between the
server (RISC/6000) and the PS/2 machines, especially when McIDAS is officially
released under the AIX operating system.