* 9120952
* Children's Representation of Linguistic Stress and Function Morphemes in Early Language Acquisition (REU Supplement)
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1994
* LouAnn Gerken, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 01/31/1994
* USD 69,980.00

ABSTRACT The research examines children's representations of two potential cues
to the location and grammatical category of words and phrases: linguistic stress
and function morphemes. The overwhelming majority of English words begin with a
strongly stressed syllable. If children were aware of this regularity, they
could use it to identify the beginnings of words in the speech stream. Function
morphemes, such as articles and verb inflections, occur at the beginnings and
ends of phrases, and could help children to isolate these units. Function
morphemes also provide cues about the type of unit that has been isolated, such
as Noun Phrase or Verb Phrase. However, we know little about children's
representations of stress and function morphemes, and therefore about whether
they are able to use such cues in language acquisition. One set of experiments
explores the phonological and syntactic nature of function morpheme
representations with the use of imitation picture pointing tasks. Another set of
experiments is designed to extend previous work on the effect of stress patterns
on children's morphemic and non- morphemic weak syllable omissions, and to
provide new information about their representation of the canonical stress
patterns of their language.