* 9120260
* Acquisition of an Argon Laser for Phase Fluorometry
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Steven Grossman, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 12/31/1993
* USD 41,240.00

An argon laser will be used in fluorescence decay studies of creatine kinase,
cascade polymers, nitrate reductase and an investigation of the static quenching
limit. Intrinsic and extrinsic fluorescence lifetime and anisotropy
investigations of creatine kinase folding and conformation are proposed. A
comprehensive set of equilibrium and kinetic experiments, including quenching
studies are proposed to describe intermediates in the folding pathway and the
temporal relationship between folding and association of subunits. Experiments
will assess the internal environment of cascade polymers in relation to
synthetic micelles, using lipophilic probe lifetimes and anisotropies.
Experiments are proposed to evaluate the solvent characteristics of the internal
domain and the degree of packing using diphenylhexatriene, a well- characterized
probe of micelle dynamics. A study is presented to characterize the relationship
between catalytic properties and the conformations of the dimer, tetramer and
isolated domains of nitrate reductase. Experiments are proposed to examine the
assembly of the tetrameric state, using the intrinsic fluorescence and thiol-
labelled protein as reporters of conformational changes in the presence of
effectors of activity. Lifetime measurements will be used to obtain quenching
constants for perylene and 9,10 dicyanoanthracence by carbon tetrachloride and
used in calculation of the static quenching limit. The argon laser is a high
intensity excitation source required for examining intrinsic fluorescence
lifetimes and extrinsic fluorophore anisotropies. The multiple excitation
wavelengths will be useful in global analysis of overdetermined data sets to
characterize decay laws using discrete and distributed models.