* 9120521
* Materials Research Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1992,02/28/1997
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* W. Lance Haworth
* 02/28/1997
* USD 11,956,000.00

The Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at Northwestern Univ- ersity supports
interactive, interdisciplinary research with the overall theme of "the science
of new materials". The research is organized in five major thrust areas.
Research on electroactive polymeric and molecular materials addresses charge
transport phenomena in these materials. It includes synthesis, processing,
characterization, and theory. Emphasis during the current funding period is
being broadened to include the coupling of charge transport with magnetic,
photochemical and redox processes. The thrust on heteroepitaxial growth of
strained layer structures addresses the epitaxy of compound semiconductor
materials, with emphasis on nucleation, growth, and relaxation mechanisms in
strained layer structures; electronic and optical properties of these
structures; and theoretical modelling and simulation of experimental results.
Research on macromolecular nonlinear optical materials is concerned with the
design, synthesis, processing, characterization and theory of polymeric
materials whose nonlinear optical characteristics make them promising candidates
for eventual use in optical and optoelectronic devices. The growth and
properties of novel electronic and photonic metal oxide thin films is being
investigated in a fourth thrust area. Finally, a new thrust group addressing
unconventional superconductivity in heavy fermion materials is studying a
uranium-platinum compound, both theoretically and experimentally, in order to
understand its superconducting properties and elucidate the change in electronic
structure that leads to delocalized electronic behavior. A long range goal is to
provide a basis for better understanding of other superconducting materials,
including the high temperature oxide superconductors. The MRL also supports the
development, operation and maintenance of major central facilities for materials
research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research, supports programs
in education and the development of human resources in the materials field, and
is developing a range of programs for outreach to industry. The MRL currently
supports the activities of about 30 faculty members from five academic
departments, 8 postdoctoral research associates, 28 graduate students, 20
undergraduates including about 10 minority students, and 6 technical and
scientific staff members. The MRL central facilities also support a substantial
amount of research that is funded from other sources. The Northwestern MRL is
directed by Professor Robert P.H. Chang.