* 9120524
* Mathematical Sciences: Scientific Conference on Hamiltonian Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1993
* Kenneth Meyer, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/1993
* USD 9,000.00

From its origins nearly two centuries ago, Hamiltonian dynamics has grown to
embrace the physics of nearly all systems that evolve without dissipation, as
well as a number of branches of mathematics. The power and elegance of
Hamiltonian methods were first seized upon in the mid-nineteenth century by
theoretical astronomers, who reduced problems in their discipline to the task of
finding enough "integrals" of an appropriate Hamiltonian system; these integrals
were difficult to find except for the simplest systems. Poincare showed that the
emphasis should not be placed on solving the equations for a physical system,
but rather that the important features of a system's behavior could be found by
other means. These new methods had a strong effect on mathematics itself, as the
fields of topology and dynamical systems arose out of Poincare's qualitative,
geometric vision of problems in celestial mechanics and Hamiltonian systems. The
qualitative approach to dynamical systems has remained an active research area,
especially now that computers provide a "laboratory" in which to view systems of
increasing complexity. Driven partly by the discovery in these experiments of
new phenomena and partly by the maturation of the mathematical disciplines
arising out of Poincare's work, the results and methods of Hamiltonian systems
have grown and penetrated neighboring fields of research. This project will
support an International Conference on Hamiltonian Dynamical Systems to be held
from March 25-28, 1992 at the University of Cincinnati. The conference will
gather together leading and newer researchers to discuss the latest results in
Hamiltonian systems and its applications, and to gain an overview of how those
results relate to each other and to the discipline as a whole. To emphasize the
comprehensive aspect of the conference, at least one of the plenary speakers
will be a professional historian of science, and will discuss the subject in the
broadest possible terms.