* 9120333
* Materially-Predictive Theory of Magnetic Behavior and the   Heavy Fermion State
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Bernard Cooper, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/1995
* USD 232,000.00

This research is aimed at exploiting and extending capabilities for treating the
reduced magnetic ordering and related phenomena, including magneto-optic
behavior, associated with the highly correlated f-electron state on approaching
or being in the heavy fermion state. Essentially, we have learned how to exhibit
magnetic ordering properties in the correlated-electron state by projecting onto
a site-centered basis. Our materially-predictive methodology involves two major
stages: (1) the parameters in a lattice model hamiltonian containing both band-f
hybridization and band-f coulomb exchange are calculated by a sequence of
electronic structure calculations and, (2) a two-step sequence for finding the
magnetic ordering properties (ground state and equilibrium behavior, magnetic
excitations, critical behavior) first transforming the model hamiltonian into
the language of resonant scattering theory to get an effective multipolar two-
ion interaction and then using various methods we have developed to predict the
observable properties on a wholly ab initio basis (no adjustable parameters or
empirical information used). We will use this methodology to predict the
approach to and nature of magnetic ordering in the heavy fermion state for
seveal isostructural systems of experimental interest. Our methodology will be
extended to include predicting (1) incremental specific heat associated with
magnetic ordering, (2) pressure effects and elastic properties, (3) effects in
high applied magnetic fields, (4) alloying including diluting the f-electron
species. In addition, we will initiate studies on the role of explicit
(interconfigurational) correlation effects on the magneto-optic behavior and on
the conduction bands. %%% Computationally-intensive research will be undertaken
to study the magnetic properties of materials in which the electrons behave as
if their masses are many times their usual mass, ie, so-called heavy fermion
systems. These highly correlated systems are difficult to treat using
conventional techniques. The calculations proposed here are unique in coupling
electronic structure calculations for these systems with many-body theory to
describe these highly correlated systems from a first-principles approach.