* 9120995
* The Concurrency Factory- Practical Tools for the Design     and Verification of Concurrent Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Philip Lewis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 02/29/1996
* USD 538,628.00

The goal of this project is to build an efficient, comprehensive and usable
environment for design, verification, and implementation of concurrent systems.
The system, which will cater to protocol engineers and software developers, will
support process algebra as its underlying formalism and have the following
features: o A graphical user interface that will allow the non-expert to design
and simulate concurrent systems using process algebra. o A suite of design and
analysis algorithms for concurrent systems; care will be taken to ensure that
implementations of these algorithms will be efficient enough to be used on real-
life systems. o A graphical compiler that will transform the graphic designs
produced on the system into Ada or Occam programs. This will relieve the user of
the burden of manually recoding their designs in the target language of their
final system. o A uniform intermediate representation that will serve as the
input format for all the tools in the system. Basing the representation on a
widely recognized format, such as BLIF-MV or KISS2, will promote the exchange of
tools with industrial and academic institutions. The system, the Concurrency
Factory, will be written in C++ and execute under X-Windows so that it will be
efficient, easily extendible, and highly portable. Moreover, all objects
manipulated by the system will be stored in an object-oriented database, for
efficient and uniform access. Realization of the Factory will require research
in numerous areas including efficient algorithms for design and verification,
with particular emphasis on techniques for state-space management and
compositional analysis; computation of diagnostic information and its graphical
presentation; and methods for compiling graphical descriptions of process
algebra expressions into languages such as Ada and Occam.