* 9120378
* Integrated Interconnections for ULSI Using Silicon Wafer    Area Networks (SWANs)
* CSE,MIP
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Stuart Tewksbury, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul T. Hulina
* 05/31/1995
* USD 148,881.00

This research investigates the functional behavior and VLSI realization of a
novel, scalable and intelligent wafer-level communications network (the Silicon
Wafer Area Network or SWAN) supporting fine grained communications with
predictable network traversal times. The network's "intelligence" is chosen to
adaptively and dynamically establish virtual interconnections with the
functionality of direct point-to-point interconnections for passage of
individual messages through the network. The network is assumed to be a wafer-
level function, allowing highly parallel data links between switches by
exploiting the high density of IC wiring. The network organization is similar to
a systolic processing array, using nearest neighbor connections and pipelined
data movement through the network to establish high data rates. The critical
issue of load balancing is based on (1) achieving sufficiently high
communications rate capabilities so that network links are sparsely used (i.e. a
rate capability well in excess of the required data rates) and (2) a global
routing and load balancing algorithm based on electrostatic and potential
energies (i.e. a network "activity potential"). The distributed computations of
the potential energies provides each local node with a slowly varying measure of
link usage in regions away from that node. The specific research completes VLSI
design and circuit simulations of the performance of the network nodes. In
addition, the research develops a network simulator to investigate the steady
state and transient behavior of the network with various routing and load
balancing algorithms selected to achieve the maximum VLSI area/speed
performance.