* 9120015
* UNIDATA: Implementation of the UNIDATA PC McIDAS Weather    System into the Broadcast Meteorology Program
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1993
* Mark Binkley, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Jacobs
* 03/31/1993
* USD 10,641.00

Funds are provided for the purchase of three UNIDATA PC-McIDAS work stations to
be used to enhance the teaching and research efforts within the Broadcast
Meteorology Program at Mississippi State University. This program is designed to
train television weathercasters through on-campus and off-campus courses. The
PC-McIDAS work stations will receive weather charts and imagery via satellite
and ingest, store, loop, analyze, and print the requested data. Broadcast
Meteorology Program faculty and students will utilize the data in both the
classroom and laboratory settings for on-campus students and in video tape
format for off- campus students. Undergraduate and graduate meteorology courses
and special meteorology courses for secondary education students will utilize
the data. The current array of research being conducted by both faculty and
students will increase with the new work stations and the ability to create
local weather forecasts will expand. The weather graphics in the PC-McIDAS will
also be transmitted to the Universities' mainframe and then sent to other
terminals across campus through the Ethernet communication system, allowing a
continuous monitoring of the current weather activity. Weather data and
information will also be exchanged between MSU and other meteorological
universities through the internet system.