* 9120038
* Continental Scale Biogeochemical Cycles in the Amazon:      A Riverine Perspective
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Jeffrey Richey, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 02/28/1995
* USD 799,848.00

This project will test the working hypothesis that "the distributions of the
respective chemical species follow a predictable annual pattern, with
interannual variability falling within a characteristic 'envelope' driven by
discharge effects on the sequences of (a) tributary inputs, which can be
described by a regional chromatography model (b) in situ carbon oxidation, which
is maintained through a dynamic equilibrium, and (c) mainstemvarzea linkages,
which are a function of basin structural features. Specific research objectives
include: Objective 1. The Regional Chromatograph: (1) Developing a regional-
scale research paradigm (2) Examining the chemical basis for a regional
chromatographic model. (3) Developing the capability to model water, chemical,
and sediment routing at subbasin scales, and (4) Developing a sampling network
for tributary basin and upriver sampling. Objective 2: Mainstem Dynamics: (1)
Determining interannual variability by continuing the Marchantaria monthly time
series for routine parameters and augmenting these with more detailed chemical
characterizations and maintaining data input from the DNAEE hydrologic data
base. (2) Examining the "dynamic equibrium" concept through analyses of the
patterns of biogenic gases, bacterial carbon dynamics, temporal variability
inorganic composition, and selected N and P forms. (3) Modeling mainstem routing
and mainstem-floodplain exchange through the extension of a 2-dimensional
hydrodynamic model, incorporating remote sensing data on water and sediment
exchange. The research is pertinent to resolution of major ecological questions
at the continental scale within the preview of global change. Past work has been
productive, and collaborative arrangements with Brazilian scientists are
excellent.