* 9120301
* Exchange Networks on the North Coast of New Guinea:         Collaborative Field Studies and Historical Research Using   American and German Museum Collections
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Robert Welsch, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1994
* USD 71,836.00

This project involves collaborative research involving personnel from the Field
museum in Chicago, the Papua New Guinea (PNG) National Museum, the Department of
Anthropology at the University of PNG, and the Museum for Volkerkunde in
Dresden, Germany. The researchers will study the extent and pattern of exchange
relations in the West Sepik district of PNG, which have integrated local
communities into larger human associations or "regional systems". The project
will build on prior research based on a collection of artifacts at the Field
museum. Using photographs of these artifacts, the researchers will describe the
manufacture, use, cultural meaning and local socioeconomic significance of the
area's material culture, will reconstruct historical patterns of manufacture and
trade, and study the current changes in material culture. This project is
important because the study of material culture in one small scale, tribal
society can reveal general principles of the creation and maintenance of
sociality among diverse communities. Although PNG is legendary for innumerable
small cultures speaking different languages, they were all connected by trade
systems, and this sort of research can reveal the principles which cross ethnic
boundaries to relate diverse communities. These principles can then be used to
understand cross-ethnic relations in other places in the world.