* 9120661
* SGER:  The Influence of Landscape Variation on Avian        Demography:  The Feasibility of Using GIS Analytical        Techniques
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Kimberly Sullivan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1993
* USD 14,985.00

Preservation of biological diversity requires that variation in the landscape,
and its importance to population persistence be well understood. Studies using
traditional methods have demonstrated that a relationship exits between bird
species and vegetation composition and structure, but have not been able to
evaluate how this variation affects population statistics. Recently developed
geographic information systems (GIS) analytical techniques using Landsat
satellite images will be combined with a long-term data set on populations of
the Yellow- eyed Junco, to better understand the potentially large influence of
landscape variation on the structure and persistence of populations. Fine-scaled
landscape characteristics will be linked to estimates of survivorship and
mortality, productivity, movement patterns and abundance patterns. The proposed
research will provide a new paradigm for researchers studying bird population
biology and conservation. It will also test the effectiveness of "patch
occupancy" models in estimating demographic trends and predicting population
persistence. If accurate "patch occupancy" models can be developed, it will be
possible to collect such data on many more species in a greater array of
habitats than can now be accomplished with labor intensive mark- recapture
studies. Conservation biologists and government agencies need cost effective,
accurate methods of evaluating habitat, estimating bird population trends and
predicting population persistence. The proposed research will help develop these
models and analytical techniques.