* 9120311
* Assembly and Stability of Microtubules from Antarctic Fish  at Low Temperatures
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Harry Detrich, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 11/30/1995
* USD 388,590.00

The long-range goals of the proposed research are to determine, at the molecular
level, the structural adaptations that enable the tubulins of Antarctic fishes
to polymerize at the low body temperatures (-2 to +2 C) experienced by these
cold-adapted vertebrates, and to examine the dynamics of the fish microtubules.
The specific objectives of this project are five in number: 1) to compare the
assembly energetics of brain tubulins from Antarctic and temperate nototheniid
fishes; 2) to clone and to sequence cDNAs (DNAs complementary to messenger RNAs)
that encode the brain tubulins of Antarctic and temperate nototheniid fishes; 3)
to determine the structures of tubulin genes from an Antarctic fish, and
possibly from a temperate nototheniid; 4) to determine the structural features
responsible for the functional differences between brain and egg tubulins of an
Antarctic fish; and 5) to characterize the dynamic behaviors of Antarctic fish
microtubules at low temperatures. Molecular- biological experiments will be
performed on tubulin cDNAs and genes derived from the nucleic acids of the
Antarctic cod, Notothenia coriiceps neglecta, and of its temperate congener, the
New Zealand black cod, N. angustata. Additionally, the dynamics of Antarctic
fish microtubules at low temperatures will be examined by video-enhanced light-
microscopic methods. Comparison of the primary sequences and posttranslational
modifications of tubulins from Antarctic fishes with those of tubulins from
related temperate fishes and warm-blooded vertebrates should reveal the
molecular interactions and structural features necessary for microtubule
assembly at low temperatures. This work will provide valuable information
concerning the structure of tubulin genes from an extreme Antarctic
poikilotherm.