* 9120655
* Annotated Maps for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1995
* Charles Thorpe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 02/28/1995
* USD 224,941.00

Florida Atlantic University (FAU) and Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) are
pleased to cooperate in a three-year program of research on autonomous
underwater robots. The use of remotely controlled, tethered underwater vehicles
to routinely perform critical underwater tasks in offshore and ocean situations
has clearly demonstrated both the utility and importance of these systems.
Recent developments in autonomous vehicle and robot technology now form the
basis for projecting that significant expansions are possible in the
capabilities of underwater vehicles and robotics. The technologies involved are
wide ranging and include sensors, controls, power, computing, architectures and
data representation. The coordinated research program will focus on map-based
knowledge representation to directly address several of these central issues of
autonomous underwater vehicles. We will develop methods to build, store, and use
the knowledge that autonomous vehicles need to execute useful missions.
Specifically, we will develop "annotated maps", which index information to
particular objects and locations in the map. The annotations can be used for a
wide variety of purposes: describing objects, providing hints for perceptions or
control, or specifying particular actions to be taken. We will provide a query
mechanism to retrieve annotations based on their map locations. We will also
build "triggers", which will cause a specified message to be delivered to a
particular process when the vehicle reaches a given location in the map. These
annotated maps will serve a crucial role in enabling missions that are currently
beyond the reach of autonomous systems.