* 9120293
* Experimental Population Genetics of Drosophila Mitochondrial DNA
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1997
* David Rand, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1997
* USD 602,000.00

The general focus of this research is to test the hypothesis that different
mitochondrial genomes affect the reproductive rate or "fitness" of the fruit fly
Drosophila melanogaster. The research will employ experimental population cages
where flies carrying different mitochondrial DNAs (mtDNAs) are competed against
one another to determine whether certain mitochondrial genotypes have consistent
reproductive advantages over other genotypes. The experiments will involve
genetic crosses to construct strains of flies that have the same nuclear
chromosomes but differ only in their mtDNAs. Several pairwise tests of
competitive ability will be conducted between strains of flies from different
populations. The populations have been chosen so that the pairwise tests will
involve strains of flies with little, moderate and large amounts of DNA sequence
difference between the competing mitochondrial genomes. This should provide a
test of the effect of DNA sequence difference on the strength of the fitness
different between strains. The research also involves a complementary set of
experiments to test the "fitness" of different mtDNAs inside cells. Using a
microinjection technique to transplant intact mitochondria between strains of
fruit flies, one can create a miniature "population cage" inside the
reproductive cells of female flies. By creating reproductive cells with mixtures
of different mtDNAs, one can test the hypothesis that different mitochondrial
genomes have an advantage in inheritance from mother to offspring. This approach
will be employed with the same strains of flies used in the population cage
experiments described above. This "two-level" approach to the study of mtDNA
variation will provide information on the functional significance of naturally
occurring variation in mtDNA and serve as a model system to study the
coevolution of nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. Furthermore, this research
will test the critical assumption for many studies of population dynamics that
mtDNA variation is neutral.