* 9120361
* Theoretical Studies of Anyon Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Robert Laughlin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/1995
* USD 450,000.00

Theoretical Studies of Anyon Superconductivity - The occurrence of fractional
statistics in nature (anyons)-, the capacity of fractional statistics to cause
superconductivity, and the natural appearance of fractional statistics in formal
descriptions of strongly correlated model systems (e.g., the Hubbard and t-J
models) are now firmly established. As a result, anyon pairing must be accepted
as a potential case for high-Tc superconductivity. As yet unclear is whether
anyonic superconductivity actually occurs in these (or indeed any) real
materials. This question will remain open until mathematical tools sufficiently
powerful to describe anyonic effects both accurately and correctly are
developed. The proposed research includes both the development of formal
procedures, based on perturbative techniques, to describe anyonic
superconductivity in realistic settings, and the use of these procedures for
computation of spectroscopic properties of high-Tc materials. %%% This work is
intended to develop an accurate picture of anyonic superconductivity, that is,
superconductivity whose elementary objects are pairs of odd-fractioned spin
entities, rather than the paired electrons which produce normal superconductive
phenomena. This new form of superconductivity is important in itself, but is
also a plausible model for the recently-discovered phenomenon of high-Tc
superconductivity. The central feature of the present work is the development
and application of mathematical machinery suitable for detailed discussion of
this phenomenon.