* 9120783
* The Organization of Moche Ceramic Production: Excavations atthe Cerro Mayal Workshop, Chicama Valley, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* Glenn Spencer Russell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1994
* USD 54,386.00

Dr. Russell will conduct archaeological excavations at the site of Cerro Mayal
which is located in the Chicama Valley of northern coastal Peru. The site, which
dates to Moche times, consists of a ceramics workshop, a ca. 5000 square meter
area with numerous piles of wasted ceramics which protrude up to one meter above
the ground surface. Also associated with this is a habitation area where the
remains of buildings of both masonry and adobe brick architecture can be
discerned. During a single season of fieldwork, Dr. Russell and colleagues will
excavate in the workshop area to identify the spatial organization of features
and artifacts. They hope to reconstruct the ceramic technology and associated
labor organization. Dr. Russell will also dig in the waste pile area to recover
tools, molds and partially competed vessels. Finally, he will focus on the
habitation zone associated with the workshop. He hopes to learn how this group
was organized and how the products were distributed over a broader area. Dr.
Russell will also conduct laboratory analysis of clays and ceramic materials
from both Cerro Mayal as well as other Chicama Valley sites in an attempt to
reconstruct the trade network. The Chicama Valley served as the focus for the
Moche culture which built monumental architecture in the form of temples and
associated habitation complexes. They also produced fine craft items. The Moche
spread over a large area, controlled large numbers of people and dug and
administered an extensive system of canals which captured water from the Andes
Mountains and permitted agriculture in this extremely dry desert environment. It
is unclear how large societies such as this arise and are maintained and many
archaeologists believe that control of manufacturing and trade play an important
role in this process. Cerro Mayal is important because its large size suggests
that pottery production was under centralized control. This research will help
to determine whether this hypothesis is correct. The project will produce data
of interest to many archaeologists and will increase our understanding of how
complex societies arise and are maintained.