* 9120730
* Development of the Integrative Properties of LGN Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* William Guido, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 03/31/1994
* USD 123,000.00

This project considers the cellular mechanisms underlying development and
experience-dependent plasticity in the visual system of mammals. An in vitro
slice preparation is employed and dye-filled electrodes are used to record
intracellularly and label immature (visually-naive) neurons and neurons affected
by visual deprivation. The focus is the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN)
which is the thalamic relay between the retina and the visual cortex. The LGN is
the most peripheral site along the visual pathway where severe morphological and
physiological deficits develop in response to brief periods of visual
deprivation during the critical period of development. Its functional
organization is well-known and its neurophil simpler than that of more central
structures such as the visual cortex, thus making it more amenable for analysis.
There are two main goals of Dr. Guido's research. His first goal is to examine
the cellular integrative properties of visually-deprived LGN neurons, and then
to determine the degree to which any changes in these properties correlate with
the reported morphological abnormalities. His second goal is to study the
postnatal development of these properties to determine the extent to which their
normal expression depends on visual experience during the critical period of
development. The specific properties that Dr. Guido will be examining are
membrane properties and synaptic events, especially those that rely on the
activation of the glutamatergic-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor. This project is
important from the point of view of understanding the origin of visual deficits
in humans.***//