* 9120228
* US-Poland Materials Research on Magnetic and Transport      Properties of Novel Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1992,05/31/1997
* James Anderson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 05/31/1997
* USD 33,364.00

This U.S.- Poland cooperative research project is between Dr. James R. Anderson
of the University of Maryland, College Park, and Prof. Robert R. Galazka and Dr.
Andrzej Mycielski of the Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences. The
researchers will investigate magnetism and magnetotransport in some of the new
types of diluted magnetic semiconductors. They will investigate the narrow-gap
materials, Hg1-x- yMnxCdyTe and A1-xRxB (where A belongs to group IV of the
Periodic Table of the Elements, B belongs to group VI, and R is a rare earth),
and the wide-gap systems, C1-xMxD (where C is either Cd or Zn, M is a magnetic
ion such as Co, Fe, or a rare earth, and D belongs to group VI of the Periodic
Table). These materials will be prepared primarily by the modified Bridgman
technique. Magnetization measurements will be used to examine the
antiferromagnetic exchange interactions among magnetic ions and to look for
spin-glass and ferromagnetic behavior. When combined with magnetooptical
studies, the magnetization measurements will be used to determine the
interactions between the magnetic ions and the carriers. Magnetotransport
measurements will be used to investigate carrier scattering in diluted magnetic
semiconductor systems. This project in physics fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States
and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas
of strong mutual interest and competence.