* 9120572
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Computer Modelling of Sensory Filtering in the Elasmobranch Hindbrain
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1996
* David Bodznick, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 10/31/1996
* USD 19,560.00

This award supports visits over a three year period by Dr. David Bodznick of
Wesleyan University and Dr. Mark Nelson from the University of Illinois to the
laboratories of New Zealand colleagues Dr. John Charles Montgomery at the
University of Auckland and Dr. Michael Geoffrey Paulin of the University of
Otayo. The Dorsal Octavolateral Nucleus (DON) is the structure located in the
medulla of elasmobranch fishes which filters electrosensory signals as they
enter the brain. In this project advanced signal processing and computer
simulation techniques will be used to characterize and analyze the function of
the DON in terms of detailed circuity. By combining the skills and resources of
the four investigators with diverse backgrounds the study anticipates improving
the understanding of the DON and similar brain structures in other vertebrates,
and also how mathematical and computer methods can be applied to analyze neural
structures. The expertise of Dr. Paulin (mathematician) in computer modelling in
neurophysiology and Dr. Nelson (physics) in biophysics and neural information
processing will be integrated with the ongoing collaborative studies previously
initiated by Drs. Bodznick and Montgomery in electrosensory systems and
elasmobranch physiology.