* 9120863
* Birth Order and Cell Fate in an Embryonic Neuronal Lineage
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Melody V. S. Siegler, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Edwards
* 08/31/1995
* USD 199,469.00

The nervous system contains a stereotyped complement of neurons with different
properties. Neurons have different shapes, respond to and release different
biochemical messengers, and exert their effects on unique subsets of target
neurons. The processes underlying the development of this neuronal specificity
will be investigated in the simple nervous system of the grasshopper. The
investigator has previously characterized a group of 100 midline neurons that
arise from a single identified precursor stem cell. This group of neurons
contains three basic cell types that function in different sets of behaviors. It
will be determined how the final complement of neurons in the group arises
temporally during development, over what time course neurons are added to the
population and when and to what extent cell death reduces the population to its
final size. In addition, the birthdays of identified neurons, i.e. the timing of
a neuron's final cell division, will be correlated with cell lineage to test the
hypothesis that birth order and cell type are related, with sequential switches
occurring during development to produce efferent neurons, local interneurons,
and then intersegmental interneurons. Differential staining of cell types and
birthdating of individual neurons by labeling DNA during cell divisions will be
applied. The system is unique in the high degree of resolution for identifying
individual neurons of a population and the potential for spanning several levels
of inquiry in studying the relationships between developmental events and the
functioning of mature neuronal circuits. The study of neurogenesis in this
simple nervous system that is easily accessible to experimental manipulation
promises to increase our general knowledge of processes involved in the
formation of different kinds on neurons.