* 9120061
* Evaluation of Existing Reinforced Concrete Columns
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1994
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 08/31/1994
* USD 190,000.00

This project, in collaboration witha companion project by W. Holmes of
Rutherford &amp; Chekene (NSF Grant No. 9120214), is supported under the Phase 2
(second year) program of the Seismic Repair and Rehabilitation Initiative (NSF
90-23). Reinforced concrete frames constructed prior to the 1970's pose one of
the greatest hazards for loss of life due to collapse during strong ground
shaking. One of the key deficiencies of such structures is inadequate
proportioning and detailing of columns. Examples of deficiencies include
insufficient column strength relative to beam strength, light transverse
reinforcement, and short lap splices. This research is to conduct an
experimentally based study of the behavior of deficient columns and to develop
methods for calculating strength and deformability of existing columns for use
by structural engineers. The methods will be useful (a) for evaluation of
existing structures and (b) for design of retrofitting systems that are intended
to protect relatively brittle elements of the existing structure. The research
includes a detailed review of existing data on performance of reinforced
concrete columns, study of common details in existing structures, experiments on
columns containing deficiencies representative of those found in existing
construction, numerical modeling and analyses of results, and development of a
practical set of rules for gaging the strength and deformability of reinforced
concrete columns in existing structures. The research will be carried out
jointly by researchers/engineers at the University of California at Berkeley and
at Rutherford Chekene.