* 9120258
* Molecular Systematics and Chloroplast DNA Variation in      Parasitic Scrophulariaceae/Orobanchaceae
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1998
* Claude dePamphilis, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/1998
* USD 440,000.00

Studies of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) variation have helped to clarify
phylogenetic relationships in many plant groups. However, the most common types
of cpDNA data cannot be applied to parasitic plant lineages that are completely
non-photosynthetic. I propose to use a new source of data, sequences of
nonphotosynthetic chloroplast genes, to investigate phylogenetic relationships
in a family containing photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic forms.
Scrophulariaceae and Orobanchaceae are ideal for these studies because they
contain plants with a wide range of parasitic behaviors, including some that are
highly destructive to important crop plants. Additionally, plants in this group
display remarkable variation in cpDNA structure and gene content associated with
the loss of photosynthesis. A multiple approach involving gene sequencing and
cpDNA mapping will examine the molecular phylogeny of this group and fully
describe its variation in cpDNA structure and gene content. The study will focus
on critical "transition" genera that unify the Scrophulariaceae with the
(nonphotosynthetic) Orobanchaceae, but will include species in both groups plus
outgroup taxa. Significant developments that should derive from this research
include: (1) Efficient molecular systematic approaches that can be used within
plant families, even "troublesome" ones that include nonphotosynthetic plants.
(2) Opportunities to learn much about the phylogenetic relationships and
character evolution within the most economically important group of parasitic
plants. (3) A much deeper understanding of the dynamics and mechanisms of cpDNA
molecular variation.