* 9120588
* Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Organic      Reaction Rates and Mechanisms
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1996
* USD 802,125.00

An investigation of the basic mechanisms of a variety of fundamental chemical
reactions ranging from pericyclic processes to the reactions of carbenes and
singlet oxygen will be conducted. Experimental results will be obtained and
compared with frontier molecular orbital and ab initio calculations as
appropriate. In the case of pericyclic reactions, attention will be given to the
effect of substituents. Experimental isotope effects will be compared to
predictions derived from theoretical calculations. Molecular dynamics of
forbidden pericyclic reactions will be investigated by variable transition state
theory, and ab initio calculations will be performed to generate potential
energy surfaces. An investigation of the dynamics of carbene and singlet oxygen
reactions will be conducted using statistical mechanics and transition state
theory. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing
work of Professor Kendall N. Houk at UCLA. The studies will be directed toward
providing a better understanding of a number of important chemical reactions. A
significant portion of the research project will utilize high speed computers to
predict the reaction pathways with the prospect of designing efficient catalysts
which are capable of increasing reaction efficiency. Such computer predictions
are important since they reduce substantially the actual laboratory time it
takes to develop fast and efficient chemical processes.