* 9120836
* Generation and Utilization of Monoclonal Antibodies as      Probes of Slow NGF Receptor Structure and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Stuart Feinstein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* None
* 02/29/1996
* USD 189,150.00

Intercellular biochemical communication is a ubiquitous feature in biology
serving to mediate an enormous range of regulatory functions. In vertebrate
nervous systems, targets of innervation secrete proteins known as neurotrophic
factors, which are subsequently received by the innervating neuron. Acquisition
of sufficient neurotrophic factor by individual innervating neurons is essential
for the proper development and maintenance of the nervous system. Interruption
of the flow of neurotrophic factor from the target to the neurons result in the
rapid neuronal destruction of the affected region. In Dr. Feinstein's project,
he will examine the molecular mechanisms by which Nerve Growth Factor (NGF), the
best understood among the neurotrophic factors, mediates its action upon
responsive neuronal cells. NGF action is known to be initiated by the
interaction of NGF with "slow" (also known as "high affinity") NGF receptors
located in the neuronal plasma membrane. He will first utilize a variety of
immunological strategies to generate novel molecular probes. Then, he will use
these probes as tools to investigate the molecular composition of the slow NGF
receptors as well as the functions mediated by the slow NGF receptors. These
studies should markedly contribute to our understanding of neurotrophic factor
action and the development and maintenance of the nervous system.*** //