* 9120131
* Spatial Information Processing in the Hippocampal Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Patricia Sharp, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Sigvardt
* 09/30/1994
* USD 120,000.00

The hippocampal formation is part of the brain known to be critically involved
in learning and memory. Hippocampal damage in humans caused profound, nearly
global amnesia for events which occur after the lesion. One type of ability
affected is spatial, or navigational learning. Individuals with hippocampal
damage cannot learn their way around a new environment. Some insight into how
the hippocampus may accomplish its role in spatial learning has come from
studies which examine the activity of single cells in the hippocampus in
vertebrates as they navigate in an environment. In each part of the hippocampal
region studied to date, cells show striking spatial correlates. Cells in one
region fire in a location-specific manner, so that they are active only when the
animal is within a particular, circumscribed region of space. Cells in another
area fire only when the animal is facing a particular direction, regardless of
its location. In yet a third area, cells fire as a function of both direction
and location. Dr. Sharp will examine the spatial firing correlates of the cells
in the hippocampal area. She will examine the basic spatial firing properties of
cells in part of the hippocampal region which have not yet been studies. This
will provide novel information about the nature of the spatial signal in the
hippocampal formation. In addition, Dr. Sharp will conduct analytical studies to
discover the sensory and mnemonic determinants of the spatial firing properties
of cells in these areas, as well as in areas in which the basic spatial
properties are already known. Another aspect of her work will be to examine
changes in hippocampal physiology which result from exposing animals to
spatially-complex environments. These long-lasting changes are thought to
possibly reflect information storage mechanisms in the hippocampus. Thus,
examination of the timecourse, mechanisms, and conditions of such neuronal
plasticity could provide insight into how the hippocampal area orchestrates
learning. Dr. Sharp's results will be used to try to understand the role played
by the hippocampus in learning and memory, specifically as it relates to the
onset of Alzheimer's disease in the aging brain.***//