* 9120007
* Center for Quantized Electronic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1992,01/31/2001
* Horia Metiu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/2001
* USD 21,587,285.00

Research and education programs of the Science and Technology Center for
Quantum Structures address a class of artificially structured materials now
being explored for use as ultra- miniature electronic or photonic devices. Low-
dimensional semiconductor structures that exhibit quantum effects are
synthesized using novel atom-by-atom techniques. The focus of the research is to
study quantum phenomena in the resulting structures, whose size is comparable to
the electron wavefunction in these materials. Unusual physical properties have
already been observed in these structures, and revolutionary new devices may
ultimately be forthcoming. The Center combines the efforts of specialists in
compound semiconductor technology with expertise in crystal growth, advanced
processing, and device fundamentals and design, with those of surface chemists
and condensed matter theorists to address these issues. Faculty members from
five academic departments are involved in the research. The Center offers broad,
multidisciplinary experience for undergraduates, graduate students and
postdoctoral associates as well as an outreach program for precollege teachers
and their students. It also supports visiting scholars, engages in collaborative
programs with researchers in industry, national laboratories, and other
universities, and is involved in course development in the area of quantum
structures. The Center for Quantum Electronic Structures is directed by
Professor James L. Merz.