* 9120493
* Classical Mechanics and Stabilization Type Methods to       Extract Molecular Motions from Experimental Measurements    and/or Large Scale Quantum Theoretical Calculations
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Howard Taylor, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Paul S. Bagus
* 12/31/1994
* USD 260,000.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division is
supporting work by Professor Taylor on the chaotic behavior of the energy levels
of molecules in highly excited vibrational states and in intermediate resonant
transition state complexes. Such energy levels are governed by local dynamic
adiabatic potentials whose existence is not evident in the static molecular
potentials and hypersurfaces. These potentials and motions are related to phase
space structures as periodic orbits and reduced dimension tori. Professor Taylor
is using a classical method of analysis which yields approximations to the
desired dynamic potentials and to the motions. The research is intended to
demonstrate that the method is capable of providing a physical interpretation of
experimental and computational studies on intramolecular vibrational relaxation
and on the spectra of larger molecules. %%% When molecules are highly excited by
absorption of electro- magnetic energy or by chemical reaction, they populate
very complex vibrational energy states that are not predictable by the patterns
found for their lower energy vibrational states. Experimental and computational
methods can provide data, but Professor Taylor is seeking a relatively simple,
classical method of analysis of the results that will yield qualitative insight
into the dynamics of the systems.