* 9120368
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Nonlinear Dynamics of Soil Moisture Climate at Continental Scales:  Climate Origins of Droughts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1991,08/31/1997
* Rafael Bras, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 08/31/1997
* USD 473,098.00

The goal of this collaborative research project will identify and analyze the
interactions and feedbacks between the land and atmosphere that result in
observed complexities and lack of predictability of hydroclimatology. In
particular, it is intended to study the dynamics of soil moisture and its
excursions into dry (drought) and wet (flood) states. The first hypothesis is
that local recycling of moisture at continental scales, and time periods on the
order of seasons to years leads to soil moisture dynamics that can be described
by a stochastic differential equation with multiplicative noise. The solution to
such nonlinear system is a probability distribution of soil moisture with at
least two modes; that is, two preferred states, one dry and one wet. This
contrasts with the traditional unimodal view of the soil moisture distribution.
This distribution can be studied to obtain answers like the probability of the
onset of drought or vice versa the end of a drought period. Another question of
interest is the duration of droughts. The multimodal distribution can also be
the basis of a new classification of climatic regions. The second hypothesis is
that at time scales on the order of the occurrence of individual events (i.e.,
weeks) the soil moisture has a delayed effect on atmospheric dynamics. This
phenomena is due to the moisture supply as well as to dynamic influences
resulting from soil moisture effect on surface temperature and atmospheric
pressure. The implication of this hypothesis is a highly nonlinear delayed
differential equation for the description of soil moisture. The solution of this
equation leads to a fixed equilibrium, a limit cycle with bifurcations or to
chaos. This will be used to study amplification of seasonal effects over
continental regions like the Amazonia as well as the predictability of soil
moisture and hydroclimatology in general. Principal Investigators and staff from
the University of Arizona and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will
collaborate on this project.