* 9120100
* Theoretical Studies of Structure and Spectra of Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1995
* John Tossell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1995
* USD 108,000.00

Theoretical Studies of Structure and Spectra of Glasses - Quantum- chemical
methods at the level of ab initio Hartree-Fock Self- Consistent Field Molecular
Orbital Theory will be applied to a number of problems in glass science. The
basic goal will be to characterize both the short and medium range order of
species in glasses by calculating values for their geometries, energetics, and
spectra, and comparing with experiment. NMR spectra of various species in
glasses will be calculated for several short range ordered species, e.g.,
boroxol rings and silicate tetrahedra in their respective glasses. Structural
and spectral properties as a function of charge state and degree of
polymerization will be calculated to assist in monitoring sol-gel reactions.
Finally, methods will be developed to calculate polarizabilities of oxygen in
various environments found in glasses and to calculate spectral energies for
free and complexed probe ions used to evaluate the optical basicities of
different oxidic environments in glasses. This proposal will be cofunded by DMR-
Materials Theory (67%) and by CHEM-Physical Chemistry (33%). %%% It was once
thought that crystalline and glassy solids were very much different
structurally, with crystalls possessing both short and long range order and
glasses possessing order in any meaningful sense only at the local level if at
all. It now seems clear that in many cases glasses possess substantial medium
range order, i.e., order on a length scale corresponding to several molecular
units. Increased knowledge of the types of local and medium range order existing
in glasses and the influence of such order upon the properties of the glass will
make it possible to create glasses with tailored properties using nonempirical
atomistic approaches. Application of quantum chemical methods to this problem is
the goal of this proposal, which will be cofunded by DMR-Materials Theory (67%)
and by CHEM-Physical Chemistry (33%).