* 9120664
* A Workshop on Information Access and Capture in Engineering Eesign Environments, November 12-14, 1991, Ithaca, New York
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/1991,02/29/1992
* John Hopcroft, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 02/29/1992
* USD 10,000.00

Computing hardware, digital memory systems, and high speed computer networks
have progressed to the point where building very large digital document
collections and providing facile distributed access to these collections is
practical and economical. However, many difficult problems still stand in the
way of implementing such systems. The time is ripe to begin building a broad
science base to support this activity and to begin academic programs at
universities to produce the PhD's needed to advance progress in this area. This
award funds a three day workshop to bring together about 30 key researchers in
the area of information capture and access. Participants represent broad
coverage of the research area and a balance between industrial and academic and
between project implementors and more science base oriented individuals. The
workshop will be held November 12-14, 1991 in Ithaca, New York. The coordinators
are John Hopcroft, chair Computer Science Department, Cornell University and
Gregory Zack, manager Xerox Design Research Area. The primary objectives of the
workshop are to determine the state of the art in information capture and
access, to identify key research efforts and projects, and to highlight research
direction where progress is likely. In addition the workshop will identify
common infrastructure that would foster cooperative research efforts. The Xerox
Corporation is a co-sponsor of the workshop. //