* 9120410
* UNIDATA: Enhancement of Undergraduate Meteorology Education          Through UNIDATA's OS/2 and UNIX-based Workstations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Patrick Gannon, Lyndon State College
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Jacobs
* 02/28/1994
* USD 14,520.00

Project objectives are to enhance student visualization of complex
meteorological principles, introduce students to the principles of numerical
weather prediction and computer models, participate fully in the Unidata project
and facilitate faculty and student research using high speed computer platforms.
These objective will be met using Unidata's OS/2-based McIDAS and UNIX- based
Scientific Data Management (SDM) systems. Funds are provided to a UNIX-based
workstation capable of running Unidata's SDM system. This requisition will
significantly enhance the processing of the Domestic Data Plus circuit.
Processing of the McIDAS data stream at Lyndon will be upgraded by the
acquisition of two PC computers, augmenting a network of 4 previously acquired
IBM PS/2s (1987 NSF Grant CSI-8750236) which are marginally configured to
process the data stream. Simultaneous windowed displays of radar and
conventional data using the WXP program in the SDM and McIDAS displays of
satellite imagery and gridded fields will speed computers, present interactive
computer programs and models can be run on time frames compatible with
individual class sessions. Numerical prediction methods can be demonstrated to
upper level students. The faster computers and new data will foster future
student and faculty research projects while enhancing current ones.