* 9120183
* Nitrogen Dynamics in a Salt Marsh
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Richard Wetzel, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 09/30/1995
* USD 200,000.00

Coastal lagoon-type estuaries such as the Virginia Coast Reserve are often
nitrogen-limited. The availability of nitrogen controls aquatic primary
productivity in the estuary. The effects of N-loading on the estuary due to
agricultural runoff depends to a large extent upon the N-cycling processes that
occur in the intertidal sediments. Processes such as nitrification-
denitrification result in losses of N from the sediment, whereas dissimilatory
nitrate reduction to ammonium tends to conserve N in the sediment. Efforts to
develop models to predict the effects of nitrogen influx to estuaries due to
natural or anthropogenic processes have been limited by the difficulties
involved in measuring the rates of the various N-cycling processes in wetland
sediments. Many of the techniques currently used to measure the rates of these
processes are disruptive, utilize inhibitors of questionable effectiveness, or
require additions of substrates at higher than ambient concentrations. Such
techniques may at best then measure potential rather than in-situ reaction
rates. This project will develop the methodologies required to apply 15N isotope
pool dilution techniques to intact sediment cores taken from vegetated and
unvegetated intertidal wetland ecosystems. These measurements will allow the
determination of the relative importance of nitrification, followed by
denitrification v.s. dissimilatory nitrate reduction to the overall N-budget.
The study will be performed at a Long Term Ecological Research site in the
Virginia Coast Reserve. Taken together, this information will improve the
accuracy of rate estimates of nitrogen cycling reactions in wetland and near
shore sediments and permit an evaluation of the role of these processes in the
ecology of coastal marine ecosystems.