* 9120331
* Cyclogenesis and Frontogenesis Processes Over Western       North America and Vicinity
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 01/31/1995
* USD 350,100.00

Dr. Bosart is one of the leading synopticians in the field of atmospheric
sciences. He will continue and expand upon his previous work on midlatitude
cyclogenesis and frontogenesis, relying on climatological and case study
investigations which encompass atmospheric processes on the planetary, synoptic
and meso-scales. Dr. Bosart will pursue three major research thrusts. The first
is an investigation of the cyclone and frontal formation in the intermountain
regions of the western United States. A particularly difficult forecast
situation arises when upper tropospheric disturbances encounter mountain
barriers. Sometimes the subsequent flow pattern results in the development of a
quasi- stationary storm system in the mountain regions. At other times, the
disturbance will continue moving eastward. Through his analyses, Dr. Bosart
would like to distinguish between the conditions which cause these two very
different weather patterns. The second major area of research is the study of
merger and separation of wave disturbances at different levels in the atmosphere
affect storm development. Finally, Dr. Bosart will take on a new research
project, looking at the interaction between the midlatitude cyclone development
and transient disturbances emanating from the subtropical jet stream. In
addition to their intrinsic scientific interest, the questions Dr. Bosart hopes
to answer have direct implications for improved operational weather forecasting.