* 9120222
* Archaeological Investigations of a Mississippian Period     Production for Exchange System
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Charles Cobb, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1995
* USD 73,852.00

Dr. Charles Cobb will conduct two seasons of archaeological site survey and
excavation in the Mill Creek region of Southern Illinois. The region is
important to archeologists because it contains quarries for stone which was
manufactured into hoes. Finds from numerous other sites demonstated that these
prized objects were then distributed throughout the lower Ohio and Mississippi
River Valleys. Dr. Cobb will first conduct an intensive sample survey of the
area to obtain information on the variety, distribution and function of sites
related to digging implement production. In the second stage of the work he will
excavate a small sample of sites to learn how actual production of the
implements was organized. Materials collected will also help to date the sites
and shed light on the subsistence practices followed. Recovery of exchange items
such as non-local flint, galena, shell artifacts and copper will provide
information on trade networks. Although they did not develop all the features
commonly attributed to "civilizations", late prehistoric (ca. 900-1500 AD)
societies in the American Midwest developed a high degree of social complexity
in which individual groups were bound together into larger organized trade
networks. Archaeologists have postuated that a tight link exists between the
development of social complexity, political centralization and control of trade.
Because Mill Creek contained such a valuable product, it makes an excellent
region to examine this issue. Through his excavations Dr. Cobb wishes to learn
how the production of stone hoes and their exchange was organized and functioned
at both a local and an interregional level. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide insight into how complex societies were
developed and maintained. It will yield data of great interest to many U.S.
archaeologists.