* 9120749
* Dissertation Research:  Intra-Regional Economies and _      Exchange in the Valle de la Plata, Colombia
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1991,11/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1993
* USD 11,900.00

Under the direction of Professor Robert Drennan, Mr. Dale Quattrin will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct excavations at 4 to 5 sites
situated at different altitude levels in the Valley de la Plata, which is
located at the headwaters of the Rio Magdalene in southwestern Colombia. While
the Andean region provides the best known examples of prehispanic civilizations
in South America, within the Rio Magdalene region a wide scale, complex
prehistoric culture developed which was marked by a complex funeral cult and by
monumental architecture. Dr. Drennan has worked for many years to document this
phenomenon. The Magdalene area covers a wide range of altitudes and at the
present time different crops are grown at different heights. Mr. Quattrin wants
to determine how ancient this pattern is and the role that possible exchange may
have played in the development of the Magdalene culture. To accomplish this he
will locate sites which are spread vertically across the zone and excavate them.
He will then analyze both pollen samples, which show what plants were grown at
each altitude, as well as macrobotanical and phytolith remains which indicate
what was consumed. By this means it will be possible to reconstruct both
production and consumption patterns and infer whether or not and food moved over
space, and if so what foods were involved. Archaeologists have used
ethnohistoric and ethnographic data from the Andes to describe a number of
exchange models. It is clear that in areas such as Peru where resources varied
by attitudinal zone, complex strategies were devised to minimize risk by moving
different crops across zones. However it is neither known how far back this
practice extends in time nor the role it may have played in the development of
complex Andean societies. Given the excellent data base collected by Dr.
Drennan, it will be possible for Mr. Quattrin to examine this question in
Colombia. This research is important for several reasons. It will both address a
significant theoretical issue and provide data of interest to a large number of
archaeologists. It will also assist in the training of an extremely promising
scientist.