* 9120931
* Energy and Product Partitioning in Chemicals Excited by     Light
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Peter Wagner, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1996
* USD 442,384.00

A thorough investigation of the geometric parameters which govern the
interaction of one part of a molecule with another part of the same molecule
will be conducted. The interactions to be investigated will include processes
which result in energy transfer and/or chemical reaction. The base absorbing
chromophore to be investigated will be an aromatic ketone. By careful choice of
geometry in the aromatic ketone, it will be possible to define for the first
time the restrictions imposed by atomic and electronic orientation on chemical
processes of excited aryl ketones. The projects to be investigated will include:
(1) measurement of the kinetics of processes involving triplet cycloaddition,
hydrogen abstraction and intramolecular triplet energy transfer; (2) observation
of biradical partitioning; and (3) determination of the spin multiplicity of
benzene-halogen cleavage reactions. Classical photochemical and photophysical
methods will be utilized throughout the project to provide a thorough
examination of the mechanisms involved. %%% This grant from the Organic Dynamics
Program supports the continuing work of Professor Peter J. Wagner at Michigan
State University. The investigation will be aimed at probing the means by which
energy is transferred from one part of a molecule to another. This work is
particularly important since the process of how two parts of the same molecule
interact is at the heart of many chemical processes which occur in both natural
and synthetic molecules. The work to be conducted will provide the chemist, as
well as other scientists, with a basic understanding of how chemical processes
occur upon absorption of a photon of light. From this project will emerge a
fundamental understanding of the constraints placed upon light induced processes
by geometrical configurations of the groups comprising photoreactive molecules.