* 9120081
* U.S.-New Zealand Joint:  Seminar/Workshop on Molecular      Evolution; December, 1992; Rotorua, New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1993
* Michael Clegg, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 04/30/1993
* USD 22,625.00

This award will support the participation of nine U.S. scientists in a joint
seminar on Molecular Evolution to be held in early December 1992 on the campus
of the Forest Research Institute at Rotorua, New Zealand. Participation of the
New Zealand scientists is supported through the Ministry of Research, Science
and Technology. The New Zealand Journal of Botany will publish the seminar
proceedings. Organization of the seminar is being conducted by Dr. Michael T.
Clegg from the University of California at Riverside and Dr. Bruce S. Weir from
North Carolina State University on the U.S. side, and by Dr. Michael Hendy and
Dr. David Penny from Massey University in New Zealand. Many sets of DNA
sequences of the same gene from different plant taxa are now available.
Evolutionary comparisons of homologous sequences provide a powerful means of
resolving functionally important regions such as the sequence motifs in
chloroplast gene regions. Once such motifs are identified, the relationship to
gene or protein function can be further explored with mutagenesis experiments.
Research in both theoretical and plant molecular evolution has been pursued in
the U.S. and New Zealand and it now seems appropriate for some combining of
forces to benefit both communities. The speakers will describe their current
work in molecular evolution. The plant scientists will gain from learning of new
techniques for modelling evolution and analyzing data, while the theorists will
learn of biological advances that require model or methodology development. The
central theme of the seminar will be that of managing and using molecular data
for a study of plant evolution. The organizers believe the seminar will act as a
foundation for future long-term collaborations.