* 9120428
* RUI: Molecular Analysis of PHB/V Biosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Douglas Dennis, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1995
* USD 240,000.00

Poly-B-hydroxyalkanoates (PHA's), polymers found in many bacteria, have
attracted considerable interest in recent years because they exhibit
biodegradable thermoplastic properties. The physical properties of PHA polymers
are dictated by the number of carbons in their monomeric unit. For instance,
poly-beta-hydroxybutyrate (PHB= C4 monomeric unit) is much more flexible. For
this reason, there is considerable ongoing research in the development of the
PHB/V copolymer. The bacterium Alcaligenes eutrophus is one of the first
bacteria shown to be capable of producing either PHB or PHB/V, depending on the
feedstock. The genes for polymer synthesis in A. euthrophus have been cloned
into Escherichia coli by our research group where we have employed them to
produce large intracellular deposits of PHB. In initial experiments using
standard E. coli strains we have not been able to detect copolymer synthesis,
even when the feedstock is altered to stimulate PHB/V synthesis. However,
recently we were able to obtain copolymer synthesis employing an E. coli mutant.
Preliminary results indicate that copolymer synthesis in E. coli is similar to
that found in A. eutrophus. The purpose of this research is to further develop
our knowledge of PHB/V synthesis and PHB/V genetics using the newly develop E.
coli system. This research will be done by conducting a comprehensive survey of
bacteria that produce primarily PHB and PHB/V, cloning of selected PHB/V genetic
pathways, analysis of these pathways in E. coli capable of PHV production, and
manipulation of copolymer synthesis and structure using genetic techniques.