* 9120991
* Pedagogical Techniques for Classroom Communications Systems
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* A. Louis Abrahamson, Better Education  Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1994
* USD 602,700.00

Classrooms of 30 to 300 students, although commonplace, provide poor learning
environments in schools and colleges. Active learning significantly improves on
traditional methods. With low-cost classroom communications systems (CCSc) every
student can engage actively in learning, but results are not guaranteed.
Teachers must learn how to use CCSs' as pedagogical tools. Objectives: provide
substantive data on the benefits of CCSs in various educational environments;
show how CCSs can be adapted to various pedagogies to enhance the effectiveness
of the learning environment; quantify the effects of these adaptions on student
performance. Research: Scientist-teachers from eight national programs will test
Classtalk CCSs' capabilities in research classrooms. Feedback from pilot
research at these test- sites will help optimize the tools and interface. In the
principal effort, test-site researchers will do controlled evaluations of CCS
impact on their own pedagogical frameworks. Anticipated Results: We will learn
how to use CCSs effectively under various classroom pedagogies and what software
tools make CCSs maximally effective Applications: Successful CCSs are cost-
effective tools enabling all students to engage actively in learning. CCSs help
identify students' preconceptions and diagnose fundamental misunderstandings.
CCSs may incorporate video and other technologies, improve students' motivation,
and help teachers to track and assess student learning.