* 9120128
* Hybrid Control of Seismic Response of Bridge Structures:  A Coordinated Effort between the U.S. and Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Jann Yang, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 01/31/1996
* USD 345,203.00

This project is to conduct collaborative research on aseismic hybrid control of
Bridge structures between the University of California, Irvine (UCI), and the
Public Works Research Institute (PWRI), Ministry of Construction, Japan. The
main objective is to carry out in-depth theoretical/numerical studies of
aseismic hybrid control systems for bridge structures. In particular, control
algorithms will be developed for various types of hybrid control systems
currently being developed at PWRI. These hybrid control systems for bridge
structures include variable viscous dampers, variable stiffness control devices,
active sliding isolation systems, active base isolation systems, etc. Hybrid
control systems, which consist of a combination of passive and active control
devices have been shown to be more effective and practical in reducing the
response of long-span bridge structures subjected to strong earthquakes.
Aseismic hybrid control systems are often highly nonlinear (such as active
sliding systems and variable stiffness devices) inelastic, (such as active
rubber-bearing isolation systems) or time-variant (such as variable viscous
dampers). Research efforts are needed to develop control algorithms which could
be incorporated into computer/processor and control hardware for aseismic hybrid
control of bridge structures. Theoretical studies will be carried out at UCI,
whereas hardware developments and experimental tests will be conducted at PWRI.
Various control algorithms developed at UCI will be used in the experimental
tests. Results of the experimental tests obtained at PWRI will be correlated
with the corresponding theoretical/ numerical solutions obtained at UCI.
Discrepancies between experimental and theoretical results will be examined,
investigated and corrected.