* 9120412
* Regulation of Iron Transport and Virulence in Shigella
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1995
* Shelley Payne, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1995
* USD 168,638.00

In addition to its role as a nutrient, the essential iron acts as a regulatory
signal to control synthesis of iron acquisition systems, certain toxins, and a
variety of other bacterial proteins. Thus iron is one of a number of
environmental stimuli to which cells respond. The long range goals of this
project are to characterize the genetics and regulation of iron acquisition and
other systems associated with in vivo survival of Shigella, an enteric bacterium
which multiplies both extracellularly and intracellularly within host intestinal
epithelial cells. These studies will include (1) characterizing genes and gene
products which are differentially expressed in vivo and the associated
regulatory signals, (2) measuring the expression of iron-regulated genes in an
in vivo system, and (3) characterizing the genetics and regulation of Congo
red/heme binding (crb). Experimental approaches will utilize genetic and
biochemical techniques. In vivo expression of the genes will be investigated
using fusions to reporter genes whose expression can be readily monitored , and
an in vivo labeling system has been developed to compare proteins synthesized by
bacteria inside host cells to those observed in vitro. Mutants with altered gene
regulation will also be characterized. These studies will help define mechanisms
of regulation both in vivo and in vitro.