* 9120525
* Quantum Phase Transitions in Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/1991,11/30/1995
* Ramamurti Shankar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1995
* USD 174,000.00

Theoretical research will be conducted on quantum phase transitions, that is,
phemonena in which the ground state of a many-body system changes qualitatively
as some control parameter is varied at zero temperature. These include
transitions from metal to insulator as a function of interaction strength,
randomness or both, changes in magnetic order with hole density, representation
of the spins, or microscopic couplings, and the transition from metal to
superconductor with doping. All these problems have the common feature that
there is generally no obvious small parameter to allow a clean theoretical
calculation. This will be handled in a variety of ways: by working with low
dimensional analogs amenable to exact solution, by embedding the given problem
in a larger family (with bigger spin, bigger group, etc.) where a small
parameter exists, and by the application of the renormalization group which
permits one to deal with the problem in stages instead of all at once. %%% This
work will utilize techniques developed for high energy physics to investigate
phase transitions in condensed matter systems where the properties of matter
change from one form to another, such as occurs when an insulating material
changes to one which has no resistance to the flow of electric charge. Usually
these phase transitions are studied as a function of temperature. However, for
this work the calculations will be done at zero temperature where quantum
effects dominate. The effects to be studied are basic to many modern problems in
condensed matter physics and materials science.