* 9120433
* Development and Neural Basis of Visual Attention
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Mark Johnson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1995
* USD 266,957.00

There are a variety of ways of exploring the brain basis of psychological
abilities such as visual attention. One of these approaches is to study how the
postnatal development of cortical circuits gives rise to the onset of components
of visual attention in the human infant. Due to the importance of visual
attention in early infancy, it is evident that this approach may also be of
clinical benefit. Furthermore, an understanding of the relation between
postnatal cortical development and the emergence of cognitive abilities would
clearly be a major advance for both developmental psychology and cognitive
neuroscience. This research program is designed to test predictions of Johnson's
theory about the relation between cortical maturation and the development of
visual attention. This theory uses developmental neuroanatomical evidence to
predict the sequence in which certain cortical circuits become functional. Since
these circuits are thought to subserve components of visual attention, this
allows predictions to be made about their developmental sequence. In human
infants between 2 and 6 months of age these predictions will be tested by
studying performance in certain tasks known to be specifically sensitive to the
functioning of these cortical pathways. In addition, new "marker tasks" will be
developed to make possible the investigation of "covert" visual attention i.e.
shifts of attention that are independent of eye movements. Finally, work will be
done on developing a standardized infant visual attention screening test. This
test will subsequently be used in conjunction with neuroimaging techniques to
investigate directly the neural basis of visual attention during infancy.