* 9121525
* Third International Symposium on the History                of Particle Physics to be Held June 24-27, 1992 at the      Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1993
* Lillian Hoddeson, Universities Research Association Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 11/30/1993
* USD 20,000.00

An International Symposium on the History of Particle Physics is being held at
the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center from June 24- 27, 1992. This is the third
in a series of such gathering that began at the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory in 1980. A primary goal of these meetings is to identify principal
themes and critical problems, thereby laying the basis for future historical
studies of an important area of modern physics. Themes to be explored in this
symposium include the growth of large international scientific collaborations,
the transition from fixed- target to colliding beam modes of experimentation,
the unification of the weak and the electromagnetic forces, and the development
of the quark model of elementary particles. While concentrating on the "Rise of
the Standard Model" in particle physics, the symposium is not ignoring particle
physics outside of this mainstream--eg. papers are being given on the discovery
of CP-violation. By bringing together a group of prominent scientists together
with leading historians, sociologists and philosophers of science, the
organizers aim to promote interdisciplinary collaboration in writing the history
of recent science and to develop further the methodology of using personal
recollections of major contributors as a tool for historical research. The
proceedings of the symposium are being carefully edited, extensively referenced
and supplemented with an introduction that discusses the historical context in
which the development of the standard model occurred.