* 9121811
* The Molecular Kinetics of the Organometallic                Vapor-Phase Epitaxy of II-VI Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Robert Hicks, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 02/28/1997
* USD 239,000.00

The mechanism and kinetics of the deposition of cadmium telluride from the
decomposition of dimethylcadmium and diethyltellurium are determined.
Preliminary results indicate that deposition occurs by a catalytic reaction
consisting of the adsorption of the organometallic molecules on the alkyl
groups. In this study, the elementary kinetics of adsorption and decomposition
of dimethylcadmium and diethyl tellurium on (2x8) gallium arsenide (100) are
determined in ultrahigh vacuum. Internal-reflection infrared spectroscopy and
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy identify the adsorbed species and measure their
surface coverages. Temperature-programmed desorption is used to characterize the
decomposition kinetics. A kinetic parameters become available, they are
incorporated into mathematical models suitable for the design, optimization, and
control of organometallic vapor-phase epitaxy (OMVPE) reactors. This project
provides the fundamental data needed for process and reactor models of OMVPE,
and makes a start on developing these models. OMPVE is a very promising
technology for producing layered structures of compound semiconductors, which
form the active region of such electronic and photonic devices as high-speed
field-effect transistors, light-emitting diodes, solid-state lasers, infrared
detectors, and solar cells.