* 9121386
* Geomorphological Investigations in the Naco Valley, NW      Honduras
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1993
* Edward Schortman, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 45,016.00

With National Science Foundation (NSF) support, Drs. Edward Schortman, Patricia
Urban and their colleagues have conducted archaeological survey and excavation
in the Naco Valley in Honduras. This work has revealed the presence of a complex
prehistoric polity which flourished during the first millennium A.D. The central
site of La Sierra contains large numbers of both monumental platforms as well as
smaller constructions. The surrounding region also has many sites, all
significantly smaller than La Sierra itself. This suggests that La Sierra
represents the capital of a state level polity which encompasses the entire Naco
Valley and possibly extends beyond these physiographic limits. Between ca
950-1000 AD, a dramatic change took place in the Naco Valley. Population rapidly
declined and drastic settlement shifts occurred. Drs. Schortman and Urban wish
to understand the reasons for this and speculate that environmental change and
depletion may be the cause. They will thus collect data through geomorphological
investigation. They will reconstruct ancient patterns of land use, hydrology and
erosion. Field and laboratory studies will construct a geologic and soil map of
the region, assess the fertility and crops grown in ancient agricultural fields
and determine the extent and intensity of prehistoric hill slope erosion. The
research is important for several reasons. First, it will increase our
understanding of how complex societies develop, are maintained and eventually
collapse. The project will also provide data from a relatively unknown area and
these will be of interest to a large number of archaeologists. Finally, because
the research is based at an undergraduate institution and students will be taken
into the field, it will provide a first hand introduction to how science is
conducted and hopefully encourage these individuals to pursue careers in this
area.