* 9121968
* Jumping the Gun:  Intertemporal Instability in Two-Sided    Matching and Related Markets, Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Alvin Roth, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1995
* USD 242,575.00

This project involves parallel theoretical and empirical investigations into
the behavior of two sided matching markets, and related markets. It focuses on
the phenomenon of "jumping the gun," in which market transactions come earlier
and earlier, in response to competition, and resulting in various types of
market failure. Preliminary indications are that this may be a much more common
form of market failure than is generally recognized. The empirical part of the
investigation will focus on a number of other markets which appear to have
experienced this phenomenon. In this regard, some of the markets which present
promising targets for this investigation are labor markets in medicine (for
specialty positions), law (for associate positions in law partnerships and
clerkships in Federal courts in the U.S., and for "articling positions" in
Canada), dentistry (particularly oral surgery), clinical psychology (pre-
doctoral internships), the entry level market for new graduates of elite
Japanese universities, and the market for post-season college football bowls.
Preliminary indications are that most if not all of these markets have at some
point in their histories experienced similar market failures, and have in many
cases adopted specific institutional arrangements to deal with these failures.
One focus of the investigation will be to examine these market failures and the
institutional arrangements developed in response. Another focus will be the
degree and manner in which participants in these markets engage in strategic
behavior adapted to particular institutional arrangements. These issues also
raise new theoretical problems, which will be pursued.