* 9121931
* Electoral Cycles in Federal Government Prime Contract Awards
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1995
* Kenneth Mayer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/1995
* USD 74,216.00

This project is an investigation into the timing of federal government prime
contract awards, and has two main thrusts. First, it attempts to refine
knowledge of carefully timed economic expansions; scholars over the last decade
have suggested that governments may attempt to stimulate the economy in an
attempt to bolster the election prospects of incumbents (the Political Business
Cycle). Despite the plausibility of such cycles, attempts to find consistent
patterns have failed, largely because so few macroeconomic policies are easily
controlled by incumbents; as such, it is very difficult for them to orchestrate
economic expansions to coincide with elections. Prime contract awards, however,
are easily timed, and they also have immediate economic effects. A plausible
hypothesis that will be evaluated in this project, then, is that contract awards
will increase before elections. Second, the literature on Congressional-
bureaucratic relations is clear on the importance of executive branch officials
maintaining good relations with members of Congress, particularly those who have
influence over agency budgets. Carefully timed contract awards are likely to be
seen as an excellent way to maintain goodwill on the Hill, particularly since
contract timing strategies are legal, and easily implemented. Past work on
government grant programs has suggested that agencies time grant awards to
coincide with elections in the districts of influential legislators, this
project will extend that work to include prime contract awards which invlove
hundreds of billions of dollars annualy. The project will use monthly data on
contract awards for the twelve federal agencies most active in procurement
activity, with accurate data on the location of the recipient individuals of
firms; these data have rarely been subjected to rigorous analysis. For nearly
twety years, scholars have been lamenting the lack of such accurate data. The
objective is to determine whether contracts are in fact timed to coincide with
elections, and to identify who benefits from the practice. The project will show
more clearly patterns not only of the distribution of prime contracts, but also
patterns of timing. The results will extend our understanding of the Political-
Business Cycle phenomenon, as well as theories of congressional-agency
relations.