* 9121716
* RUI:  Acquisition of high speed centrifuges, a liquid       scintillation counter, and an automated sequence reader/    densitometer for isolation and characterization of macromole
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1992,05/31/1994
* Lehman Ellis, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 05/31/1994
* USD 54,863.00

This proposal requests $100,750 for acquisition of four major, multiuser
equipment items: two high speed centrifuges, a liquid scintillation counter, and
an automated sequence reader/scanning densitometer. The five research programs
that support this application encompass a diverse assortment of basic biological
research, including the areas of cell biology, evolutionary genetics, molecular
biology, molecular genetics, and microbial genetics. A primary objective of each
of these programs and many others within the Department of Biological Sciences
is isolation, purification, and characterization of protein and nucleic acid
fractions. The requested items are basic instrumental requirements for modern
techniques in cell and molecular biology that are used to achieve this
objective. As such, each of the five research programs rely heavily on the
instrumentation requested in this proposal. The research projects that support
this request involve undergraduate student research projects, M.S. thesis
topics, and faculty research efforts. The equipment will significantly enhance
the research, training, and instructional capabilities of the Department of
Biological Sciences. Most of the faculty and graduate students in the department
will require the instrumentation in their research. Undergraduate students
working under faculty supervision will receive training and research experience
with the equipment.