* 9121150
* The Family and Community Context of Adolescent Development
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1996
* Sally Powers, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Amber L. Story
* 01/31/1996
* USD 217,193.00

ABSTRACT This research will increase our understanding of longitudinal change in
adaptive and maladaptive development of adolescents and the relation of this
change to family behavior patterns. The relation between adolescent functioning
and family behaviors will be examined with a two-phase sampling design. The
first phase is an epidemiological survey of the relation between family
processes and adolescent functioning in a community population of adolescents
from nine working-class, rural towns in New England. The second phase selects
for intensive study a subsample of 100 families of adolescents chosen for their
representativeness of the larger community population. The adolescents in the
larger community sample and the families from the subsample will be studied at
two times points two years apart in order to examine longitudinal change. The
epidemiological survey phase tests hypotheses about the relation of family
factors to adolescent outcome in a large, well-defined population. The intensive
study of the representative subsample delineates specific family behavior
patterns that are associated with varying longitudinal trajectories of
adolescent adaptation. This intensive second phase uses methods of direct
observation of family behavior patterns as well as standardized questionnaires
and tests to assess all family members' functioning. This research will increase
our understanding of the relationship between adolescent functioning and family
behaviors.