* 9121271
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Engineering):  Effects of  Fuel Properties and Physical Factors on Engine Combustion   Processes
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Nicholas Cernansky, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 03/31/1996
* USD 24,860.00

There is a general need for a better understanding of the combustion processes
occurring in engine systems. In particular, the detailed physical and chemical
processes important in engine ignition, flame propagation, and knock need to be
clarified, and fuel property effects and interactions determined. In an effort
to address these needs, a joint research program between Tianjin University and
Drexel University was initiated in March 1989 under NSF sponsorship; Good
progress has been made on this program and will be continued under this award.
The work is being carried out by separating and individually studing the two
major types of processes occurring in engine systems, i.e., the chemical
processes and the physical processes. Drexel University is concentrating on the
chemical processes, while Tianjin University is concentrating on the physical
processes. This division of labor builds upon the strengths and programs at each
university and effectively leverages existing resources. The Drexel effort is
focusing on low and intermediate temperature oxidation of hydrocarbons using a
variety of laboratory systems, including static and flow reactor systems, to
isolate relevant chemical processes. The Tianjin effort is focusing on physical
factors, such as surface deposits, test transfer and fluid flow effects,
utilizing a variety of laboratory and engine test facilities. Coordination of
the individual research effort is leading to identification of important
interactions and incorporation of critical experiments for studying these
interactions. Successful completion of the research program will lead to a
better understanding of the important chemistry and physics in engine combustion
and autoignition processes, and consequently to improved engine performance.