* 9121325
* Development of an Optical Laser Trap for the Study of       Biological Media and Cellular Interactions (Resubmission of DIR-9102304)
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Gregory Sonek, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Michael K. Lamvik
* 06/30/1995
* USD 195,905.00

The technique of optical laser trapping is, potentially, a powerful tool for
studying fundamental interactions of light with biological media on a
microscopic scale. The ability to interprete, quantify, and predict the effects
of coherent radiation forces, will be key to its effective use and development
as an analytical tool in biomedical and surgical applications. Herein, we
describe the development of a single beam, infrared optical trapping system, and
its use, as a micromanipulation tool and a noncontact force transducer, in the
study of biological media and cellular interactions, The system, consisting of a
tunable laser source, a high resolution microforce transducer, forward
scattering detector, and data acquisition system, is to be used in the (1)
quantification of trap generated forces and thermal contributions to the
confinement process; and (2) basic study of red blood cell, chromosome, and
organelle micromanipulation behavior in a single beam optical potential. Other
potential applications for the optical trapping system to be developed herein
are also described. An artificially engineered organic liposome model is
presented as a way of determining, in a controlled fashion, the physical and
optical characteristics of cell and cell membrane samples, and their effect on
optical trapping performance. In addition, a light scattering model, and set of
experimental measurements, is to be used in the correlation of theoretical and
experimental results. This quantitative theory is applied, in one case, to the
cell biology study of transport mechanisms along microtubules. A working
knowledge of the physical parameters that are responsible for generating and
maintaining an optical trap, and their effect on host biological samples, should
be useful to both researchers and practitioners of optical trapping systems.