* 9121245
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Archaeo-Environmental Investigationsin Southern New England
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/1991,04/30/1993
* NONE NONE, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1993
* USD 10,280.00

Under the direction of Dr. Frank Hole, Ms Lucinda McWeeney will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation thesis. She will extract cores from archaeological and
geological sites to obtain macroflora - small preserved plant remains, and
analyze these as well as materials already in hand. All sites are located in
Southern New England and together span the time period from late in the last
glacial period, ca 14,000 years ago, to recent times. On this basis, it should
be possible to reconstruct vegetation response to the northward retreat of the
last glaciers as well as more recent climatic fluctuations. The results of this
reconstruction will be integrated with archaeological data to examine how Native
American populations at different periods of time responded to, and were
affected by climatic change. In particular, Ms McWeeney will examine three
specific issues. The first involves the earliest paleoindian hunters and
gatherers in North America. What were the environmental challenges which they
faced and what resources were available to these first human colonists in the
New World? Secondly, a major change in lifestyle took place in the late Archaic
period when settlement in New England shifted to riverine locations and a number
of new stone tool forms appeared in the archeological record. Archaeologists
don't know whether these changes are due to an influx of new peoples or
represent an in situ adaptation to a changing environment. Finally, in
comparison to other parts of North America, maize agriculture was adopted
relatively late in New England and it is unclear what role climatic limitations
may have played in this delayed spread. Ms McWeeney's research will help to
answer this question. This research is important for several reasons. While it
is clear that human populations are influenced by and may actively respond to
environmental change, the details of this interaction are not well understood.
Because of its long archaeological record and the presence, at different times,
of groups with varying levels of technical expertise, New England provides an
excellent context to examine this question. Much archaeological data exists but
the environmental context is not well established. Ms McWeeney's research will
help to remedy this. This work will also assist in the training of a very
promising young scientist.