* 9121180
* U.S.-New Zealand Joint Workshop on The Biology and MolecularBiology of Extreme Thermophiles; University of Waikato, NZ; May, 1992
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1994
* John Reeve, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 04/30/1994
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support the participation of nine U.S. scientists in a joint
workshop in the "Biology and Molecular Biology of Extreme Thermophiles" to be
held at the University of Waikato in Hamilton, New Zealand in May 1992. The
existance of extreme thermophiles, microorganisms which live and grow at
temperatures. above 70oC, challenges the understanding of the limitations of
biological systems. As sources of thermostable enzymes these microorganisms are
very important economically as natural resources. This workshop will allow both
academic and industry- based scientists from both New Zealand and the U.S. to
present and discuss the results of their most recent research. The meeting is
being co-organized by Dr. John N. Reeve from Ohio State University and Dr. Peter
L. Bergquist from the University of Auckland. The formal presentations will be
grouped into sessions focussed on the environment and ecology, enzymology and
physiology, molecular biology and commercial application of extreme
thermophiles. Emphasis will be placed on interactions and, hopefully, future
collaborations between researchers studying the natural habitats and in situ
microbiology of geothermal areas. There will be four days of presentations and
group discussions and a field-trip to the Rotorua Geothermal Region located 80
km from Hamilton.