* 9121137
* Frontal Brain Asymmetry, Emotion, and Self-regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Andrew Tomarken, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/29/1996
* USD 198,201.00

ABSTRACT For a number of years, there has been a wide-ranging interest in the
biological basis of personality and temperament. However, few reliable
biological markers of temperament have been identified. Recent research has
shown that resting electroencephalographic (EEG) asymmetry recorded from frontal
regions of the brain is a biological marker that predicts individual differences
in emotional reactivity and in emotional traits. This research has shown that
individuals characterized by relative activation of right hemisphere frontal
regions have an increased predisposition for negative affect and a decreased
predisposition for positive affect. The opposite pattern appears characteristic
of individuals with relative left frontal activation. However, the research has
left unclear precisely what predisposition are linked to frontal asymmetry. In
addition, prior work has not linked anterior asymmetry to known functions
mediated by the frontal lobes. On the basis of evidence concerning functions
mediated by the frontal lobes and evidence concerning affective traits that are
linked to anterior asymmetry, it is proposed that the critical predispositions
linked to frontal asymmetry are individual differences in cognitive and related
processes that serve to regulate or modulate emotional reactions or goal-
directed performance on tasks that elicit significant emotion. It is
hypothesized that relative left anterior activation promotes access to cognitive
processes that serve to amplify or sustain positive affect and to inhibit or
dampen negative affect. It is hypothesized that relative right anterior
activation is linked to the opposite pattern. To test these hypotheses, four
experiments will be conducted to assess the relation between resting frontal
asymmetry and: 1. various components of a "state" vs "action" orientation in
response to experimentally induced failure; 2. self-focused attentional
responses to success and failure; 3. selective memory for affectively toned
events; and 4. selective attention to affective stimuli. These studies will help
elucidate the critical predispositions linked to resting frontal asymmetry and
will have more general implications for models of the contribution of the
cerebral cortex to individual differences in emotion-related personality traits.
In addition, because few studies have assessed the relation between the
prefrontal cortex and the regulation of emotion, the present studies will
contribute to knowledge concerning the functions served by this clearly
important, yet largely uncharted, region of the brain.