* 9121534
* High Resolution Molecular Beam Spectroscopy and Model       Potential Energy Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1995
* John Muenter, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 06/30/1995
* USD 264,000.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor John Muenter of the University of Rochester will study weakly bound
van der Waals complexes using a number of spectroscopic methods with the intent
of exploring intermolecular potential energies. Included in the experiments are
molecular beam electric resonance studies of hyperfine and tunneling splittings,
infrared laser studies of new acetylene systems with extension to ethylene, and
pulsed laser studies to extend the determination of high resolution parameters
to excited electronic states of monomeric species. There is a theoretical
component which aims to extend and test Muenter's simple model for
intermolecular potentials by adding polarizability terms. %%% The forces between
individual molecules affect every aspect of chemistry, from gas phase kinetics
to in vivo biochemistry. In recent years, high resolution molecular beam
spectroscopy has studied intermolecular interactions by observing the structure
and properties of weakly bound cluster molecules. These species, made up of two
or more stable molecules held together by weak bonds, contain considerable
information about the forces and energies which govern the motions within the
complexes. This program combines a theoretical model for describing these forces
and energies with an experimental program which aims at gathering data to
validate and refine this model.