* 9121306
* Theoretical Study of Molecular Ions and Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Kenneth Jordan, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 07/31/1995
* USD 291,093.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division is
supporting a research project by Kenneth Jordan in which he is investigating the
properties of small ionized clusters. The work places special emphasis on
problems of charge localization in clusters, the characterization of temporary
anions of clusters, the interaction between weakly coupled chromophores, and the
computer simulation of cluster properties. Effort is divided between the
development and refinement of new techniques and use of the methods in
applications to chemically important systems. The sphere approach used for
stabilization calculations on temporary anions is being pursued and effort made
to improve the efficiency of the jump-walk/multiple histogram method for Monte
Carlo simulations. The latter is to be used to study "solid-liquid" melting
transitions in small water clusters. %%% Theoretical chemists have made great
progress in understanding and predicting the properties of matter in the gas
phase, but have much more difficulty with solids. One approach to the problem is
to examine small clusters of molecules in which the intermolecular forces
responsible for holding a solid together are manifested in a system with a
relatively small number of particles. This project is developing computational
methods for investigating such clusters, with special emphasis on electrically
charged clusters.