* 9121148
* Eye Movements and Vision
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Bahaa Saleh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1996
* USD 201,811.00

The human eye is never still; the eyes move even when a person gazes steadily
at an object. These involuntary movements of the eye are minuscule, and have
been extensively studied with respect to their size, frequency and how they
change according to the object being fixated. A useful method for studying these
eye movements is to render the retinal image steady in relation to the light
receptors--the stabilized image technique. After an initial period of clear
visibility, the image gradually fades and disappears, despite its constant
presence on the retina. Understanding how and why retinally stabilized images
disappear is important to clarifying how the visual system detects and adapts to
steady and moving images. The present research involves development of a
quantitative model of stabilized-image adaptation, relating these adaptation
processes to known theories of light adaptation. Three areas of research are
involved: The spatial aspects of the adaptation process are studied in detail;
the response of the adaptation process to uniform lights is measured; and the
use of colored stimuli should help determine the physiological location of the
adaptation process, itself. The development of a general model from this
research will provide a framework within which the effect of adaptation to any
spatio-temporal signal can be assessed, including those generated by normal
motions of the eye.