* 9121074
* Materials Research Group on Studies of Fundamental          Mechanisms of Film Growth Using Chemical Vapor Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1997
* Thomas Kuech, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* W. Lance Haworth
* 08/31/1997
* USD 2,796,000.00

This award is to establish a new Materials Research Group at the University of
Wisconsin at Madison. The topic of the research of this group is studies the
fundamental mechanisms in growth and the resulting microstructure of thin films
of semiconducting materials using chemical vapor deposition. The emphases of the
research include: understanding of the interaction of the gas phase with the
growing thin film through studies of the precursor gases and the gas phase
chemistry, quantitative microscopic characterization of the kinetic and
thermodynamic mechanisms involved in growth, ex- situ characterization of the
structural, optical, and electronic nature of the resulting films, theoretical
analysis and computational modeling of the gas phase chemistry and film
structure, feedback from characterization and theory to growth chemistry, design
of novel processing and materials on the basis of new understanding of the
growth process. The group is developing a chemical vapor deposition system
capable of growing electronic device-quality films, that also allows in-situ
monitoring of the growth process. The initial materials being studied are
silicon and silicon-germanium systems/multilayers. The later stages of the
research involves studies of group III nitrides, which are wide band-gap
semiconductors that show great promise for application in integrated electronic,
optical, and optoelectronic devices. Characterization techniques being used
include: photoreflectance, photoluminescence, reflection difference
spectroscopy, mass spectroscopy, reflection high energy electron diffraction,
scanning tunnelling microscopy, and low energy electron diffraction. Theoretical
techniques include Monte Carlo simulations, rate equation calculations, and
statistical mechanical methods. The strengths of the group are the balance of
the complementary expertise of the investigators and the facilities available
for this research. This research would not be possible without the collaboration
of the investigators working in an interactive and integrated mode.