* 9121183
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research on the Development of the Continental Crust in the Western Province of New Zealand
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1991,03/31/1993
* David Kimbrough, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 03/31/1993
* USD 4,280.00

This award will support a one-year collaborative project between Professor David
L. Kimbrough, Department of Geological Sciences, San Diego State University, and
Dr. Andrew J. Tulloch, New Zealand Geological Survey. The scientists will carry
out radiometric dating of crystalline basement rocks of New Zealand, with a view
toward obtaining more information about geological events in New Zealand
associated with the fragmentation of the Gondwana supercontinent, and, more
generally, contributing to a better understanding of continental crustal
evolution in the circum-Pacific region. The activity takes place under the
U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Science Program. The researchers will measure
uranium-lead (U-Pb) isotopic abundances in the mineral zircon, a common trace
constituent in the granitic rocks to be studied here. The zircon U-Pb method is
a reliable and widely applied technique for determining age relations of
geologic events. It is especially useful in studying the plutonic rocks of New
Zealand, where other isotope systems in these rocks may have been "reset" by
thermal and hydrothermal events subsequent to the initial crystallization of the
granite bodies. Facilities for carrying out U-Pb dating of minerals exist at San
Diego State University, though not in New Zealand, and so this aspect of the
ongoing cooperation between the scientists will be carried out during a research
visit by Dr. Tulloch to San Diego. Funds from this award will assist in
providing for necessary materials and supplies, as well as for undergraduate
student involvement in the research.