* 9121654
* Materials Research Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,08/31/1996
* John Silcox, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* W. Lance Haworth
* 08/31/1996
* USD 21,588,000.00

The Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at Cornell University supports
interactive and interdisciplinary research in four major thrust areas. It
provides a central focus for interdisciplinary materials research at Cornell.
Researchers in the polymers and polymer composites thrust are studying polymer
interfaces and thin films, nanoscale polymer composites, and the dynamics of
liquid crystalline polymers. The quantum phenomena thrust addresses the
influence of quantum effects on electron transport in mesoscale systems, phase
transitions, and fundamental excitations in condensed matter; researchers in
this area also share expertise in low temperature experimental techniques. The
surface structure and dynamics of a variety of materials are studied in the
surfaces and interfaces thrust. A new thrust on theory and modelling of
materials represents a concerted attempt to exploit major new computing
resources to advance materials research in the MRL and beyond. The MRL also
supports the development, operation and maintenance of major central facilities
for materials research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research,
supports a program to enhance the participation of minorities in materials
research, fosters research participation by undergraduates, and administers an
active industrial outreach program. The MRL currently supports the research
activities of about 53 faculty members, 6 postdoctoral research associates, 39
graduate students, 17 undergraduates and 12 technical and scientific staff
members: the MRL central facilities also support a substantial amount of
research that is funded directly from other sources. The Cornell MRL is directed
by Professor John Silcox.