* 9121222
* Ylide-Fluoroolefin Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Donald Burton, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 02/29/1996
* USD 395,400.00

Previous work on this project has demonstrated the self-oligomerization of
trifluoromethylcopper to form CF3(CF2)nCu(n=1 to 16). The use of 覺CF3Cu! as a
覺CF2! transfer agent with other perfluorinated organometallic reagents is
planned, and the generality and mechanism of the 覺CF2! insertion process will be
investigated. Alternative sources of 覺CF2! will be studied for use with less
reactive organometallic compounds. A broad study of alpha-halogen effects in
alpha-halo and alpha, alpha-dihaloperfluoro organometallic reagents and of the
scope of cumulene formation will be done. Complementary to this approach is the
synthesis and chemistry of perfluoro diene-ynes. As an adjunct of the
organometallic and phosphorus chemistry, a long range study will be made of the
preparation of perfluoro-polyenes and the study of unique chemistry of these
relatively unknown systems. The development of cis- and trans-difluoroethylene
synthons will be part of the synthetic methodology for F-polyenes. These will be
utilized as new synthons for the stereospecific preparation of
perfluorobutadiene derivatives. In the area of ylide chemistry, a practical
approach to functionalized fluoroolefin derivatives via an intramolecular
Wadsworth-Emmons reaction using ylide/acylation methodology developed earlier
will be undertaken. Related work with alkylated fluorinated ylides is planned as
a new and practical route to alpha-fluoromethylene ylides. Finally, the study of
new single electron transfer (SET) reactions will provide new or improved routes
to fluoromethylene and difluoromethyl functionalized derivatives of biological
interest. With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will support the
research of Dr. Donald J. Burton at the University of Iowa. The studies will
continue the development of new synthetic methodology for the introduction of
fluorine into organic molecules and the development of the ofttimes unique
chemistry that results. This may lead to new kinds of chemicals and materials
that should benefit research in biochemistry and medicine, as well as in the
chemical industry.