* 9121647
* Behavior Systems and Learning: Modules, Modes, and Temporal Integration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* William Timberlake, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1994
* USD 99,415.00

This research stems from an ecological approach to the study of basic learning
mechanisms, an approach based on the assumption that learning evolved and can be
profitably studied within a functioning system of behavior. Specifically, the
present experiments are designed to reveal the nature and number of the
mechanisms involved in spatial learning. Do spatial learning and search vary
with the type of cue used and the effects of reward? To what extent are there
differences between the sensory-motor mechanisms controlling efficient search
when rewards are used versus no rewards or different types of reward? The
answers will determine the importance of considering the specific system context
in analyzing spatial learning. The more general importance of this work involves
establishing examples of the extent to which learning can be profitably studied
within functioning systems of behavior (such as foraging for food, or seeking
safety) rather than based only on very general mechanisms. If systems of
behavior are important, it suggests that learning can be more effectively
produced and controlled by understanding the function it serves rather than
exhaustively analyzing the circumstances that produce it. In humans, the general
importance of learning in determining behavior is large and unquestioned. What
has not been so specifically dealt with is the extent to which learning follows
somewhat different rules and determinants related to specific functions. Even in
humans, learning about spatial locations and learning appropriate social
behaviors may depend on different stimuli, motivational states, and mechanisms.
The optimum conditions for promoting one sort of learning may well be different
from the conditions promoting the other.