* 9121629
* Testing of an Improved Cumulus Parameterization in the      NMC Global Model
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* David Randall, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 12/31/1994
* USD 133,000.00

Dr. Randall has developed a new cumulus cloud parameterization that has been
run in a research mode with the general circulation model at Colorado State
University. Early results with this parameterization are quite promising. Under
this award, the parameterization will be tested in an operational environment
using the National Meteorological Center's (NMC) global forecast model. Proper
representation of cumulus clouds in numerical models is essential for improving
weather prediction. Cumulus clouds are important in releasing latent heat which
drives the atmospheric circulation as well as playing a major role in the
development and evolution of thunderstorms and tropical cyclones. The new scheme
has many features which make it attractive for both practical and scientific
reasons. Unlike its predecessor, the Arakawa-Schubert parameterization, this
version allows penetrative cumulus clouds to form at any level in the model. It
also allows for the formation of shallow cumulus cloud convective downdrafts.
The new scheme thus brings the numerical model closer to what is observed in
nature. Computationally, the new scheme appears to be superior in terms of
simplicity and speed. Forecasts with the new scheme will be compared with those
made with NMC's current cumulus scheme. The principal investigator hopes to
demonstrate the robustness and model independence of his parameterization. This
project is being supported under the NSF-NMC Joint Program in Numerical Weather
Prediction.