* 9121254
* Mobility and Sedentism at Southwestern Pit Structure Sites
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Patricia Gilman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1995
* USD 63,046.00

Dr. Patricia Gilman will conduct one season of archaeological excavation in the
San Simon drainage, located in Southeastern Arizona. She will focus on the Pit
Structure period which dates from ca. AD 500-1050 and excavate a series of
habitation structures of varying size. Entire structures as well as immediate
surrounding areas will be completely opened to provide a full picture of
settlement pattern. A wide range of recovered materials will be analyzed to
determine chronology, subsistence practices and degree of mobility. An attempt
will also be made to determine the season when each site was occupied. The goal
of this project is to reconstruct the settlement and mobility pattern during the
Pit House period. For decades archaeologists have studied the large pit house
structures which give this period its name. These semi-buried houses have been
interpreted as "permanent" structures and taken to imply a settled way of life.
Dr. Gilman, however, has noted that in other regions of the world similar
structures are used on a seasonal basis and she hypothesizes that the same may
hold true in the U.S. Southwest. This position is supported by the observation
that smaller sites from the same time period are also found in the region and
these may represent a different part of a seasonal round. The planned
excavations and analyses are designed to test this possibility. In the
Southwestern United States archaeologists have traced the transformation of
prehistoric groups from small scale hunting and gathering societies to large
polities with year round settlements and centralized political organization.
However, the process which lead to this change is not well understood.
Increasing sedentism probably played a role, but just what is uncertain. This
research should help to resolve this question. It will also produce data of
interest to many archaeologists.