* 9121744
* GLOBEC: Physiological Status of Zooplankton: Utilizing PCR  to Rapidly Assess Species-Specific Enzyme Expression
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Lewis Incze, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/1995
* USD 92,513.00

This project offers a unique solution to the problems associated with
identifying, sorting and assessing the physiological status of zooplankton.
Molecular techniques will be developed that can rapidly identify and quantify
the level of expression of physiologically significant genes in the copepod,
Calanus finmarchicus. These techniques take advantage of the specificity and
sensitivity of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to quantitatively amplify
species-specific mRNAs that encode enzymes that regulate metabolic flux. In
order to design the necessary primers for PCR, the cDNAs that encode for the
enzymes, hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, phosphoglucose isomerase and citrate
synthetase will be cloned utilizing the phylogenetically conserved primary
sequences of these enzymes. Species-specific primers will be designed from these
cDNA sequences and used to quantitatively amplify each enzyme's mRNA only from
C. finmarchicus to ascertain the affect of environmental parameters on the level
of enzyme expression. Differences in the quantity of C. finmarchicus present in
a taxonomically complex assemblage of zooplankton will be normalized by
simultaneously measuring the specific concentration of a physiologically
invariant gene, such as actin. The results will be equivalent to enzyme per
weight of C. finmarchicus, a unit comparable to more traditional physiological
studies.