* 9121782
* Molecular Beam Studies of Spin-Orbit Effects and            Anisotropy in Penning Ionization
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Peter Siska, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 08/31/1995
* USD 298,800.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. Peter Siska of the University of Pittsburgh will study crossed molecular
beam reactions involving noble gas atoms with other atoms or diatomic molecules.
Specifically, Penning and associative ionization dynamics will be investigated
using Penning ionization electron spectroscopy (PIES). Also included are
theoretical studies of the scattering of metastable noble gases by atoms and
molecules on a state-specific level. %%% When an electronically excited atom A*
meets a molecule BC, the atom may lose its energy by a variety of pathways. In
some circumstances the loss of the atom's energy results in the ejection of an
electron from the intermediate molecular complex, leaving a positively charged
ion, which may be ABC+, BC+, or AB+. Such processes are known by the name
"Penning ionization" and have been used to elucidate the electronic or molecular
structure of large organic molecules, adsorbates on metal surfaces, and even
liquid surfaces. These applications are possible because Penning ionization is
sensitive to the spatial extent and shape of individual molecular orbitals, that
is, the molecule's electron clouds. In this project various reactions involving
Penning ionization will be examined in order to answer some basic questions
regarding the mechanism by which this process works.