* 9121751
* Modulation of Two Transient Potassium Currents in Mouse     Hippocampal Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1993
* Michael Barish, Beckman Research Institute City of Hope
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1993
* USD 20,000.00

The individuality of neurons is determined by the particular complement of
functional ion channels present in the neuronal membrane. Different neurons
express varying numbers of channels selective for sodium, calcium, potassium and
chloride ions, and as a consequence have specific patterns of responses to
incoming excitatory and inhibitory stimuli. In order to understand how the
individuality of neurons is established, a class of potassium currents whose
activity influences both the waveform of single action potentials and the
pattern of repetitive action potentials will be studied. Experiments will be
performed on cultured embryonic mouse hippocampal neurons, a standard
preparation for study of early neural development. It has been previously
observed that the expression in neurons of two variant forms of transient
potassium currents, termed A-current and D-current, is dependent on contact with
non-neuronal glial cells. Since A- and D-currents are involved in neuronal
electrogenesis, these observations raise the possibility that glial cells
modulate neuronal activity by influencing channel expression. To understand how
this process might occur, the precise molecular relationship between A- and
D-current channels should be clarified. In the present experiments differences
in gating and permeation behavior at the single channel level will be examined.
Future experiments will focus on issues of gene expression and post-
translational modification that may establish the differences between the ion
channels underlying A- and D-currents.