* 9121258
* Neurochemical Mediators of Appetite
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Pierre Deviche, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Koenig
* 09/30/1995
* USD 186,500.00

The neuroendocrine mechanisms that regulate the control of feeding is a
fundamentally important problem that is not well understood. It is known that
control of food consumption depends on complex interactions between several
types of neurochemicals, including neuropeptides and steroidal hormones. Based
on extensive neurobiological data, Dr. Deviche hypothesizes that opioids
interact with androgens within specific brain cells of the hypothalamus, an
important neural structure for regulatory behaviors. To test this theory, he
will use a combination of neuroanatomical, biochemical and behavioral
approaches. Experiments will identify the specific hypothalamic nuclei that
opioid peptides act to influence feeding, and where these peptides interact with
respect to testosterone, the major testicular androgen. Moreover, the unique
environment at the University of Alaska enables Dr. Deviche to utilize a
seasonally breeding, migratory avian species that undergo extreme seasonal
changes in testosterone as his model. He will establish the relationship between
density of CNS opioid receptors and variations within plasma concentrations of
this androgen. It is likely that these data could ultimately have significance
for our understanding of human eating disorders. For example, anorexia nervosa
is a life-threatening eating disorder for which there is some evidence for
opioid and endocrine dysfunctions.