* 9121914
* Functional Limit Theory in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* Donald Andrews, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1995
* USD 208,663.00

This project encompasses four distinct, but interrelated areas of research in
probabilistic functional limit theory. They are: (1) optimal tests of parameter
constancy, (2) median unbiased estimation and confidence interval construction
for nonstationary time series, (3) empirical process limit theory for dependent
non-identically distributed random variables, and (4) semiparametric econometric
methods. The results of this research will provide powerful, new tools for
applied economic analysis including research on the economics of global
environmental change. The proposed work on parameter constancy covers tests of
structural change with an unknown change point and tests of regime switching.
This part of the project is important because there currently are no
asymptotically optimal tests available for testing for parameter constancy when
the standard regularity conditions fail. The proposed research on median
unbiased estimation and confidence interval construction is significant because
current tests have low power. The new tools developed under this project can be
used to provide analysts more information for the types of time series problems
that are frequently encountered in empirical economics. The basic limit results
for dependent non-identically distributed random variables also have
applications in a wide variety of time series econometric problems. In the
fourth area of research the project develops tests for heteroskedasticity,
autocorrelation, asymptotic normality for semiparametric and nonparametric
estimators. Semiparametric estimators are widely used by economists because the
data for many economic problems do not fit the assumptions required for standard
parametric analysis and these new tests can be used for a very wide range of
semiparametric estimators. These methods are especially appropriate for the type
of forecasting and empirical analytical problems encountered in the economics of
global change because of the poor quality of the data, the uncertainty about
many of the underlying economic relationships, and the possibility of changes in
the structure of the economic system being studied.