* 9121456
* Quantitative Morphology Tutorials and Databases for Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1993,07/31/1997
* Robert Bolender, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9121456 Bolender This project will create, using information technologies, a new
infrastructure for quantitative morphology (QM) in the life sciences. It
includes: (1) software for tutorials, databases, and query tools, (2) files of
published data for 22 animal organs, and (3) facilities for electronic
submission of data. The significance of the project is that it makes the methods
and data of QM readily available to the community, organizes structural
information hierarchically, and provides new research tools. The new tutorial
supplies training in QM, which include morphometry, stereology, and
reconstruction, through use of detailed descriptions, worked examples,
calculation workscreens, simulations, and toolkits. It provides: (1) background
material for biologists and computer scientists wishing to use the QM databases
and (2) state-of-the-art tools for researchers interested in using these methods
in the laboratory. The databases include a tutorial, data entry forms, published
data and query tools. Reports allow end-users to standardize, recycle, and
create new data. A new representation of QM data, called the structural
phenotype, simplifies the task of searching for structural analogies and
generalizations across the literature. The project actively supports the use of
QM and contributes a structural component to Biomatrix. Furthermore the
investigator will begin to port his work to the workstation environment. This
proposal is being jointly supported by the Applications of Advanced Technology
program in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources as well as the
Computational Biology Activities program. *** Quantitative Morphology Tutorials
and Databases for Biology