* 9121660
* Studies of Plasma Structure in the Ionosphere Using         Scintillation and Tomographic Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1996
* Chao Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 10/31/1996
* USD 300,000.00

We propose to investigate the ionospheric plasma structures using two
techniques: tomographic technique and scintillation technique. Each is
summarized in the following. 1. Tomographic technique: Our simulation studies
over the past several years, as well as several studies by others, have
demonstrated the potential and capability of imaging ionospheric structures of
horizontal scales from tens of kilometers to hundreds of kilometers. We propose
to set up a network of stations to receive Doppler shifted signals from the
navigation satellites NNSS for the purpose of imaging the equatorial ionosphere
using the tomographic technique to learn about the dynamics of the equatorial
anomaly region. This project has associated tasks in repair and modification of
donated JMR geodetic TRANSIT receivers, development of a low-cost PC based data
acquisition system, development of receivers at selected field sites, data
management and processing, further development of computer algorithm, and data
interpretation. 2. Scintillation technique: This project is concerned with
analyzing already collected scintillation data at various sites of geophysical
interests. One station (Spitzbergen, 77.00oN, 15.55o, geomagnetic dip 73.43oN)
is a polar cusp station. The small structures observed by the scintillation
technique can be related to the presence of auroras, the configuration of the
interplanetary magnetic field, electromagnetic omissions, etc. In the Pacific-
Asia region data from a network of stations have been collected to analyze the
relation of scintillation with the traveling ionospheric disturbances. At
equator the scintillation data can be correlated with the radar data to
investigate the relation between ionospheric motions and the production of small
ionospheric structures.