* 9121856
* The Effects of Extra-Legal and Legal Sanctions on the       Prevalence of Criminal Offenses
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Harold Grasmick, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1994
* USD 91,720.00

BURSIK Deterrence research related to criminal behavior has focused
traditionally on the effectiveness of legal sanctions in the form of physical
and material deprivations. The research of Grasmick and Bursik is embedded in a
new line of inquiry that emphasizes the role of extra-legal factors in
controlling anti-social behavior. Theoretically, the study will contribute to
deterrence research by linking the moral dimension of controlling anti-social
behavior emphasized in sociology with the utilitarian paradigm of rational
actors, a notion drawn from the expected utility models associated with
economics. Their approach will expand the utilitarian paradigm by incorporating
personal moral beliefs and community standards in the calculation of expected
costs that rational actors weigh in assessing the utility of anti-social
behavior. Specifically, their proposal will make use of a cross-sectional survey
conducted in 1982 in Oklahoma City that is to be replicated in 1992. The survey
is designed to measure relationships between perceived certainties and
severities of shame, embarrassment and legal sanctions, and self-reports of
littering, tax cheating, drunk driving, assault, illegal gambling, and petty
theft. During the ten years since 1982, offense-specific legislation, social
movement activity, and appeals to conscience have occured at the national and
local levels, and are expected to have changed the levels of perceived threats
in the community. The merged dataset will be the basis for testing hypotheses
that changes in the perceived threats of shame and embarrassment might be more
powerful explanations of changes in offense prevalence than is change in
perceived threat of legal sanctions.