* 9121276
* Ruminative Thought
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Leonard Martin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 05/31/1996
* USD 242,559.00

ABSTRACT Unwanted, repetitive thoughts or rumination is a major symptom of a
number of psychological disorders, and may even instigate and maintain some
disorders, such as depression. Previous research on ruminative thinking has not
fully addressed such questions as: Where do such thoughts come from in the first
place? What motivates people to think at all? Why do they think about one thing
as opposed to another? Finally, why do people ever stop thinking about
something? These researchers have developed a theory that addresses three basic
questions about rumination: What starts it? What stops it? And what determines
its content? The theory suggests that the blockage of personal goals leads to
thought. The content of thought is determined by several factors including
individuals' beliefs about what is important in the situation and what they have
learned to associate with that situation. A series of theory guided experiments
and field study will explore: the role of goals in initiating and terminating
rumination; the role of people's own subjective theories about their goals in
determining the content of rumination; the role of goal non-attainment in
producing analytical, problem solving thinking as opposed to feeling centered
thinking; the relative effectiveness of blocked goals versus the environment
ininitiating very long-term (i.e., years) rumination. This research should yield
a better understanding of the factors involved in activating spontaneous
thoughts, determining their content, and reducing their power to intrude.