* 9121346
* Choice Behavior in Everyday Life:  Rules, Outcomes, and     Modifications
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Richard Nisbett, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 08/31/1995
* USD 230,257.00

ABSTRACT This research is intended to show support for several propositions
about choice behavior in everyday life. (1) There are individual differnces in
rules concerning choice, and these differences are associated with different
life outcomes. (2) The rules that are associated with preferable outcomes are
lay, intuitive versions of the normative cost-benefit rules of microeconomic
theory. (3) These lay versions of cost-benefit rules can be highly abstract, in
that they apply across an extremely broad range of content domains. (4) An
implication of the abstract, domain independent nature of cost-benefit rules is
that they can be taught quite effectively, with small amounts of instruction,
both as abstract rule systems and as rule systems in a particular domain that
will spontaneously generalize to other domains. (5) Therefore it should be
possible to teach cost- benefit rules in an efficient fashion and improve
people's life outcomes. This research program will also begin exploratory work
attempting to find out what problem-solving strategies and behaviors might
mediate between knowledge of cost-benefit rules and superior choice outcomes.
This work has implications for descriptive and normative theory as well as
practical implications. The major implication for descriptive theory would be
that highly abstract rules, at a level shown by the Principal Investigator and
his colleagues to mediate inference, also mediate choice behavior. The normative
contribution would be to add empirical data to the currently purely
mathematically-based assertion that cost-benefit rule use improves outcomes. The
major practical implication would be that it may turn out to be possible to
improve both personal and professional life outcomes with relatively small
amounts of instruction -- substantially less than characterizes a course in
microeconomics.