* 9121528
* U.S/Japan Joint Committee Meeting on Building Codes; U.S    China Research Protocol Meeting on Earthquake Engineering;  and Japan/China Symposium on EQ Eng Res, Nov. 1-14, 1991
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1992
* Robert Hanson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1992
* USD 4,250.00

This is an international travel grant to support the Principal Investigator's
participation in the "U.S.-Japan-China Trilateral Symposium on Earthquake
Engineering", scheduled for November 4-11, 1991 in Harbin, China, and also in
the U.S.-Japan Joint Committee Meeting on Seismic Codes scheduled for November
11-14, 1991 in Hawaii. The Trilateral Symposium is organized by the Institute of
Engineering Mechanics, China. It will be implemented under Annex III of the
U.S.-China Protocol on Cooperative Earthquake Studies, for which the Division of
Biological and Critical Systems at NSF is the implementing agency of the
American side. The Joint Committee Meeting is organized by Mr. Roland Sharpe of
the Applied Technology Council of California and Professor M. Ozaki of Chiba
University, Japan on behalf of the seismic building code communities in both
countries. The Principal Investigator has an outstanding track record of
successful research in earthquake engineering and hazard mitigation, and is an
invited speaker of the Symposium and an active member of the joint code
committee. The activity will advance the knowledge and technological basis for
design and construction of buildings against earthquakes and will stimulate
cooperative research in this important area.