* 9121917
* Experimental Studies of Surface Diffusion                   on Semiconductor Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1997
* Edmund Seebauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 02/28/1997
* USD 205,000.00

Surface diffusion on semiconductors is examined by direct imaging of adsorbate
concentration profiles using surface second harmonic generation (SHG). Work in
the antimony on germanium (111) system has demonstrated that the SHG method
avoids many of the problems associated with other methods, permits extraction of
the coverage dependence of the diffusivity without paramaterization, and allows
observation of the effects of ambient gas pressure on surface diffusion. The
present effort focusses on III-V adsorbates (including gallium arsenide) on
silicon and germanium. Activation energies and preexponential factors for
diffusion are measured as functions of surface concentration and of the density
and orientation of surface steps. The approach is also being extended to gaseous
adsorbates such as triethylgallium. The effects of various factors on diffusion
are examined; these include photon flux, electric fields directed parallel to
the surface, and ambient noble gases. Surface diffusion often has a primary role
in governing the rates of surface reactions, particularly for those involved in
the formation of thin films of semiconductors by chemical vapor deposition or
molecular beam epitaxy. Control of the process and of the quality of the product
are hampered by a lack of data on surface diffusion. This research produces an
efficient and general methodology for obtaining such information.