* 9121007
* Mathematical Sciences: 1992 AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar on      "Exploiting Symmetry in Applied and Numerical Analysis"
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1994
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1994
* USD 63,080.00

Symmetry plays an important role in nearly all branches of science. This is
particularly evident in theoretical physics, where representation theory has
long been a primary tool. Symmetry aspects have only recently been exploited in
certain branches of mathematics. In particular, symmetry has only begun to be
exploited in any systematic way in numerical analysis. In applied analysis, the
study of symmetry is much more well- developed. In the area of classical
differential equations, the understanding of symmetry groups as a central tool
has been realized since the last century. In the relatively more recent area of
bifurcation theory, symmetry has been exploited systematically only in recent
years. There is a growing collection of researchers in numerical analysis who
are currently attempting to use symmetry groups as a fundamental tool in their
work. This project will support the 1992 AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar in Applied
Mathematics to be held from July 26 - August 1, 1992 at Colorado State
University. The topic of this conference (the twenty-second in this series) is
Exploiting Symmetry in Applied and Numerical Analysis. The major aim of the
conference is to provide a wide-ranging survey of the exploitation of symmetry
in applied and numerical analysis. A purpose of the seminar is to stimulate
interaction between aspects of applied mathematics (e.g., partial differential
equations, integral equations, bifurcation), numerical mathematics (e.g.,
numerical linear algebra, boundary and finite element methods), core mathematics
(e.g., representation theory of groups), and classical physics (e.g., Taylor and
Benard problems). The seminar will have both an entry level summer school
component intended for junior researchers and a frontier research level aspect.