* 9121859
* Political Stability, Security of Tenure, and Natural Resource Conservation in Developing Countries
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1994
* Robert Deacon, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 03/31/1994
* USD 38,418.00

The purpose of this project is to investigate the general proposition that
stable political and legal institutions are key ingredients for the secure
property rights needed to induce investment in and conservation of natural
resource and environmental assets. The focus of attention will be on the way
tropical forests are used in developing countries and the primary goal is to
assess, empirically, the importance of stable political and legal institutions
to observed measures of the way these resources are used. This work will be
carried out first by developing a theoretical framework that relates insecurity
of tenure to the conservation incentives of private resource owners and public
resource managers. Empirical analysis, based on the theoretical framework, will
compare the principal hypothesis to two alternatives, that tropical
deforestation and similar phenomena are caused by the process of economic
growth, and that the primary cause of these outcomes is population pressure.
Principal data sources have been identified to provide the information needed
for the empirical work. These sources provide data of three types that are
needed to examine the hypothesis of interest: (1) indicators of tropical forest
and other natural resource use in developing countries; (2) measures of legal
and political conditions in these countries; (3) information on social and
economic conditions. Major effort will be directed to data collection and
exploratory econometric analysis.