* 9121938
* Learning and Interdependent Decision Making, Modeling       Farmers' Technology Adoption Decisions in Developing        Countries
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Timothy Besley, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 08/31/1994
* USD 124,368.00

The primary objective of this research project is to develop new methods for
studying the adoption of technological innovations of uncertain profitability.
The focus will be on situations where learning about the technology, either from
one's own past experience, or from the success of others, is significant. It is
important since externalities between adopters imply that diffusion occurs at
less than the socially optimal rate. Empirical analysis of such situations also
raises interesting methodological questions. The proposed study has three parts.
First, the interdependence of farmers' decisions will be given a theoretical
foundation. Incorporating learning, the decision problem for each farmer is a
dynamic programming problem and equilibrium adoption paths are found by applying
the appropriate apparatus. Second, econometric models reflecting strategic
interdependence in farmers' decisions must be developed. The path of adoption of
a new technology reflects dynamic discrete choice optimization. A simulated
methods of moments procedure will be used to estimate a dynamic system with
neighborhood effects. Finally, the theoretical and econometric models developed
will be tested using a ten year panel data set from the International Crops
Research Institute for the SEmi-Arid Tropics. The study will be of the adoption
of higher yielding varieties cotton in the semi- arid tropics of India.