* 9121398
* Orbitally-Induced Variations in the Diurnal Cycle of        Radiation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Randall Cerveny, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 08/31/1994
* USD 45,152.00

Interpretation of the climatic impact of variations in the earth's orbital
mechanisms has progressed in recent decades to the point where individual mid-
monthly caloric insolation totals are now available. Each refinement of these
insolation variations has produced new insights into the influence of the
earth's orbital mechanisms on the climate of the planet. This is important
because disagreement exists about the ability of the current Milankovitch
orbital theory of climatic change to explain conflicting signals found in
certain climate proxy records. The problems associated with this theory can be
evaluated and possibly resolved through further refinements in the orbital
influence down to the diurnal level. This study continues that process of
refinement by defining the variations in the diurnal (daily) cycle of specific
mid-monthly insolation totals by means of a computer simulation model. The
results should help to resolve past discrepancies in the paleoclimatic proxy
data record. By expanding previous Milankovitch insolation studies to the
diurnal scale, this project opens new avenues of investigation and suggests the
need for re-examination of previous studies of climatic change. In particular, a
more precise record can be established regarding the termination of glacial
periods, the occurrence of paleomonsoon events, and the fluctuations in sea-
level rise.