* 9121622
* A Litmus Test of Greenhouse Gas Policy Initiatives:         Electric Utilities
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Frank Gollop, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1994
* USD 140,685.00

The purpose of this research is to develop a comprehensive assessment of the
cost and effectiveness of competing greenhouse gas policy initiatives applied to
the electric power industry, an industry already targeted as a primary
participant in any solution to global warming. Existing studies typically focus
on the aggregate U.S or global economies and have a demand-side orientation,
evaluating how consumption patterns will change in response to regulation-
induced price changes. In contrast, this project implements an applied
macroeconomic model of firm behavior to assess how electric utilities would
respond to alternative policy initiatives. The model will be used to compare and
contrast the critical properties of various policy options such as a carbon-
content tax on fuels, a tax on the carbon-equivalent content of any emitted
greenhouse gas, a command reduction in emissions, and a command reduction with
allowed trading. The econometric model and micro data set designed for this
project will generate the following information for each policy imitative: the
expected reductions in carbon dioxide, nitrous oxides, overall carbon-equivalent
emissions, the marginal costs of reducing these emissions, the resulting impact
on prices of electricity, and the coincident effects on both sulfur dioxide and
ash emissions. This information can be used to rank competing policy tools in
terms of relative costs and effectiveness.