* 9121772
* Sex, Gender, and Values in Biological and Behavioral        Science
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Jeri Sechzer, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 12/31/1993
* USD 70,762.00

This project will investigate the extent of sex bias in selection of research
subjects in biological and behavioral research. For animal studies, scientific
journals will be surveyed and data coded to determine the number of single sex
studies, sex- comparative studies, observed sex differences and where
generalization of research findings occurred from single-sex studies to the
opposite sex of the same or other species without apparent justification. Then,
the extent of sex bias in clinical research with human subjects will be
documented through a similar survey of clinical research journals. This inquiry
will focus on four major disorders affecting men and women: AIDS/HIV infection,
concer, coronary heart disease, and depression. Once relevant human studies have
been identified, the investigators will look back to the animal experiments on
which the clinical tests and trials were based, to determine if sex differences
were studied or whether generalizations were made from single sex animal
studies. This investigation would identify the extent, nature, and
appropriateness of generalizing research findings from single sex studies and
ultimately stimulate awareness of the problems inherent in generalization and of
the need for rigorous sex-comparative research. The investigators and advisors
are well qualified; the project plan is good; the budget is very reasonable;
results are likely to have intellectual and practical significance. The proposal
is recommended for support with high priority.