* 9121776
* Quantile Regression, Smoothing, and Robust Inference
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Roger Koenker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1995
* USD 183,442.00

Classical statistical and econometric methods underpin almost all empirical and
some theoretical research in economics. But these methods are subject to
restrictive assumptions that often do not hold in real-world economic problems.
Applied estimates using classical statistical tools are sometimes very sensitive
to small changes in the assumptions about underlying economic relationships or
to a few "outlier" observations. Robust inference is a very active field of
research in statistics and econometrics that provides tools for applied economic
research that do not easily breakdown because they are relatively insensitive to
outlier observations or changes in assumptions. The contribution of this project
comes in three areas of robust inference: (1) conditional quantile methods for
parametric linear models, (2) nonparametric estimation of conditional quantile
functions, and (3) global versus local measures of robustness for statistical
procedures. This project extends work on regression rank-scores to a broad range
of new estimation and testing problems. Regression rank- scores defined from the
dual solution to the regression quantile problem provide a natural foundation
for rank based methods of estimation and inference for the linear model.
Applications to testing for heteroscedasticity and to time-series models are
proposed. A new method for forming confidence and prediction intervals for
quantile regression is introduced, and investigation of its efficacy is
proposed. Efficient computer algorithms for application of regression quantile
and regression rank-score methods are developed. Several approaches to
nonparametric estimation of conditional quantile functions are studied.
Computation is carried out within the linear programming framework of ordinary
regression quantiles; moreover the solution for various bandwidths can be
formulated as a parametric linear programming problem and is thus amenable to
efficient solution. Other approaches may be based on weighted regression
quantile estimates and provide a general kernel-based approach. Substantial
theoretical, methodological, and applied work concerning these approaches is
carried out. Further investigation of estimation and test breakdown is proposed.
The project develops versions of regression rank-score tests with improved
breakdown properties. The research investigates the general concept of
breakdown, its relationship with the tail behavior of estimation procedures, and
general methods of combining high efficiency with high breakdown robustness.