* 9121950
* The Policing of Developed Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1994
* David Bayley, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 02/28/1994
* USD 63,054.00

Police in the United States and other developed democracies are in a period of
unprecendented rethinking of their basic purposes and operational procedures.
The internationalization of policing is a major current phenomenon, as a
consequence of the growth of international crime problems and such developments
as European integration. Despite the fact that there is a general perception
among police professionals and observers that this is a watershed period in
policing, surprisingly little is known about patterns of resource allocation,
organization, and strategy. This is not only true on a comparative international
basis, but for individual countries as well. This grant will provide support for
the completion of a comparative international project on police operations in
five developed democracies. Specifically, Professor Bayley will compile data
from Great Britain, following the research design already followed in Japan,
Australia, Canada, and the United States; organize and analyze the data from the
five countries; and write a book-length manuscript on policing in developed
countries. Longitudinal and cross-sectional data will be collected on police
resources, personnel, dispositions, demands, workloads, and strategic plans in
three British forces as well as national data from the Home Office. As in the
other four countries, information will be collected about trends in allocations
for the past twenty years and about variations in allocations among different
social settings contemporaneously within each force. In addition, interviews
will be conducted with key operational and managerial personnel. This project
will produce the most extensive collection to date of information about the
character of contemporary police operations on a comparative basis. It will
increase our understanding of the ways that differences in environment and
organization of policing affect the work police do. As such, the study has
practical relevance to public policies about police organization and service
delivery. Also, the study will provide important theoretical insights into the
linkage between policing functions and the organizational, administrative, and
cultural milieu of police organizations. Finally, it will provide a basis for
examining other issues in law enforcement such as morals, attritions, police
values and attitudes, and the police subculture. Understanding these issues will
contribute to basic knowledge about individual rights and collective
responsibilites as well as the proper relationship between government and the
governed.