* 9121852
* Synthesis and Reactions of Strained Molecules and Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1992,04/30/1997
* Kenneth Shea, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 04/30/1997
* USD 565,300.00

This research will involve the synthesis of a number of organic molecules that
contain carbon-carbon double bonds severely twisted out of planarity. These
distortions produce profound changes in both the chemical and spectroscopic
properties of the double bond. The structure (x-ray crystallography), strain
energy (computational) and reactivity (kinetics) of these strained double bonds
will be examined in order to understand how mechanical distortions of the olefin
linkage are translated into chemical reactivity. The analysis will also include
distorted amides (quasi-double bonds), the results of which can provide insight
regarding the mechanism of activation of the peptide bond towards hydrolysis by
enzymes. The synthesis of new families of molecules containing the double bond
in novel topologies is also planned. These species will enable the evaluation of
the chemical response of the double bond to various torsions and out-of-plane
bendings, leading to the possibility of identifying alkene reaction manifolds
that may be particularly sensitive to specific molecular distortions. The third
component of this research utilizes high-energy, twisted alkenes as monomers for
the synthesis of strained polymers. The reactions employ metathesis catalysts to
achieve polymerization. New methodology is described to form these novel, high
energy materials. %%% With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will
support the research of Dr. Kenneth J. Shea at the University of California,
Irvine. The research explores the influence of structural deformation on the
reactivity of the carbon-carbon double bond and the amide group which may also
considered a quasi-double bond. Strained polymers will also be made from
strained monomers. This will generate new methodology and materials that should
benefit research in biochemistry, medicine, as well as in the chemical industry.