* 9121298
* Natural Casual Induction
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1994
* Patricia Cheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 03/31/1994
* USD 125,000.00

This research project is concerned about how ordinary people induce the causes
of events. There are two aspects to this question: The first is what is computed
in the covariational component of causal induction. Covariation, the difference
between the probability of an effect given the presence of a potential causal
feature and that probability given the absence of that feature, has generally
been regarded as a necessary although insufficient criterion of normative causal
induction. Contrary to prior research, recent work by Cheng and Novick has shown
that a single reliable mechanism probably underlies this essential component.
Uncertainty remains, however, regarding what exactly this component computes. In
particular, Rescorla and Wagner's associationist model, the dominant model in
animal conditioning, can account for many of the findings in human causal
induction. Project I involves three predictions that differentiate between
Rescorla and Wagner's model and Cheng and Novick's model, to be tested in three
experiments. This project may yield a unified account of the covariation
component in humans and animals. Project II aims at resolving a puzzling finding
about the type of information gathered to test a hypothesis and the type of
information used in evaluating a causal hypothesis. Recent evidence indicates
that in evaluating a causal hypothesis, people spontaneously make use of the
frequency of the effect in the absence of a potential cause. Research on the
gathering of information for hypothesis testing, however, indicates that people
do not search for this type of information. Project II will consist of three
experiments that address two issues. First, are people in fact able to obtain
indirectly and to use such information despite failing to directly gather it?
The revision of hypotheses is one way of obtaining such information indirectly.
Second, is there a dissociation between what people think they do in testing
causal hypotheses and what they in fact do? Project II may provide an
explanation of this puzzling finding and lead to the discovery of two distinct
types of causal reasoning.