* 9121700
* Mathematical Sciences: Thermal Effects in Fully-Coupled     Transient Models for Dynamics Quasi-Brittle Fracture
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/1992,10/31/1995
* Louis Brock, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1995
* USD 115,250.00

Experiments show that quasi-brittle fracture in solids under rapid (dynamic)
loading is accompanied by temperature increases. These increases are confined to
very small regions near the crack edge, yet are substantial enough to reduce the
solid's resistance to fracture. The study of this phenomenon must deal with the
mixed boundary/initial value problems and fracture criteria of fracture
mechanics and transient thermoelastic and small-scale yielding theories that
often couple otherwise hyperbolic and parabolic partial differential equations.
The research proposed here will conduct just such a study by obtaining
analytical solutions, asymptotic expressions and numerical results for these
problems. Two important variations -- the principle of second sound, which
allows thermal waves, and crystal defect (dislocation) motion near cracks -- are
also considered. The results obtained will shed new light on the critical
problem of rapid fracture in solids by considering the oft- neglected
temperature effect. The development of the equations and numerical results
necessary for this purpose will provide insights into combinations of equations
that are usually examined separately. Finally, the difficulties encountered in
the development process will lead to an enhanced capability to apply a variety
of analytical and computational solution techniques.