* 9121005
* Mathematical Sciences: A Research Quarter and Conference in Nonpositive Curvature and Geometric Group Theory; June 13-  16, 1992, Columbus, OH
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1993
* Ruth Charney, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 03/31/1993
* USD 15,000.00

A major theme of twentieth century mathematics has been the deep connections
between group theory and geometry and topology. This connection began with
Poincare's discovery of the notion of the fundamental group of a space. One of
the most interesting aspects of this connection is the relationship between
group theory and curvature in particular, nonpositive curvature. The 1980's saw
a new influx of ideas in this last area including the following: (1) work on
"word hyperbolic groups," that is, a class which contains all groups which can
act properly and cocompactly on negatively curved spaces, (2) the recognition of
the algorithmic character of such groups leading to the introduction of the
notion of "automatic groups," (3) the study of groups acting on trees and
R-trees, (4) work on polyhedra and orbihedra of nonpositive curvature and
applications to complexes of groups, and (5) the Novikov conjecture for word
hyperbolic groups and work on topological rigidity of nonpositively curved
manifolds. This project will support a research quarter in Nonpositive Curvature
and Geometric Group Theory to be held at the Ohio State University during the
Spring Quarter of 1992. The activity will include both long and short term
visitors, as well as a conference which will be held during the first week of
June 1992.