* 9121278
* Electromagnetic Studies of the Continents (EMSOC):          Trans-Hudson Orogen and Southeast Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1995
* Jean Filloux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/1995
* USD 500,000.00

Electrical conductivity, which depends on ionic fluids, metal or carbon content
and temperature, provides complementary information to properties determined
from seismic or potential field data. Our ability to image conductivity
structure has recently undergone a revolution. These projects involve high
resolution magnetotelluric (MT) profiling in the Trans-Hudson Orogen (THO) and
the southeast Appalachians (SEA). The common element in the two experiments is
illumination of processes in fossil zones of continental collision. The THO
experiment will coincide with an 850 channel COCORP seismic reflection line
across the Williston Basin and will be closely coordinated with the Canadian
Lithoprobe transect of the THO. Its targets include the largest known
conductivity anomaly in N. America, sutures between the orogen and adjacent
Archean provinces and possibly anomalous mantle under the orogen. It is expected
to provide a definitive demonstration of the resolving power of MT data in
nearly ideal conditions. The SEA experiment will take advantage of the fact that
the ocean edge can amplify MT response to certain structures. It is expected to
settle the controversy about the location of the Alleghanian suture, map the
sedimentary package under the thrust associated with this collision event,
provide important insight into the preservation of retrograde metamorphic
conditions in deep continental crust and estimate the volatile content in (and
the presence of partial melt beneath) very old oceanic lithosphere.