* 9121486
* Theoretical Investigation of Surface Reconstruction and     Relaxation Using Cluster Models
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1996
* John Head, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 01/31/1996
* USD 189,000.00

Professor John Head is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies of surface
relaxation and reconstruction using a newly developed cluster embedding
algorithm. Surface geometries are frequently modified relative to the bulk
properties by interaction with adsorbates. The proposed embedded cluster
calculations will treat clusters of a manageable size using standard Hartree
Fock techniques while taking edge effects into account by using an extended
basis set defined for the embedded cluster space. The equilibrium surface atom
positions will be determined by minimizing the embedded cluster energy, while
the computational effort of the minimization will be reduced by only evaluating
a subset of the cluster atom energy derivatives. %%% A number of important
commercial processes depend on the detailed interaction of molecular species
with surfaces. Examples include: intermetallic hydrogen storage, the initial
stages of oxidation of metal surfaces, and heterogeneous catalysis. All of these
processes can benefit substantially from a better theoretical understanding of
the interactions of molecular species with surfaces at the molecular level. The
techniques which will be developed by Professor Head will help to further
elucidate these interactions.