* 9121034
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Field-Petrologic-     Geochemical Study of Recent Volcanic Rocks Erupted Behind   the Andean Volcanic Arc
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1991,02/28/1994
* Frederick Frey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 02/28/1994
* USD 10,238.00

This award will support field collaboration between Frederick Frey of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and D. Delpino of the Servicio Geologico
Nacional in Argentina. The project aims to sample recent lavas erupted east of
the active Andean volcanic front from 35 degrees to 37 degrees S in Argentina,
in order to understand volcanism in the southern Andes and the pertinent
volcanic rocks erupted in Chile and Argentina. The fieldwork and sampling are
located in regions that have been mapped by Delpino and colleagues, but the
recent volcanic features have not been sampled for detailed geochemical studies.
There are two principal reasons for studying these lavas erupted 500-200 km east
of the active Andean volcanic front: (1) it is likely that the MgO-rich alkaline
basalts erupted in Argentina east of the front more directly reflect their
mantle source composition than the relatively evolved lavas which form the
stratovolcanoes on the front; (2) by studying lavas erupted at varying distances
across the strike of the front, researchers can define geochemical trends as a
function of distance from the Chile trench. With this information, they expect
to develop new constraints on the sources and processes involved in creating
this portion of the Andean volcanic arc. The U.S. side has geochemical
analytical and interpretive expertise in understanding the origin and evolution
of volcanic rocks. The Argentines have expertise in field volcanology and in
local geology and logistics.