* 9122958
* Dissertation Research:  The Pollination Ecology of          Calyptrogyne sarapiquensis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Robert Colwell, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1995
* USD 8,076.00

Floral display can vary between plants and animals of the same species, and this
variation can affect reproductive success. Displays may vary in their capacity
to attract pollinators, and in their attraction to destructive florivores. I
will examine how the variation in floral display affects visitation by
pollinators and florivores of Calyptorgyne sarapiquensis, a rain forest
understory palm. Although a number of flowers may well have evolved to maximize
long-term reproductive success, plants rarely set fruit from all of their female
flowers. Fruit set may be reduced by many factors, including lack of
pollination, predation of flowers, and lack of resources to develop fruit. In
the first field season I will examine the natural levels of variation in these
factors and relate them to amount of fruit set in the field. These correlative
data will be used to design manipulative experiments for the second field
season. These experiments will consider the interaction of factors determining
fruit set. Plants also achieve reproductive success by dispersing their pollen.
The distance over which pollen is moved influences key elements of the plant's
reproductive ecology, such as the number of prospective mates, the availability
of pollen for females, the size of the mating population and the area it covers.
I will examine pollen flow by tracing the movement of a pollen analog.