* 9122145
* Collaborative Research on Market Structure and the Nature   of Trade in Business Services
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Adrian Esparza, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 11/30/1994
* USD 37,962.00

The market structure of business services normally adheres to hierarchical
principles, but trade in business services exhibits far less regularity with
flows often extending from smaller to larger centers. This incongruity between
market structure and patterns of trade remains a critical obstacle to
understanding how business services function in the space economy. This project
investigates how the market structure of business services affects patterns of
trade within a system of cities. It develops a model of market structure and
market interaction for business services, and it uses the model to devise a
taxonomy of business services that identifies their relative locational
dependence. Survey data from a sample of 600 establishments are used to identify
the trade of ten different business services located in ten midwestern cities. A
spatial interaction model is calibrated with these data to model flows of trade
among business services within a hierarchy of urban places. This project shows
how the characteristics of business services shape market structure. The model
also distinguishes the exchange of services, occurring within a system of
cities, from the trade of services which occurs with centers outside of the city
system. With the increasing importance of business services in advanced
economies like that of the United States, this research should add important new
knowledge on how these services fit into the hierarchy of cities, and on how
trade among them circulates through the city system.