* 9122886
* Smoothing Bias and Other Issues in Semiparametric Estimation
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Thomas Stoker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 120,560.00

Many recent contributions to the econometrics literature have proposed and
analyzed "plug-in" semiparametric estimators. Such estimators replace unknown
density or regression functions by nonparametric estimators of those functions.
While theory states that these nonparametric estimators are "better" because
they are able to capture all nuances in the structure of econometric
relationships in large samples, this does not assure that they will always
produce better answers in either small or moderately sized samples. In
particular, since an infinite series expansion must always be truncated, or a
finite approximation region chosen for a local average estimator, there is the
real possibility that nonparametric estimators can contain systematic biases,
because of their construction. In other words, the remainder terms that modern
theorists easily show vanish in large samples could actually be large, and
systematic in onerous ways. This is a particularly dangerous possibility for
econometric results, since such semiparametric estimators could naturally be
interpreted as less biased than their more restricted parametric counterparts.
The contribution of this project comes from measuring the significance of the
biases in these estimators and developing ways of correcting for them. In
particular, this research will show how derivatives or elasticities computed
from local smoothing estimators display systematic downward bias. As such,
measured derivatives from kernel regression and kernel density estimators are
too small on average. The project demonstrates how large such bias will
typically be, and proves theoretically why such biases arise naturally.
Corrections for this bias are studied. This work involves both theoretical
development and computer simulation. The project also continues research on
average derivative estimation, a particular semiparametric approach. Questions
to be addressed include the calculation and implementation of optimal bandwidths
for average derivatives, as well as how to measure discrete variable
coefficients in index models.