* 9122718
* Experiments on Flow in the Earth's Core:  Effects of        Buoyancy, Rotation and Precession
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1991,04/30/1993
* Peter Olson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 04/30/1993
* USD 30,339.00

This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research proposal to conduct laboratory
fluid dynamical experiments on flow in the Earth's liquid outer core. The PIs
will investigate the combined effects of Earth's spin and precession on
buoyantly-driven flow in a fluid spheroid, whose shape approximates the shape of
the core- mantle boundary. The purpose is to determine the influence of unsteady
rotation on core motions, arising from the 23,000 yr luni- solar precession of
the mantle. In particular, the relative importance of buoyancy and precessional
effects in controlling the structure of fluid motions just below the core-mantle
boundary, where geomagnetic secular variations have been used to infer the
pattern fluid motion will be determined. The PIs will carry out a series of
experiments using a liquid-filled spheroidal cavity mounted on a
rotation/precession apparatus, with boundary temperature control. This is the
first time the effects of convection and precession have been investigated
simultaneously in a rotating fluid with the geometry of the Earth's core. They
intend to (1) determine the pattern of flow due to thermal buoyancy and due to
precession, and (2) measure the zonal flows, meridional flows and differential
rotation produced by precession and convection. The ultimate goal is to develop
a comprehensive experimental approach to the processes that underlay magnetic
field generation in the Earth's core.