* 9122191
* Land Rents, Productivity, and the Search for the            Agricultural Revolution
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Gregory Clark, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1995
* USD 85,850.00

The standard story of the emergence of the modern industrial world is that in
Britain between 1770 and 1850 there were two revolutions: the first and better
known, the Industrial Revolution; and the second, the Agricultural Revolution.
There remains, however, an unresolved dispute about the nature of the
Agricultural Revolution and its relationship to the Industrial Revolution.
Agriculture from 1700 to 1850 experienced important organizational changes with
the elimination of almost all common field villages and the decline of self-
contained peasant farms in favor of large "capitalist" farms which employed most
of the rural populations as wage laborers. Two interpretations -mainstream and
Marxist- share the perspective that the reorganization of agriculture from
small, peasant open field farms to large-scale, enclosed, capitalist farms was
the major source of productivity advance in Britain, and the reason why British
agricultural productivity far exceeded the rest of Europe. Where the views
differ is over the mechanism by which this reorganization increased productivity
and the effects it had on the peasantry. This research will help to settle this
long lasting dispute, and it will also provide useful insights into the process
of economic growth and development. Specifically, the purpose of this project is
to collect and analyze a large new set of data for English agriculture for the
period 1600 to 1850 which will contain observations on the market rental value
of agricultural land, the rate of return on capital, and rural wages. At least
21,000 observations on market land rents will be collected for the period 1600
to 1837. With this date set it will be possible to shed light on several
important questions about the Agricultural Revolution in England such as: When
did occur? How important was it to the Industrial Revolution? How important were
property rights changes during that period? What was the mechanism by which
yields and labor productivity increased? How important was the expulsion of
surplus labor from agriculture in creating the Industrial Revolution?