* 9122529
* Dynamic Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics Simulations of   Transport Catalytic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Katherine Shing, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1995
* USD 89,000.00

Systematic Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics simulation studies for diffusion
and sorption processes in pillared-clays will be conducted. Pillared clays are a
new class of catalytic material chemically similar to, but morphologically very
different from, zeolites. Zeolites have been the subject of extensive
experimental and theoretical studies while studies on the pillared clays are
primarily experimental. Compared to zeolites, pillared-clays have the advantage
of having more structural flexibility, that is, by changing the height, size and
distribution of the pillars the structure of the pillared-clay can be optimized
for particular reaction and/or separation applications. As a result, in order to
fully exploit this structural flexibility, it is important to understand the
fundamental thermodynamic and transport properties and their dependence on the
physicochemical characteristics of the pillared-clays, as well as those of the
molecular species diffusing through the porous medium. This work will
systematically examine the following: 1. Diffusion of 3-Dimensional molecules
through pillared- clay of various size, height and distribution of pillars. 2.
Diffusion with reversible and irreversible adsorption at low and high flow rates
(or densities). 3. The variation of diffusion and sorption with inter- molecular
and surface forces and with the shape, size and flexibility of the diffusing
molecules. 4. Comparison of Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics results to
establish the relationship between MC simulation time and MD time, if any. 5.
Studies of multicomponent diffusion in porous media and the evaluation of mutual
diffusivities.