* 9122337
* A Theoretical Treatment of Polymer Solutions and Polymer    Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Jane Lipson, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/1996
* USD 138,375.00

This research grant, funded by the Divisions of Materials Research and
Chemistry, is aimed at providing a description of polymer solutions and blends
which has a solid basis in statistical mechanics, yet is accessible to
experimentalists for understanding current results and designing future work.
The research involves developing a theoretical description of these systems
using integral equation techniques where the goal is to understand equilibrium
properties, especially those concerned with miscibility. Progress has already
been made using a lattice model to describe a binary incompressible mixture and
a compressible pure fluid. New research will be done in two areas: further
development of the lattice model and extension of this treatment to a continuum
model. The lattice model, which can be solved analytically, can be checked
against simulation results, almost all of which are done on lattice solutions.
The continuum model is closer to reality, but analytic solutions are not
possible. %%% Calculations will be done to describe the properties of liquid
polymers and their mixtures. The models will be based on statistical mechanics
results for liquids and complement other models describing these material
systems. The results will be important in interpreting experimental results and
for designing new materials.