* 9122705
* Managerial Opportunism, Solutions, and Strategies:  Evidencefrom Early Chartered Companies
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Ann Carlos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 09/30/1995
* USD 85,737.00

Coincidentally with the growth of European overseas trade in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries was the use of the chartered company as the preferred
means by which trade was carried out. These chartered companies were, for all
intent and purposes, multinational firms. The head office was located in Europe
and managers, factories, and trading sites were located around the world - in
Africa, Asia, Canada. Because these firms operated their branch plants with
salaried managers, the head offices were immediately faced with the question of
how to ensure that those managers worked for the company and not for themselves.
This is a problems which faces all modern multinational and multilocational
firms. In fact, it is the very immediacy of the issue that makes the study of
these far older companies important. These companies operated in a less complex
environment. Communications were slower and a separation between ownership and
control at the head office level did not exist. Thus, the links between owners
and strategies chosen are very clear, and it is possible to analyze which
strategies chosen to control managers were viable solutions and to examine what
circumstances allowed firms to choose those solutions. This information will
help us to better understand why some American firm structures are successful
while others not in different situations and time periods. Because chartered
companies were vertically integrated firms, they faced potentially serious
principal/agent problems. In fact, the secondary literature is almost unanimous
in its verdict that a company's agents were the company's worst enemies. Despite
such statements, little archival work has been done to examine the extent of
managerial opportunism. These companies may be old, but this does not
necessarily mean that they were unsophisticated in managerial practices. The
objective of this research is to study a range of early chartered companies and
to examine the strategies and solutions chosen by firms operating in different
external markets, but all with the same internal structure. The theoretical
literature on such problems and on game theory directs the focus of this project
towards employment contracts, bonding relations and monitoring strategies; all
of which help to ameliorate moral hazard and adverse selection amongst managers.