* 9122724
* The Money Management Industry: Its Structure and Effect     on Stock Prices
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Robert Vishny, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 160,392.00

Institutional investors now hold over half of US equities, and most of this
money is managed by professional money managers. Although progressively more of
that money is put into index funds -- a strategy suggested by standard finance
models -- the majority is still managed actively. That is, money managers
allocate money between stocks and bonds, and choose individual securities within
both groups. Despite the important role played by professional money managers in
financial markets, there has been relatively little research on money management
so far, particularly on institutional money management. This project studies the
behavior of institutional investors and the impact of their trading on stock
prices using three data sets. The first data set covers 769 pension funds and
gives their quarterly portfolio holdings over 1985-1989. The second data set
covers 37 very large money management firms and gives their daily trades during
1986-1988. The third data set covers 143 open end mutual funds and gives their
annual performance during 1965-1984. The project addresses empirically the
following broad questions: 1. How prevalent are particular types of investment
strategies among institutional money mangers? Are managers consistent over time
in following a particular strategy? 2. What is the nature of the agency
relationship between fund sponsors and managers, and how does it affect the
trading strategies of the funds? In particular what is the role of the trading
horizon, of the compensation arrangements, and of relative performance
evaluation? 3. How does excess demand by institutions affect stock prices? Do
institutions herd? Based on the strategies they follow and their herding
tendencies, are institutions likely to have a destabilizing influence on stock
prices in the sense of moving them away from fundamental values?