* 9122460
* Behavior of Fluids in Microporous Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1995
* USD 276,019.00

Porous materials, such as activated carbons, zedites, silicas and metal oxides,
are widely used in industry for purification, separation and chemical reaction
processes. The choice and design of these materials is empirical of present, and
the materials are not optimal. Classical methods for interpreting gas behavior
in porous solids rely on equations derived in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, and are inaccurate for small pores. The aim of this projects is to
provide more powerful methods based in molecular theory, for predicting adsorbed
fluid behavior. Modern statistical mechanical methods -- nonlocal density
functional theory, percolation theory, kinetic theory and molecular simulation
-- will be used to make a systematic study of the role of pore characteristics
(size, shape, interconnectedness, etc.) temperature, and intermolecular forces
(fluid-fluid and solid- fluid) on the adsorption isotherm, heat of adsorption,
solvation force, diffusion and selectivity for fluids and fluid mixtures in
model porous materials. Initially, Lennard- Jones fluids will be studied in
model materials with (a) independent pores of simple cylindrical or slit
geometry, and (b) nonuniform and networked pores, in which pore blocking can
occur. The range of independent variables, and the key features that yield each
of the observed classes and subclasses of isotherm, will be determined, and the
results will be arranged in a form that is easy to use by experimentalists
interested in characterizing porous materials. The theory will be developed as a
new means for determining pore-size distributions.