* 9122240
* Measuring Distortions From the Differential Tax Treatment ofCorporate and Noncorporate Income
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Roger Gordon, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 03/31/1995
* USD 199,965.00

The purpose of this project is to analyze the distortions arising from the
corporate income tax. In the past attention has been focused on the impact of
the corporate income tax on the rate of corporate investment, corporate debt
policy, and dividend policy. In contrast, this research focuses on the effects
of the tax on the organization structure of the firm, the type and composition
of labor compensation, and the location of borrowing by multinational firms.
This research is important because it will provide a better understanding
concerning the extent to which this tax might effect the performance of the U.S.
economy. The project consists of four empirical studies to measure distortions
arising from the differential taxation of corporate and noncorporate income. The
first study will use a panel data set of individual tax returns to examine tax
effects on individual investment in corporate and noncorporate firms. The second
study will use a panel data set of unemployment insurance records to measure the
effects of taxes on the composition of firm entrants and exits, the relative
growth rates of corporate and noncorporate firms, and the frequency of
reorganizations of existing firms. The third study will analyze the extent to
which corporate entrepreneurs have an incentive to identify their labor income
as corporate income in order to avoid personal taxation. IRS tax return data
will be used for this analysis. The fourth study will analyze an aspect of the
1984 Tax Reform Act which gave multinational firms an incentive to shift their
borrowing into foreign subsidiaries.