* 9122559
* Dissertation Research:  Intermittent Locomotion in the      Ghost Crab:  A Model for the Integration of Field and       Laboratory Studies of Locomotion
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* NONE NONE, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 07/31/1993
* USD 6,000.00

Recent advances in the study of locomotor performance allow us to integrate the
fields of behavior, physiology, and morphology to establish the relationship
between performance limits and natural locomotor activity. The ghost crab,
Ocypode quadrata, is particularly suited for such an integrative study.
Laboratory studies of ghost crab locomotion have led to specific predictions
about the speed and duration of natural movements. To test these predictions,
the coPI will observe ghost crab locomotion in the field. The coPI will
videotape crabs moving in their natural habitat and perform motion analysis to
determine the velocity, duration and frequency of their movements. The coPI will
test hypotheses about ghost crab locomotion predicted by continuous and
intermittent exercise physiology. The field data collected in this study will be
integrated with laboratory measurements of locomotor performance to determine
where ghost crabs operate within their performance limits in nature. Such
studies provide a basic understanding of the extent to which material conditions
of existence press organisms towards their physiological limits, and therefore a
basis for assessing effects of additional stresses due to environmental changes
caused by human activities.