* 9122566
* RUI: Nineteenth Century Farm Mortgages: A Data Collection   Project
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1995
* Kenneth Snowden, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 02/28/1995
* USD 100,097.00

Recent problems with the savings and loan industry are reminiscent of four other
American mortgage market crises between 1830 and 1940. Each episode was
accompanied by severe macroeconomic dislocation, and was intimately connected to
innovations or modifications of existing lending arrangements. This project is
designed to investigate one of these episodes, the mortgage boom of the 1800s
and the bust of the 1890s. Two innovations were introduced in the 1870s to
stimulate the flow of mortgage funds from the Northeast to the agricultural
frontier: western mortgage banks, and mortgage lending by eastern life insurance
companies. The volume of lending through both channels increased rapidly for two
decades. But nearly all of the western mortgage banks collapsed when the western
land boom ended in the early 1890s, while the mortgage investments of the life
insurance companies continued to perform satisfactorily. The goal of this
project is to explain why the performance of these two innovations was so
different. This research is important because it will provide a better
understanding of why institutional innovations in the mortgage market have been
so fragile throughout the history of American economic development. The most
appealing explanations for the failure of nineteenth century mortgage banks
emphasize that informational asymmetries are inherent in institutional mortgage
lending. However, these hypotheses have yet to be tested because information on
individual mortgage contracts is not easily attained. The data base to be
assembled will contain detailed information on more than 70,000 mortgages made
by the Aetna Life Insurance Company, and a Kansas mortgage bank (the J. B.
Watkins Company) in eight western states. These were two of the most important
institutional lenders operating in the western farm mortgage market between 1870
and 1900. These data will be used to examine whether differences in the design
of contracts and lending practices explain why institutions such as the Watkins
Company failed, while insurance companies were having little trouble with their
mortgage portfolios. Other scholars will also find this data set useful for
addressing a broad range of economic, social, and political issues connected to
nineteenth-century western farm settlement and mortgage making.