* 9122944
* Analysis of the Long Term Record of Arctic Airborne         Particle Composition
* O/D,OPP
* 05/01/1992,01/31/1996
* Philip Hopke, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 01/31/1996
* USD 283,158.00

This is a renewed investigation of the trace constituents in arctic aerosols,
using the Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis (INAA) technique. The
technique is extremely sensitive and powerful, capable of determining the
concentration of about forty elements, including many environmentally crucial
ones such as aluminum, zinc, arsenic and antimony that are present in very low
concentrations. As a first priority, this study will complete the analysis of
filtered samples obtained by the Atmospheric Environment Services of Canada on
Ellesmere Island since 1980, and secondarily will analyze samples obtained at
Mould Bay and Igloolik during the winter/spring transition. The occurrence of
arctic haze, the general term for aerosol concentrations in the lower
troposphere, reaches a seasonal maximum in late winter when it becomes
widespread through the arctic. The variation is the result both of seasonal
differences in the northward transport, and in the removal process through wet
and dry deposition. Multivariate factor analysis, potential source contribution
functions, and time series analyses, combined with air mass trajectories will
provide advective patterns that will refine our understanding of the transport
mechanism and atmospheric pathways from the source regions to the Canadian
Arctic, and allow the investigations of trends in the relative composition of
the arctic aerosol trace constituents.