* 9122828
* SIFT-Drift Studies of Gas Phase Ion-Molecule Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1992,06/30/1995
* Charles DePuy, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Richard A. Caldwell
* 06/30/1995
* USD 404,280.00

An investigation of the reactions of a variety of species in the gas phase will
be conducted. Reaction rates and product distributions will be analyzed as a
function of structure and electronic properties of the reactive species. The
proposed work will include studies of reactions between radicals and cations,
cation fragmentation processes which proceed by either concerted or non-
concerted paths, and processes involving doubly bonded phosphorous. By use of
flaming afterglow techniques, the kinetics of the reactions under investigation
will be determined by injecting reactive species into flowing streams of
transient gas phase molecules which themselves have been selected via the use of
a quadrupole mass filter. In addition to yielding critical thermodynamic
information about gas phase reactions, the investigation will be instrumental in
providing insight into naturally occuring processes in the atmosphere. %%% This
grant will provide funding for the continuing studies of gas phase reactions by
Dr. C. H. DePuy and Dr. V. M. Bierbaum at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
The investigation is designed to yield critical data concerning reactive
processes which are fundamental to a large number of important chemical
processes. In additional to generating rate and product distribution data, which
can be utilized by chemists to predict the occurence of new chemical reactions,
this investigation will also have a significant impact upon our general
understanding of reactions which take place in the earth's atmosphere: this
should provide direction for the development of chemical processes for
maintaining the integrity of the atmosphere and insuring a quality environment.