* 9122851
* Dissertation Research:  Ecology and Evolution of Aquatic    Sphagna:  Functional Morphology, Physiology and Phylogeny
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Norman Christensen, Jr., Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 11/30/1994
* USD 10,638.00

Large boundary layers and slow diffusion rates of dioxide in water can lead to
limitations in growth and photosynthesis of aquatic and saturated plants.
Although investigators have sought to characterize the physiological mechanisms
that facilitate carbon uptake in water, little work has focused on the role of
morphology in reducing boundary layer resistances in aquatic habitats. Species
in the moss genus Sphagnum exhibit morphological variation that preliminary
studies indicate is correlated with position along the water gradient. Thus, the
genus can be used as a model system to investigate the relationship among
morphology, boundary layer properties and physiological ecology. Also, because
the genus is taxonomically well studied phylogeny can be developed and modern
methods of comparative biology used to test hypotheses of adaptation. The major
goals of this proposed study are as follows: 1) to determine the extent that
morphology and habitat are correlated in Sphagnum; 2) to measure boundary layer
conductance for plants along the water gradient and describe its relationships
to morphology; 3) to demonstrate that differences in boundary layer conductance
lead to carbon limitations for non-aquatic Sphagnum at submerged CO2 levels; and
4) to test whether functional characters are adaptations using historical
evidence from a constructed phylogeny.