* 9122384
* Global Dimensions of Technological Change
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Joel Mokyr, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 05/31/1995
* USD 113,104.00

The purpose of this research is to analyze the technological implications of
globalization. Globalization is defined as a two pronged process moving toward
the creation of a world-wide integrated economy. This process consists of the
integration of factor and commodity markets and the international coordination
of economic policies necessitated by global environmental problems, the growing
need for product standards, and ever tighter macroeconomic linkages.
Globalization affects all stages of technological creativity-- initial
invention, survival, and diffusion. The over arching theme of this project is
extremely important because it focuses on the issue of how globalization might
affect the rate of invention, the diversity of new inventions, their likely
survival, and their diffusion. The research will first develop evolutionary
models of decreasing diversity that draw directly on the growing literature that
recognizes technological change as an evolutionary process. An historical
analysis of the relation between institutions and technological change suggests
that a certain level of inter- economy competitiveness is essential for the
preservation of technological creativity. The second part of the project will
analyze the history of technology after 1871 from this point of view. Third, the
project will focus on the political economy of technological progress by
describing and analyzing resistance to it, using both historical and simulation
techniques. This research is likely to suggest that a multitude of competitive
economies is the best guarantee against such resistance. How globalization might
affect this resistance will also be analyzed.