* 9122445
* Support for the Symposium on Geomorphic Systems; Oxford, Ohio; September 1992.
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1992
* William Renwick, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 12/31/1992
* USD 7,670.00

In recent decades, nonlinear dynamical systems theory, which includes such
approaches and techniques as chaos theory and the theory of dissipative
structures, has brought revolutionary advancements to physics, physical
chemistry and fluid dynamics. The broad applicability of nonlinear dynamical
systems theory makes it appropriate for the study of earth surface processes
such as turbulent flow. The increasingly complex nature of problems related to,
for example, global environmental change and the interconnectedness of
geomorphic and related phenomena demand a more systems oriented approach to
their study. Two major schools of thought on geomorphic systems are lodged in
North America and Europe, respectively. While North Americans emphasize more
contemporary processes, Europeans focus on longer term landscape evolution.
Debates of this nature usually take place at major international conferences.
The annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium is the foremost gathering of
scholars in Geomorphology, and in 1992 the Symposium will be organized around
the theme of geomorphic systems. This project allows five eminent
geomorphologists associated with the European perspective on geomorphic systems
to participate in the Binghamton Symposium. Their presence and their contributed
papers will provide the basis for a coordinated examination of the role of
dynamical systems theory in the study of surficial processes with the ultimate
objective of achieving a better understanding of physical landscape change on
the surface of the earth. The Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium has, for over
two decades, led the way in advancing the research frontier of geomorphological
studies. The geomorphic systems theme provides an opportunity to explore the
utility of nonlinear dynamical systems theory for the study of earth surface
processes and landforms. It should also examine the potential of geomorphic
systems studies for predicting the response of earth surface systems to large-
scale perturbations such as climate and sea- level change. The participation of
the five European experts will fertilize research in geomorphic systems by
bringing together geomorphologists from different traditions to discuss and
inform each other about the dynamic processes which produce the variety of
landscapes present on the earth. The symposium will investigate the utility of
chaos and bifurcation theory, dissipative structures, and hierarchy theory for
research on the behavior and evolution of specific geomorphic systems. It will
further explore the roles of spatial and temporal scale and scale-linkage
problems in geomorphology. This project provides a unique opportunity to bring
together scholars under the auspices of an established, distinguished symposium
format to discuss and debate the future direction of an important subdiscipline
within geography.