* 9122827
* Multiple Metal-Carbon Bonds, Metallacycles, and Catalytic   Reactions Involving Olefins and Acetylenes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1997
* Richard Schrock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 08/31/1997
* USD 1,197,500.00

With support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo- metallic Chemistry
Program, Professor Richard Schrock of MIT will continue his research on the
chemistry of compounds that contain metal-nitrogen and metal-carbon multiple
bonds with emphasis on their use as metathesis catalysts for function- alized
olefins. The metals of most interest are molybdenum and rhenium. Kinetic and
mechanistic studies to determine the effects of coordinated ligands on catalyst
activity will play a central role in the catalyst development. The chemistry of
recently discovered polyimido osmium complexes and compounds that contain
rhenium-rhenium double bonds will be explored as part of this project; in both
of these new classes of compounds the metal atoms have only two d-electrons.
Finally, studies directed toward the development of metal-carbon multiple bond
chemistry of ruthenium in the +6 oxidation state will be initiated. %%% Olefin
metathesis, which refers to pairwise scrambling of substituents in compounds
that contain carbon-carbon double bonds, is an extremely versatile reaction with
great tech- nological significance. The single biggest drawback to even greater
use of this reaction is the failure of known catalysts to promote the reaction
when there are groups other than hydrogen or alkyl attached to the carbon atoms
of the double bond. A primary objective of this project is to develop practical
catalysts for metathesis of such olefins. Other aspects of the work are directed
to the synthesis of new compounds with unusual structures and/or in which the
metal atoms have unusual oxidation states.