* 9122251
* Cryogenic Processing of Schottky Contacts to III-V          Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Wayne Anderson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 09/30/1996
* USD 241,249.00

High barrier height, low leakage current Schottky contacts to III-V
semiconductors are important for application to field effect transistors,
optical sensors and photovoltaic converters. Schottky contacts to III-V
semiconductors will be cryogenically processed (CP) to greatly increase barrier
height and reduce leakage current. Specific semiconductor materials will include
n-type InP, GaAs, InAlAs and IngaAs. Diodes will be fabricated with the
substrate cooled to 77K, a process which already has given promising results in
the form of increased barrier height, to 0.96 eV in n-InP, and reduced leakage
current by several orders of magnitude. The metals Al, Cu, Au, Pd and Pt will be
utilized to show unpinning of the Fermi level. An important aspect of the study
involves understanding the reason for CP contacts to give such improved
performance. Electrical and optical data will be correlated with high resolution
structural and chemical data. Electrical and optical data will include current-
voltage-temperature to reveal conduction mechanisms, deep level transient
spectroscopy, photoreflectance spectroscopy, photoreflectance spectroscopy, and
Raman spectroscopy. High resolution transmission electron microscopy and
chemical analysis will be correlated with other data. A later focus will be made
to apply the CP technique to quantum well and superlattice structures, where
extremely sharp interfaces are of great importance.