* 9122189
* Existence Values and Option Prices for Environmental Public Goods: Laboratory Investigations
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* David Brookshire, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 09/30/1994
* USD 43,237.00

Environmental resources such as wilderness areas, plant or animal species, and
visibility are public goods yielding benefits which may be broadly classified as
use and non-use. For example, in the case of a remote wilderness area some
people intend to visit it, and they will enjoy a use benefit. Others are not
certain they will ever visit the area, but nonetheless wish to keep that option
open. Still others derive a benefit from simply knowing the wilderness area
exists. These option and existence values represent categories of non-use
values. The Grand Canyon is a good example of a resource which gives rise to all
three categories of values. The sum of the use, option, and existence values
represents the total value of the environmental amenity. It is important to
identify the individual components, not only the total value of these amenities.
Such identification is important to ensuring consistency of measurement as well
as to address questions of the appropriate means to fund the provision,
protection and preservation of these amenities. It is fairly well understood how
to properly measure the benefit to direct users (use value). However, there is
much less agreement concerning the measurement of non-use (option and existence)
values. The purpose of this project is to conduct a series of laboratory
experiments designed to measure these three benefit components associated with
environmental amenities. The study will provide estimates of the bounds on the
values arising from existence and option component of total value. This research
is important because increasing stress on the natural environment is causing
public policy to focus on issues associated with the preservation environmental
assets. Further, the courts have seen fit to include non-use values in
environmental damage cases. Thus, there is a need to develop methods for
accurate measurement of non-use values.