* 9122294
* Computation and Operational Properties of Nonparametric     Shape-Restricted Estimators
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Rosa Matzkin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1995
* USD 102,143.00

Estimation and testing methods that require parametric assumptions about the
functions in the models being studied have the important drawback that they may
yield erroneous results when the parametric restrictions imposed are incorrect.
Recently, several estimation and testing techniques have been developed that,
instead of specifying parametric structures, specify nonparametric restrictions
about the functions in the models. Typical restrictions used are concavity,
monotonicity, and homogenity of degree one, which are properties that economic
theory often implies about the shape of utility, production, profit, and cost
functions. Using presently available algorithms to estimate and test
nonparametric functions that satisfy shape restrictions requires more computer
memory and CPU time than is available to most researchers. The major
contribution of this project comes from developing algorithms for nonparametric
estimating and testing that are within most applied researchers' reach. This
project develops an algorithm that will make it possible (1) to estimate
utility, production, profit, and cost functions, without imposing any parametric
structure on these functions, and (2) to test whether imperfect data are
consistent with a particular economic hypothesis, such as a minimization or
maximization hypothesis. More generally, the new algorithm will allow estimation
of nonparametric shape-restricted functions and tests of the hypothesis that a
regression function belongs to a particular family of nonparametric functions.
The algorithm will be used with actual and simulated data to study the
operational properties of nonparametric methods, to compare the performance of
nonparametric methods with that of their parametric counterparts, and to uncover
features of estimated functions that could not have been discovered previously
using parametric methods.