* 9122471
* Television Advertising in Political Campaigns: A Study of   the 1992 California Senate Races
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Shanto Iyengar, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1995
* USD 98,993.00

Despite the huge amounts of resources invested in campaign advertising, little
reliable evidence exists concerning the independent effects of advertising on
electoral outcomes. This project applies a multi-method strategy to assess the
impact of televised campaign advertising on the 1992 California Senate
elections. Through the use of realistic "field experiments," the investigators
assess the effects of particular campaign ads and particular pairing of ads. In
these experiments, a representative cross- section of the Southern California
electorate will be shown ads aired by the various senatorial candidates.
Following exposure to the ads, experimental participants are asked a variety of
questions concerning their political beliefs and preferences. This method
permits estimation of the effectiveness of particular ads and particular
advertising strategies on the behavior of individual voters. The experimental
results are replicated using statewide polling data, an exhaustive analysis of
every campaign ad aired by the field of candidates and interviews with campaign
managers. Trends in voter preference, for instance, will be tracked across the
course of the campaign in relation to the amount of televised advertising used
by particular candidates as well as the content of advertising. In addition,
following the election, the managers of each campaign will be interviewed so as
to ascertain their advertising "game plan." The major areas of investigation
concern the effects of broadcast advertising on voter turnout and voter choice.
How does political advertising affect individuals' interest and desire to
participate in the political process? Of particular importance is the impact of
attack advertising on voter participation. Other areas under investigation
include the relative effectiveness of "issue" versus "image" ads as a means of
stimulating voter interest and formation. The investigators also assess the
effects of advertising on candidate choice. Some of the important questions here
include the differential importance of advertising in primary and general
election campaigns, whether ads work differently among different groups of
voters, and the degree to which the persuasive effects of ads are conditioned by
patterns of news media coverage. This research will provide rigorous evidence
concerning the effects of campaign advertising strategy on electoral outcomes in
addition to the long-term impact of advertising on the democratic process.