* 9122398
* Reactions to Evidential Structures Using the Belief Calculusin a Legal Context
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Shawn Curley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 01/31/1994
* USD 50,400.00

Belief functions are an alternative to probabilities for representing the
degree to which we believe in various hypotheses, highlighting different aspects
of subjects' uses of evidence. In particular, belief functions have potential
for situations in which the assessor is interested in judging the degree of
support or justification that the evidence affords the hypotheses. Legal
situations (where the aim is to remove doubt, not to determine truth) are
studied in this project. there has been little empirical research in the use of
belief functions. Thus, the overarching goal is to examine their use as a
representational system. This project examines subjects' belief functions and
assessments of perceived evidential conflict in response to a systematic series
of evidence sets, each set containing one to three pieces of evidence. The
evidence is framed within a hypothetical, but realistic, legal setting. The sets
will vary in complexity in terms of their degree of conflict and in terms of the
number of target sets of hypotheses that are implicated. The study will inform
the application of belief functions as a communication language, the
applicability and meaningfulness of such functions in a legal setting, and our
understanding of individuals' responses to evidential complexity.