* 9122508
* The Impact of Simulation Models on Group Decision Support   Systems Outcomes
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Ilze Zigurs, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Les Gasser
* 12/31/1995
* USD 286,611.00

IRI-9122508 Lewis, Clayton; Zigura, Ilze and Reitsma, Rene University of
Colorado, Boulder $69,412 - 12 mos. Model-based Group Decision Support: The
Impact of Shared Simulation Models and Tailorable Information Viewing on Group
Decision Making Outcomes and Processes This is the third year funding of a
three-year continuing award. Simulation models can be useful decision aids for
many kinds of problems, and have been incorporated into Decision Support Systems
for single users. But many important problems require group decision making, and
effective ways of making simulation models available to groups need to be
developed. This research evaluates the usefulness of computer simulation models
in group policy negotiations, using laboratory and real-world tasks in the
domain of river basin management. It compares five different modes of model
access during negotiations, ranging from no access at all to free access
controlled by the group of negotiators as a whole. Since different negotiators
in a group typically have interests in different aspects of a policy decision
this research explores the usefulness of permitting negotiators to create
tailored views of model results, so that they can quickly evaluate the impact of
a policy alternative on their particular interests. Tailored views may exclude
unimportant data and may compute and present useful transformations of raw model
results. The results of the proposed studies should be of direct value in
exploiting advances in computer simulation technology and user interface design
in support of group policy negotiations.