* 9122058
* Reconstructing the late-Holocene hurricane climate of the   northern Gulf of Mexico coast
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1994
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 04/30/1994
* USD 97,879.00

For centuries, hurricanes have been an important factor in the climate of the
Gulf Coast region of the United States, and they play a major role in causing
coastal landform changes, as ecological agents, and as hazards to life and
property. Hurricane activity in the Gulf of Mexico region may be linked to El
Nino-Southern Oscillation events and to sub-Saharan droughts. The short length
of the documentary hurricane record together with the rarity of severe, category
4 and 5, hurricanes make it impossible to estimate the long-term frequency of
such events. Reconstruction of the prehistoric record of hurricanes and the
deciphering of long-term changes in hurricane activity depends on proxy data
which can be obtained from coastal lake sediments. This project seeks to
demonstrate that coastal lake sediments preserve a stratigraphically and
chronologically distinct record of major hurricane strikes in the form of sand
layers. The proxy for a number of sites will be correlated to identify temporal
and spatial variations in hurricane activity in the northern Gulf of Mexico
region, and these will be related to global events such as El Nino and sub-
Saharan droughts. This study promises to yield a comprehensive history of the
late-Holocene hurricane climate for the northern Gulf of Mexico region by
extending previous research from a single site to lakes and marshes across the
entire region. In this way, the documentary record of hurricanes can be extended
back several millennia, and the frequency of occurrence of severe hurricanes can
be estimated. The research will employ radiometric dating of lake sediment cores
to identify hurricane events and to establish a regional climatic signal. This
information will permit a comparison with other late-Holocene climatic changes
from other parts of the world to further an understanding of global processes
and regional linkages in the interdisciplinary study of global change.