* 9122344
* Nonlinearity and Nonergodicity in Finance and Economics:    Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* William Brock, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1995
* USD 182,532.00

This grant continues NSF support of a project to integrate methods of chaos
theory and nonlinear dynamics now used in the natural and physical sciences with
econometrics. The project does this in a way that develops useful new tools for
macroeconomics and finance. The strategy for building tools is to stay close to
the realities of actual data, actual econometric practice, and the specific
economic applications-- giving up abstract generality in the process. The major
part of this grant is concerned with continuing the development of a methodology
for determining the structure of heterogeneous agent asset pricing models. This
methodology would be used to test for the relative significance of psychological
noise trading versus information-based behavior in financial markets. More
specifically, the project finds sufficient conditions so that a combination of
the "cross-sectional" ergodic theorem and/or the central limit theorem for
weakly dependent processes coupled with "smart money" traders playing the noise
traders does not wipe out the effect of noise traders in equilibrium. The
purpose of this line of research is to develop a rigorous theoretical
explanation of abrupt changes in financial markets such as stock market crashes.
In order to empirically test this theory, the GARCH/EGARCH class of estimators
are modified in order to improve consistency with financial data as measured by
trading profits tests including both fundamental and technical strategies. The
information set is enlarged to include volume, dividend/earnings, interest
rates, psychological and sociological variables. The project also completes work
begun under the previous NSF grant on the development of general tests for
nonlinearity and the comparison of the size and power characteristics of these
tests with other nonlinearity tests. Special attention is paid to moment
condition requirements and the goal of a test for chaos where size equals power.