* 9122009
* A Conference on Intellectual Property Rights and Indigenous Knowledge, October 5-10, 1993
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Stephen Brush, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1994
* USD 50,194.00

Indigenous people control significant amounts of biological diversity and
knowledge about that biodiversity. They are important sources of knowledge and
resources. Deforestration and genetic erosion threaten these sources. While
industrial countries have implemented intellectual property protection through
legislation and regulation, these formulas are not easily extended to indigenous
knowledge. This scholarly conference on the relations between intellectual
property and indigenous knowledge will bring together both advocates and
disinterested specialists to discuss topics covering the nature of intellectual
property regimes and indigenous knowledge, the benefits and drawbacks of
extending intellectual property, the interests involved, and alternative
approaches to protecting the rights, knowledge, and biological resources of
indigenous peoples. Thorough discussion of these themes requires participation
from specialists on national and international policies and administration of
biological resources, indigenous groups and advocates, users of biological
resources, legal scholars familiar with indigenous rights issues and
intellectual property, and ethnobotonists. The primary criteria in selecting
participants are their familiarity with the issues and the expectation that they
will contribute a significant scholarly paper on their topic. Papers
commissioned from each of the 25 or so conference participants will be presented
and circulated two months prior to the conference. After each presentation at
the conference, two pre-assigned discussants will respond prior to open
discussion. The six days will include three days of presentations and
discussions, and two days for work group preparations of summary reports on the
conference themes. One day will be devoted to a final plenary session and
conference closure. Results will include scholarly publications and reports in
the newsletters and journals of appropriate professional, scientific and
stakeholder organizations.