* 9122823
* Dissertation Research:  Evolution of the Lizard Family      Phrynosomatidae as Inferred from Nuclear and Mitochondrial  Ribosomal DNA Sequences
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1994
* USD 12,000.00

Using the polymerase chain reaction, portions of nuclear and mitochondrial
ribosomal RNA genes will be sequenced from 41 phrynosomatid species. The
sequence data will be combined with data sets based on more traditional
characters, and the expanded data set used to infer the phylogenetic
relationships among the 10 genera. Also, from the large number of species of
Sceloporus that will be examined, the monophyly of this diverse genus will be
tested and the relationships among the Sceloporus species groups will be
determined. Once a hypothesis of phyrnosomatid relationships is obtained,
questions pertaining to the evolution of various morphological, karyological,
and behavioral phenotypes will be addressed. The status of the morphological
characters used in phylogenetic analyses will be reinterpreted and the extent of
homoplasy assessed. Inferences will be made as to whether similar behavioral
repertoires are the result of common ancestry or convergent evolution. From the
molecular phylogeny a better assessment of the mode and pattern of phrynosomatid
karyotypic evolution will be gained. The extent of centric fusion and fission
within Sceloporus will determined and the homology of particular karyotypes will
be tested. Finally, the sequence data generated will contribute to the growing
sequence database for ribosomal RNA genes, allowing better models for the
evolution of these genes to be formulated.