* 9122630
* Further International Comparisons of Product and Prices in  the Continuing Development of a World-Wide System of Real   National Accounts
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Robert Summers, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1994
* USD 235,384.00

This project is a continuation of work on the development of a world-wide system
of national accounts. The present system by sponsored by the United Nations is
the major source of standardized empirical information about prices and
quantities of the economies of nearly all free standing political subdivisions
of the world. This system of accounts is invaluable for most kinds of analysis
of individual economies, intertemporally and at a given point in time, but by
itself does not provide a basis for comparisons across counties. The major
products of this project are two data sets which are directed at making up for
this deficiency. The first of these is a very large table, "The Penn World
Table," which up to now has been presented in five successive versions. The
second data set consists of finely detailed and integrated bench mark estimates
of price parities and quantities for 35 summary categories of goods and services
for about 60 countries for the years 1970, 1975, 1980, and 1985. This project
will update the "Penn World Table", by expanding its county coverage, and
filling in data gaps. In addition, it will develop estimates of new variables
for each country. The new variables are of two types: price parities and outputs
of disaggregated components of gross domestic product and new estimates of
purchasing power parities for the production of outputs by industry. In
addition, the bench mark studies of the United Nations International Comparison
Program will be reworked on a data archive of a common vintage and based on a
common methodology. These updated and expanded data sets are important because
they provide the basic information needed for research aimed at better
understanding international trade and economic development issues.