* 9122541
* The Virtual Design Team:  Simulating Decision-MakIng and   Information Flow in Concurrent, MultidisCiplinary Design
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Raymond Levitt, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Les Gasser
* 10/31/1995
* USD 550,000.00

This research integrates ideas from artificial intelligence (AI) and
coordination theory to develop a Virtual Design Team VDT)-an object-oriented,
discrete event, computer simulation model of the flow of decisions and
information among participants in complex, multi-disciplinary design projects.
Conducting controlled experiments in real organizations to assess the
performance of alternative coordination structures is both expensive and fraught
with practical difficulties. Compounding this, powerful computer simulation
tools to analyze the performance of organization structures by simulation-
analogous to finite element models for simulating structural behavior-have not
yet been developed. The VDT addresses this need by using AI techniques to model
how the organizational structure of, and the information processing technologies
used by, managers in a multi-disciplinary project design team effect the
richness, volume and timing of information passing among team members. The long
range goal of this work is to provide a computerized analysis tool that can help
researchers and practitioners analyze the performance of organizations. The
first phase of the project will model the impact of organizational structure and
information processing technologies on task duration. The second phase will
extend the model to capture the impacts of organization structure and
information technologies on design quality and reliability.