* 9122447
* Improving the Accuracy of Forecasts:  A Process InterventionCombining Social Judgment Analysis and Group Facilitation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1994
* John Rohrbaugh, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Su-Shing Chen
* 05/31/1994
* USD 99,693.00

Considerable empirical evidence suggests that groups seldom do as well as their
best members on judgement tasks. To address this problem, a Group Decision
Support System (GDSS) has been developed that incorporates techniques for
reducing both the problems with interaction processes and the problems with
cognitive processing that groups face when making collective judgements. A
preliminary evaluation of this GDSS demonstrated that the process enabled groups
to perform significantly better than their most capable members on cognitive
conflict tasks. However, experimental conditions were not sufficiently
representative of environmental conditions to warrant broad generalization of
the results. This research extends the previous work by using judgment tasks
frequently faced by managerial decision makers, improving the quality of the
GDSS, and increasing the motivation of the participants., In the initial phase
of the study, two expert forecasting tasks will be developed for use in the
experiment and professional facilitators will be hired and trained to apply the
process correctly. Next, an experiment, involving 24 five-member groups, will be
conducted. To ensure that participants are motivated to perform well, they will
be paid differentially according to the quality of their group judgments. In the
final phase of study, the process intervention will be introduced into several
organizational settings.