* 9122227
* Materials Research Group - Structure, Dynamics & Transitionsof Liquid Crystal Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1998
* John Blackwell, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Ulrich Strom
* 08/31/1998
* USD 2,483,000.00

This award is for the renewal of the Materials Research Group at Case Western
Reserve University (Grant of structure, dynamics, and transitions of liquid
crystalline polymers. The primary goal of the research by the group is to
understand the physical and chemical requirements for generation of crystalline
structures containing fully extended chains from neumatic columnar hexagonal
phases and copolymers containing these phases. The research emphasis is on
synthesis of polymers, having controlled molecular structure, which are
predicted to have neumatic of columnar phases, with focus on main chain
polyesters and polyethers in which asymmetric mesogens are linked by flexible
spacers. The work also includes synthesis of supramolecular self- assembling
polymers designed to have cylindrical conformations, preparation and
characterization of micro-phase-separated supramolecular assemblies, based on
block co-polymers that contain different mesomorphic and glassy segments. The
structure and dynamics of these polymers is being determined by x-ray and
neutron scattering, static and dynamic light scattering, fluorescence energy
transfer spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The
electronic, magnetic, optical, and dielectric properties are also being
determined. Theoretical analyses of the molecular assembly, dynamics, phase
transitions, rheology and other physical properties of the mesophases is also
being done in parallel with the experimental effort.