* 9122403
* Collaborative Research on the Deterrent Effects             of Formal and Informal Sanctions
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Daniel Nagin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1994
* USD 18,299.00

Deterrence research has focused more on the costs than the rewards side of
criminal offending. Also, most of the research on deterrence has measured the
threat of sanctions at a time far removed from the point at which the individual
considers the commission of an offense. But models based on rational choice
assume deterrent effects to be instantaneous, not delayed. In addition, most
deterrence research fails to take into account the wide range of contextual
factors surrounding a criminal act. To overcome these deficiencies, Professor
Nagin, in collaboration with Raymond Paternoster of the University of Maryland,
will combine the use of judgement scenarios with traditional survey methods to
analyze issues in deterrence theory. This methodological innovation will enable
measurement of risk perceptions and intentions to offend under very specific and
controlled circumstances. Also, this innovative approach will permit the
examination of the instantaneous relationship between the costs and benefits of
offending and one's intention to commit a criminal act. Specifically, the study
will expose male college students to hypothetical situations related to sexual
assault, theft and drunk driving, criminal acts that this population shows a
considerable propensity to commit. Also, the survey instrument enables
collection of data on a range of variables related to the deterrent effects of
punishment, including the deterrent effect of formal versus informal sanctions,
of the certainty versus the severity of punishment, the impact of moral beliefs,
and the determinants of perceptions about risk of sanctions. The analytical
techniques will enable analysis of the data for each crime category separately.
The research will put to test the usefulness of the scenario method for
deterrence research and holds promise for advancing empirical knowledge related
to a series of recurring issues, yet unresolved, in the literature on the
deterrent effects of punishment.