* 9122440
* Democracy and Leadership
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1994
* Lawrence Jacobs, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 01/31/1994
* USD 25,191.00

It is common knowledge that American presidents rely on private pollsters to
provide them with a sense of contemporary public opinion. The relationship
between presidents and their pollsters is routinely discussed in the mass media,
and presidents openly refer to their public opinion surveys. This close and open
relationship between the White House and pollsters, however, is quite recent. It
began in earnest during the administration of John F. Kennedy. This research
investigation addresses the question: what difference do White House polls make
in presidents' policy positions. In short, do polling results affect the
decisions of presidents? Specifically, the researchers investigate the
relationship between the policy positions of American presidents and the public
opinion surveys that they assembled. The opinion surveys are located in
presidential archives and will, for the first time, be systematically collected.
Because scholars have previously relied on published polls, the surveys in
presidential archives offer new and better data for examining the president's
relationship with the mass public. The analysis focuses on two presidents; John
F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. In addition to collecting the survey data, the
researchers will examine evidence concerning other possible invluences on
presidential decision making, such as partisan divisions in Congress and
economic conditions. The objective is to evaluate the significance of
presidents'polling results relative to the influence of other political and
institutional variables.