* 9122915
* Dissertation Research:  Reproductive Strategies in Yucca    whipplei:  Roles of Inflorescence Size and Fruit Abortion
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* NONE NONE, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1994
* USD 6,000.00

Despite the fact that about seventy percent of all flowering plants are
hermaphroditic, the reproductive consequences of combining both sexes on a
single plant are still poorly understood. Traditional studies of reproductive
success in such plants have focused on fecundity, ignoring the affects of pollen
flow. Recent investigations have switched attention to patterns of paternal gene
flow in search for "sexual selection" in plants. Few studies to date have
attempted to quantify the affects of floral characteristics on both male and
female reproductive fitness. I propose to investigate the affects of
inflorescence size on the reproductive success of Yucca whipplei, a semelparous
hermaphrodite native to southern California. Inflorescence size typically
differs greatly between males and females in dioecious plant species, indicating
that selective pressures on inflorescence size are not the same for the two
functions. Several alternate hypotheses which could explain apparent
overproduction of flowers by Yucca whipplei will be tested. These hypothesis
include aspects of both male and female reproductive success. This research will
help determine some of the fitness consequences of hermaphroditic reproduction,
and how plants can respond to the sometimes conflicting selective pressures
resulting from combining both sexes on a single individual.