* 9122752
* Dissertation Research:  Pollen Export and the Evolution     of Distyly:  Tests of a Model
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1994
* USD 6,832.00

This proposal outlines three experiments designed to test predictions of a new
model of the evolution of distyly. This model differs from the most widely
accepted model by assuming a different ancestral state and by focusing on the
efficiency of pollen donation, as well as receipt. It also differs in predicting
that the morphological features of distyly evolve prior to the compatibility
groups. The first experiment examines pollen transfer by bumblebees between
plexiglass flowers with varying anther and stigma heights. Populations of
flowers will be created with the combinations of organ heights outlined in the
models, to see whether the purported changes in organ heights bring about the
increases in pollen donation predicted. The other two experiments will take
place at the La Selva Biological Station, using Psychotria suerrensis and one of
its butterfly pollinators. In the individual-level experiment, pollen donation
will be observed on controlled sequences of flowers and pollen carryover will be
measured. In the population-level experiment, the type of pollen available in an
isolated population will be controlled by emasculation of all other flowers of
one morph and half of the flowers of the other morph. This will allow a direct
comparison between pollen donation to like and unlike morphs. As well as being
among the first designed to test the new model, these experiments contribute to
the study of pollination biology. In addition, the field work will be conducted
on a member of a distylous genus which has received relatively little study,
despite its large size and wide distribution.