* 9122830
* Foraging of Planktivorous Seabirds and Hydrographic         Processes in the Aleutians
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1996
* George Hunt, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/1996
* USD 853,358.00

A multidisciplinary study will be conducted to test the hypothesis that
planktivorous seabirds will concentrate their foraging where tidal and sub-tidal
currents, interacting with bathymetry, transport and concentrate zooplankton
near the surface in spatially predictable upwellings and fronts. It is
hypothesized that quasi-permanent fronts, caused by horizontal gradients in
mixing associated with gradients in tidal velocity and bottom depth, will be of
importance to the birds. Physical processes and plankton distributions in both
shallow (100 m) and deep (600 m) passes near Buldir Island will be compared, as
will avian responses to concentrations of prey in both the horizontal and
vertical dimensions. Advanced technologies including an Acoustic Doppler Current
Profiler (ADCP), an integrating echosounder, multiple opening-closing nets
(MOCNESS) and computerized data entry and real-time analyses of results to
optimize use of the ship will be employed. The study provides a unique
opportunity to combine the benefits of new technologies for investigating how
physical processes affect the distribution and concentration of plankton that
support higher trophic levels. The study will be one of the few to examine
simultaneously physical processes, zooplankton distributions and abundance, and
the foraging ecology of marine birds in the western Aleutians. This suite of
information will permit comparison of the marine ecology of seabirds on oceanic
islands with that of seabirds on nearby continental islands studied previously.