* 9122056
* Arch, Cointegration and Common Features:  Theory and        Application
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Robert Engle, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1995
* USD 216,051.00

This is an accomplishment based renewal of a project that developed ARCH and
related models and tests for cointegration. Models of ARCH and cointegration are
now used in almost every area of economics to test for economic relationships
among different economic variables using time series data. These studies
typically use univariate time series models or multivariate models with at most
two or three different time series. This is a major drawback for most economic
applications. This grant will permit the investigator to continue the research
started under the previous grant on multivariate ARCH and cointegration
analysis. In addition the project develops and applies a new statistical
procedure called common features to problems in economics and finance. A
conference will be held in April, 1992 in La Jolla, California on new
developments in volatility models and applications to finance. Economic time
series have many distinctive characteristics. Generally, they exhibit serial
correlation, trends, seasonality, often heteroskedasticity, skewness, kurtosis,
and various other features. In order to detect each of these features in a data
set, a variety of tests are available each of which takes the particular feature
in question as the alternative to the null hypothesis that the feature is not
present in the data. Under its previous NSF grant, the investigator developed a
new statistical procedure called common features that permits the analyst to
determine if two or more data sets share the same distinctive characteristics.
This procedure was used to show that there was empirical evidence of a common
international business cycle for the major industrial countries. The procedure
will be extended and generalized. It will be used to examine sectoral output in
the U.S. to see whether sectors move together over the business cycle. The
procedure will be used to determine whether regions within the U.S. move
together. International data on capital markets will be analyzed to determine
what features are common to the equity markets for several blocks of countries.
This research should provide new insights into the nature of the volatility in
international capital markets.