* 9122346
* The Input - Output Approach to Demand- Shift Instrumental   Variables Selection: Theory and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1992,02/28/1994
* John Shea, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 02/28/1994
* USD 39,652.00

Traditional economic wisdom holds that demand surges during business cycle
booms generate inflation. Demand rises more quickly than capacity during booms;
in turn, this excess demand produces "tight" labor and product markets and
therefore rising wages and prices. While this wisdom is widely accepted by
economists, the press and policymakers, its empirical foundations are
questionable, as many recent studies show that rates of wage and price inflation
are uncorrelated or even negatively correlated with the business cycle. It is
the investigator's opinion that these recent studies fail to address the
question of whether demand surges generate wage and price inflation. The
correlation between inflation and the business cycle reflects the influence of
both supply and demand factors. Adverse supply shocks, such as the oil price
increases of 1973 and 1979, cause prices to rise and output to fall; such shocks
can cause prices to appear negatively correlated with the business cycle even if
demand shocks generate wage-price inflation. Studies examining only the
correlation between inflation and the business cycle are thus not useful to
policymakers attempting to determine the potential inflationary effects of
fiscal or monetary policies designed to stimulate short-run output growth. This
research will implement a new methodology for addressing the relationship
between demand shocks and wage-price inflation. Information from input-output
tables published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics will be used to identify the
actual sources of demand for disaggregated industries. This information makes
the estimation of the responses of industry wages and prices to observable
industry demand shocks possible. For instance, if input-output tables indicate
that most lumber is used for construction purposes, the response of lumber wages
and prices to movements in construction industry output will be investigated. By
examining the relationship between price and industry demand, rather than the
mere correlation between price and industry output, the influence of supply
shocks on industry activity will be effectively controlled. These results will
therefore be more useful than existing research for examining the potential
inflationary impact of fiscal and monetary policies designed to stimulate
aggregate demand.