* 9122802
* Patterns of Development in Young Women's Educational Choicesand Experiences in Math and Science
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Sandra Hanson, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/1994
* USD 96,996.00

Anticipated future labor supply shortages of scientists and engineers have
called attention to a national need for greater understanding of the factors
influencing the recruitment and retention of men and women in careers in
mathematics, science, and engineering. It is particularly important to enhance
our knowledge of the barriers to women's participation in these fields. This
project will address the following questions: What are the patterns of
knowledge, access, and attitudes that lead women to persist in or drop out of
mathematics and science? What combination of school, family, and
personal/psychological resources best explains the patterns of development
experienced by young women in their high school and post-high school mathematics
and science careers? What are the typical paths that men follow in their
mathematics and science careers and how and why do these differ from the paths
women take? Analyses of cross-sectional and longitudinal data from three major
nationally representative data sets, High School and Beyond, the National
Educational Longitudinal Study, and the Second International Educational
Assessment of Mathematics will be conducted in order to explore patterns of
young women's (and young men's) achievement in math and science as well as the
explanations for these patterns. This project, which is jointly supported by the
Sociology Program and the Education and Human Resources Office of Studies,
Evaluation and Dissemination, will contribute to a number of areas in the field
of sociology, including occupational choice, sociology of education, sex and
gender roles, and social stratification. The results of the project will enhance
our understanding of how to recruit more young people, male as well as female,
into careers in science, mathematics, and engineering.