* 9122615
* Calixarenes and Calixarene-derived Molecular Receptors
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* C. David Gutsche, Texas Christian University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 10/31/1995
* USD 248,400.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of
Professor C. David Gutsche at Texas Christian University. The synthesis of
enzyme mimics based upon a calixarene host will be undertaken. Calixarenes can
be functionalized on both faces and as a result of their conformational
flexibility permit the fashioning of cavities that can open and close.
Calixarene based aldolase, chymotryopsin, triosephosphate isomerase, and
acetylphosphatase mimics will be examined. The basic chemistry of calixarenes
will also be examined in an attempt to isolate and functionalize new examples of
these novel molecular receptors. The complexing capabilities and conformations
of several of the new calixarenes will be determined. %%% Synthetic molecules
which selectively bind to biologically important molecules (substrates) will be
made. The synthetic molecules will be designed in a fashion that places the
bound substrate in close proximity to functional groups (atoms or groups of
atoms) which can assist in the transformation of the substrate into another
biologically important molecule. The determination of the shape of the synthetic
molecule which provides the greatest assistance to these transformations will
enhance our understanding of how enzymes increase the rate of biologically
important reactions.