* 9122700
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,04/30/1994
* NONE NONE, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 04/30/1994
* USD 3,395.00

A fundamental premise of the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of
1959 is that if the democratic rights of union members are protected, the
members can eliminate corruption and racketeering. Currently there is a great
deal of debate about the use of civil actions such as the Racketeer Influenced
Corrupt Organization Act (RICO) and the remedy of government-imposed
trusteeships to control union corruption. None of these measures have proved to
be entirely successful in combating union corruption. To date, there has been no
empirical inquiry into when and to what extent the premises of these Acts are
functionally valid, nor has there been systematic examination of what legal
measures may be necessary to encourage development of reform movements and
establish democratic processes in racketeer controlled unions. This doctoral
disseration project will analyze why these efforts have not succeeded in the
past and how democratic reform has functioned or failed to function. Since the
Teamsters Union presents the best example of the failure of unions to combat
corruption, the study will encompass four generations of democratic reform in
the International Brotherhood of Teamsters. Sources for the study will include
internal union documents, trial testimony, rank and file literature and
government documents from the National Labor Relations Board, and congressional
hearings. This project will provide an empirical base and systematic factual
analysis for understanding the phenomena of corruption in unions, potentials for
internal correction by reform movements, and the role of union democracy in
allowing and correcting various forms of corruption and racketeering. The
results will not only contribute to basic knowledge about the impact of law but
will be directly relevant to unions which want to protect themselves from
racketeer infiltration, to law enforcement officials and judges who attempt to
design remedies in specific cases, and to regulators and legislators who must
develop general rules regulating internal union affairs.