* 9122801
* Planning Grant on the Comparative Socio-Legal Status        of Undocumented Immigrants
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1992,12/31/1992
* Linda Bosniak, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1992
* USD 18,000.00

The process of undocumented migration raises some of the most pressing political
and social issues of contemporary time, both within many individual countries
and at the international level. The unauthorized entry, presence, and employment
of increasing numbers of aliens poses distinct problems of border control and
deterrence, and unique concerns of human and democratic rights. This Research
Opportunities for Women Planning Grant will enable the investigator to plan for
a comparative study of the social and legal status of undocumented immigrants in
contemporary France and Spain. The study will involve examination of each
state's immigration regulatory regime, including formal rules and their
enforcement; rules and practices regarding the treatment of undocumented
immigrants in matters not directly related to immigration regulation; and the
interplay between both of these sociolegal spheres within each state. The
planning grant will enable the investigator to intensively study the European
civil law system, establish research contacts and resources, and further develop
the research model and design of the project. The study of undocumented
immigrants in receiving countries provides a striking model of the complex
interplay between legal status and social relationships in an individual
society. This study will be unique in that it will document the relationship
between the immigrant's status as an object of immigration control and his/her
legal and social status in society in the non- immigration regulatory spheres.
The results of the forthcoming research project will contribute to knowledge
about the competing drives toward closure and inclusion and toward national
community and universal human rights that often plague democratic nations. As
such the study will facilitate the advancement of general hypotheses about the
internal functioning of national political and social systems in an era of
significant international population movements.