* 9122356
* Ionic Organic Reactions and Their Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1992,06/30/1995
* George Olah, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 06/30/1995
* USD 440,200.00

Research will continue on ionic organic reactions and their intermediates with
emphasis on the role of electrophilic (proto) solvation in activating onium
ions, carboxonium ions and certain carbocationic systems by interaction with the
available non-bonded electron pairs of the heteroatoms. Some potential oxonium
and carboxonium dications will be studied such as diprotonated alcohols,
diprotonated CO, diprotonated HCN and diprotonated CO2 as well as diprotonated
esters. Included will be experimental superacidic investigations based on
isotopic exchange studies, as well as low temperature spectroscopic
investigations and theoretical studies. The protolytic (alkylative) chemistry
will also be studied. The protolytic (coordinative) activation of the Friedel-
Crafts reaction will be explored in reactions of alkanes, as well as highly
deactivated aromatics. Halooxonium ions and mixed halo-alkyl derivatives will be
also prepared and studied in chlorination reactions. Polyhalonium dications will
be explored, as will be bora-cations. The search for persistent silicenium ions
will be continued, including solid state 29Si NMR studies. The recently
discovered derivatization of C60 and C70 fullerenes will be followed up
including halogenation, alkylation, acyclation and other reactions. %%% With
this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will support the research of Dr.
George A. Olah at the Univeristy of Southern California. The research will
explore the generation of diprotonated species formed by the interaction of a
proton with the unshared electron pairs on oxygen and nitrogen atoms in stable
molecular species. The chemistry of these reactive species will be studied. This
will result in the development of some new unique synthetic methodology that
should benefit research in biochemistry and medicine as well as in the chemical
industry.