* 9122762
* Dissertation Research:  Reaction Norms of Ontogenetic       Trajectories in Lobelia
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* NONE NONE, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1995
* USD 6,500.00

Ontogeny and genetic variation are two topics that are thought to be crucial for
our understanding of patterns and processes of evolutionary change. Although the
basic concepts for the study of developmental systems and the reaction of norms
of genotypes to the environments had been formulated during the first half of
this century, only recently have they become a central focus of experimental and
theoretical work. The developmental aspect focuses on the concept of ontogenetic
trajectories, which describes the change in phenotype during growth. The
environmental variation, which elicits a genotype-specific response called
phenotypic plasticity, is described by a function that relates environments and
phenotypes through the genotype: i.e., the reaction norm. The aim of this
proposal is to couple the developmental and environmental aspects in a study of
genetic variability in two species, Lobelia cardinalis and Lobelia siphilitica
(Lobeliaceae). The research project is divided into two distinct experiments:
(I) Experiment I is a description of the plasticity for ontogenetic trajectories
to different level of shading in the genotypes samples from two populations for
each species. The objective is to gain information about 1) genetic variation
for reaction norms across development and 2) how environmental changes can
modify the developmental trajectory. (II) Experiment II is an artificial
selection experiment which - based on the information obtained from Experiment I
- will test the ability of the genetic systems of Lobelia spp. to respond to
selection on additive genetic variance of their reaction norms. A proximal
objective of this type of research is to obtain reliable models of phenotypic
evolution, using some of the parameter values from actual experiments. Attempts
in this sense have already been published, but focused only on the ontogenetic
component of variation. A more comprehensive model is desirable, which includes
environmental variation and is consistent with our general understanding of
biological complexity and with actual experimental possibilities. The ultimate
goal is to gain a basic understanding and a general phenomenological description
of the ways in which phenotypic novelties can arise and eventually be fixed
during macroevolution. These notions, together with the parallel increase in our
knowledge of the physiological and molecular basis of such phenomena, would
eventually lead us to less vague statements about how population biology and
molecular genetics can be coupled for a more complete understanding of
evolutionary phenomena.