* 9122671
* Mathematical Sciences: 1992 Summer Research Institute on    'Quadratic Forms and Division Algebras'
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1994
* James Maxwell, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1994
* USD 108,844.00

During the 1980's the closely related subjects of the algebraic theory of
quadratic forms and the theory of finite- dimensional division algebras
benefitted greatly from developments in algebraic K-theory and algebraic
geometry. The topics of this conference, historically speaking, are rooted in
number theory. Most of the main problems and motivation have number theoretic
origins. In the first half of this century, these subjects blossomed with the
development of modern algebraic number theory. The discovery of local-global
principles for quadratic forms was bound up with the development of p-adic
fields. Further, the classification of finite-dimensional division algebras over
local and global fields was closely connected to the development of class field
theory. In the past forty years, each of these subjects has declared much
independence from number theory. This project will support the 1992 Summer
Research Institute on Quadratic Forms and Division Algebras: Connections with
Algebraic K-theory and Algebraic Geometry (the fortieth in the series) to be
held from July 6 - 24, 1992 at the University of California, Santa Barbara. The
primary topics of the summer institute are the closely related subjects of
finite-dimensional division algebras and the algebraic theory of quadratic
forms. Further progress is expected to be stimulated by holding two special
lecture series, one devoted to algebraic K-theory and the other to algebraic
geometry. In addition, there will be research lectures on the two principal
themes, quadratic forms and division algebras. The first week of the institute
will have quadratic forms emphasis, the third week will have division algebra
emphasis, and the second week will emphasize both with the hope of stimulating
interaction.