* 9122497
* Feasibility Study of a West Coast Picket Fence              Specification of Upstream Boundary Conditions for           STORM
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Richard Lind, Naval Postgraduate School
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 12/31/1994
* USD 94,215.00

Elsberry has been awarded a grant to support a late entry to STORMFEST
observational systems, viz., an upstream "picket fence" of gap-filling
rawinsondes and radar wind profilers deployed along the west coast of the U.S.
STORMFEST's objectives are to improve the understanding and prediction of
mesoscale weather systems over the central U.S. The environmental flow features
that trigger some of these sytems form far upstream. Rapidly moving jet streaks
and mid-tropospheric short-waves may propagate from the data-sparse east Pacific
to the midwest in 24-36 hours. STORMFEST plans include the temporary deployment
of drifting buoys and dropsondes from far ranging aircraft over the North
Pacific, in a systems test for major STORM field experiments in the next few
years. Elsberry suggests that a west-coast picket fence might provide an
alternative (in future systems) at much lower cost, or at the least, cheap
supplementary observations. The proposed study is essentially a feasibility test
of the efficacy of the picket fence in either mode. The "picket-fence" concept
is worthy of further exploration, since it represents a low-risk low-cost
addition to STOMFEST with potentially high payoff in both basic and applied
atmospheric science. In fact, Elsberry's proposal has contributed to a recent
decision by the Canadian Environmental Service to double the frequency of its
rawinsonde ascents in a northern extension of the picket fence.