* 9122699
* Infrared and Ultraviolet Matrix-Assisted Laser              Desorption in a Quadrupole Ion Trap
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1996
* Jennifer Brodbelt, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 03/31/1996
* USD 176,000.00

This project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
examines ion-molecule chemistry in the quadrupole ion trap. The goal of the
research is to develop an understanding of ion-molecule chemistry as it applies
to the mass spectrometric analysis of large organic molecules, eventually
carbohydrate-containing antibiotics. Initial work will concentrate on the laser
desorption of relevant molecules into the quadrupole ion trap. Substituent
effects on the subsequent bimolecular ion-molecule reactions in the ion trap
will be explored, with a view to exploiting these reactions for structural
identification of large, complex organic molecules. %%% Carbohydrates are
extremely important molecules in biological systems, but the determination of
their structures is very difficult, especially because they usually cannot be
crystallized for X-ray structural studies. Determination of structures by mass
spectrometry is also difficult, since many interesting carbohydrates are very
difficult to vaporize, and mass spectrometry is a gas phase technique. In this
research project laser desorption methods will be used to place carbohydrates
and other large organic molecules in the gas phase, and controlled ion-molecule
reaction chemistry will be used to cut the large molecules into fragments by
mass spectrometry, as required for structural analysis.