* 9122790
* SGER:  Experimental Gonadal Hypertrophy and the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Gonadal Control Axis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1992,11/30/1994
* Paul Cooke, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 11/30/1994
* USD 33,369.00

A recriprocal relationship exists between the nervous system, hormones and
behavior. This relationship begins early in life, when the release of hormones
organizes the brain in terms of its endocrine function and in terms of
establishing the appropriate connections for the control of behavior. Thyroid
hormones are essential for normal development of the brain. These hormones exert
a significant and crucial effect on differentiation of cells. Dr. Iwamoto found
that treatment with a drug that induces lower levels of thyriod hormone during a
specific period of postnatal development dramatically affects adult testis
weight and sperm production. These data are quite striking. While it is known
that hyper- and hypothyroidism interferes with the physiology of reproduction in
females, little is known about the consequences in males. Dr. Iwamato will
determine whether this gonadal hypertrophy induced by developmental
hypothyroidism results from or causes a major change in hypothalamic function
and sensitivity to gonadal steroids. He will compare the gonadotropin and
testosterone secretory patterns, and single unit activity of hypothalamic cells
in response to testosterone and estrogen, of these animals to normal males. This
unique transient hypothyroidism that induces hypogonadal males may prove to be
an important model for understanding the hypothalamic- pituitary-gonadal system
and thus, provide new insights into the understanding and treatment of male
infertility.