* 9122233
* Adaptive Learning in Games and Dynamic Economies
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Ramon Marimon, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 09/30/1994
* USD 67,094.00

Game theory and dynamic macroeconomic models typically assume that people are
"ultra-rational," both in the sense that they know much about the environment
and their competitors' behavior, and in the sense that they know how to use that
information in the best possible way. This project aims to weaken the assumption
that people are fully rational, and to explore what happens when people behave
'adaptively.' Recent results from the literature on artificial intelligence will
be used to build a class of adaptive learning schemes that are suitable for
studying economic models. These learning schemes will be applied in several
economic contexts. For example, the "coordination failure problems" will be
analyzed, that is, how much coordination can eventually be expected from a
system of agents, each of whom behaves adaptively. Several applications in game
theory and macroeconomics will also be studied. In some settings, the
established learning theories will be used as devices to select among
alternative equilibria. In other settings, the theories will be used to suggest
self- confirming patterns of behavior that correspond to alternative notions of
equilibria. Finally, relationships among some existing and new notions of
stability, complexity and optimality will also be investigated.