* 9122065
* Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Discrete Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Jacob Goodman, CUNY City College
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 12/31/1994
* USD 39,200.00

The investigator, in collaboration with Richard Pollack (Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences, New York University), plans to continue his investigation
of the interplay between the geometry and the topology of Euclidean spaces by
extending recent results on the classification of ordered configurations and
their generalizations, and on related geometric and combinatorial problems.
Building on their past work on allowable sequences and order types of
configurations, as well as on ideas coming out of their recent proof of the
Grunbaum conjecture on the extendibility of finite arrangements of topological
lines to continuous spreads, Goodman and Pollack plan to continue their work on
configurations, arrangements of topological flats, and geometric transversal
theory, examining (among other problems) (1) the problem of generalizing the
proof of the Grunbaum conjecture to intermediate- dimensional flats, (2) the
problem of finding a compact representation for configurations and polytopes, as
well as a classification of arrangements of intermediate-dimensional flats which
reflects their geometric properties, and (3) the problem of determining the
relative frequency of order types (the classical Sylvester problem, generalized)
via the identification of the set of simple n-point configurations in real
d-dimensional space with an open dense subset of a suitable Grassmann manifold.
The advent of high-speed computing has brought new life to many of these
questions over the past few decades, since it has become possible to investigate
non-trivial examples relatively painlessly. The size of interesting finite
geometric sets tends to increase exponentially with the dimension. Consider, for
the simplest example, the number of vertices of, in turn, a line segment, a
square, a cube, a tesseract (4-dimensional), and so forth. The corresponding
numbers are 2, 4, 8, 16, ..., and the regularity here is so pronounced that the
numbers are computable and the properties of n-dimensional cubes, as they are
called, remain manageable even for large n. However, less regular sets with
rapidly increasing size become much more difficult to handle without a machine's
assistance for computation. This is one aspect of the relation of this kind of
mathematics to computing, but there is another reciprocal relation. Just as
computing facilitates plausible conjecture and hence proof, so too do some of
the proofs lead to improved algorithms for computing. We have here a very useful
symbiosis that is bound to flourish even more in the years to come.