* 9122953
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny of Agrypnine Click Beetles (Coleoptera: Elateridae: Pyrophorinae: Agrypnini)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1994
* NONE NONE, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1994
* USD 10,000.00

Cladistic analysis of the click beetle tribe Agrypnini is proposed as the basis
for analysis of phylogentic and biogeographic patterns. The proposed research
has the following goals: (1) performing a detailed comparative study of the
external, genitalic, and internal reproductive morphology of representatives of
all agrypnine genera; (2) performing cladistic analysis to establish a
hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships of agrypnine genera; and (3) using the
phylogenetic hypothesis of agrypnine generic relationships as the basis for: (a)
taxonomic classification of the tribe; and (b) analysis of area relationships in
this tribe. The Agrypnini is distributed worldwide, with several large
widespread genera and a number of smaller genera endemic to one region. The
biogeographical analysis will compare results from biogeographical parsimony
analysis, component analysis, and quantification of component analysis. Funds
are requested for travel to major European entomological museum for examination
of material for morphological studies and cladistic analysis, and for scanning
electron microscopy (SEM). SEM will be used to examine, interpret, and
illustrate micromorphological characters, especially the mouthparts and
ultrastructure of setal scales. The proposed research will provide additional
character systems for comparison with other elaterid taxa, will provide
biogeographical patterns for comparison with unrelated taxa, and will compare
efficacy of biogeographical analysis methodologies.