* 9122283
* Estimation with Simulation: Theory and Application
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Paul Ruud, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1994
* USD 40,987.00

This project develops estimation methods that use simulations to overcome the
computational burdens of numerically complex econometric models. This is a very
important line of research because many economic problems are intractable even
using supercomputers. Many applied economists must consciously design models to
avoid computationally intractable aspects, even though the economics of the
issue naturally lead in that direction. This project generalizes the simulated
moments methods, uses it to solve complicated empirical economic problems and
extends a new class of semi-parametric estimators for linear index models
developed by the investigator under his previous NSF grant. The method of
simulated moments is generalized to limited dependent variable models besides
the conditional multinomial Probit model and to inference problems associated
with approximating moment functions like the score of the log- likelihood. The
research in computation addresses the existence and nondifferentiability of
simulated moments estimators. The second part of the research is an empirical
application of simulated moments estimation methods to the analysis of labor
supply with nonlinear taxes. The third part of the research is about semi-
parametric estimation of index models. Asymptotic distribution theory for a
class of estimators for linear index models will be derived and the relationship
between this family of estimators and others is explored.