* 9122573
* Polymer-in-Pore Composite Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1995
* John Anderson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Edgar A. O'Rear
* 08/31/1995
* USD 254,995.00

This research offers a new and novel approach for the development of high-
technology materials in the separations field, namely, a multidimensional route
to the significant problem of synthetic membrane design. It follows naturally
the highly regarded recent research of the PI and his co- workers who, through
their work, have advanced the field of surface science and membrane technology.
The novelty of filling a membrane pore matrix with a polymeric substrate which
offers the possibility of high specificity and selectivity along with high flux
rates is the primary target of most membrane development research within the
separations area. Specifically, the PI proposes to prepare high selectivity
membranes by generating hydrogels within the pore matrix and by adsorption of
block co-polymers on the pore wall structure. The fundamental studies herein
proposed will be to quantify the resulting mated matrix with the ensuring field
enhanced mass transport via continuum convection, diffusion, and by
electrophoresis. The research proposed, although logical and inclusive (i.e.,
the research progresses from the preparation of membrane materials to the
experimental data collection phase, from which the quantitative aspects of the
characterization of the basic processes via analysis of the matrix substrate
leads to theoretical model development) it is not fully detailed. The PI must
consider the ultimate stability of the matrix substrate, the potentially
manifold mating problems inherent in substrate-matrix surface interaction, and
the selection of appropriate test materials for the study. The work, although
fundamental in nature, has some very definite practical applicability toward the
long sought goal of tailoring membranes for specific separation problems of
industrial significance. Thus, despite the relative paucity, of experimental
detail included in the proposal, the PI has an outstanding record of research
achievement and this work, though somewhat speculative, has the potential for
major contributions to the field of molecular separations. This is of especial
interest to the area of synthetic and biological macromolecules.