* 9122457
* Improvement of Highway Safety Through Optimal Vehicle       Design:  Fault-Tree and Multi-Objective Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Duan Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 03/31/1995
* USD 140,000.00

This research investigates the relationship between vehicle design, crash
characteristics, infrastructure, and driver attributes using current databases;
the structure of the accident causation-consequence system via fault-tree
analysis; and optimization of vehicle design criteria to minimize the risk of
injury and fatality when constraints on fuel economy, cost, and convenience are
recognized. The study will enable structuring and classification of knowledge
about accident causation and crash management using quantitative risk analysis
tools and methodologies, and allow identification of knowledge gaps that are
preventing a more complete understanding of the complex highway transportation
system. Decision models resulting from this work will aid the automobile
industry in the selection of the optimal crash-avoidance measure under resource
constraints in a timely yet market-focused and cost effective manner. Several
features of the proposed decision making framework include the consideration of
the multiple conflicting and noncommensurable objectives in the optimal design
process; the allowance of the impact analysis on multiple injury levels and on
various consumer groups; and the recognition of complex system interactions. To
achieve the stated objectives two sources of expertise will be used: From
academic research recently developed and/or enhanced engineering design
methodologies including fault-tree analysis, multiobjective and trade-off
analysis, and optimal resource allocation will be used. Industrial research will
contribute an understanding of the biomechanical responses to the physical
characteristics of various energy-absorbing materials.