* 9122490
* Topics in Business Cycle Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1995
* Martin Eichenbaum, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1995
* USD 108,660.00

This project addresses two major inconsistencies between modern macroeconomic
theories of business cycles and the empirical evidence. Positive shocks in the
money supply depress both real and nominal interest rates, at least in the short
run. Standard general equilibrium theory, with its emphasis on the alleged role
of "sticky" nominal wages and prices in explaining the expansionary effects of
monetary policy, would predict the opposite relationship. This project
determines whether or not the explanation for this first inconsistency lies in
an alternative (possibly complementary) channel, one which emphasizes the role
of working capital in the production process and the liquidity effects of
changes in the money supply. The second inconsistency is the phenomenon of
procyclical productivity. Productivity tends to fall in downturns and rise in
upturns. This seems to contradict neoclassical theories of business cycles
because changes in aggregate output should conform to the law of diminishing
marginal productivity, i.e., as the percentage of the labor force employed
declines (increases), the productivity of the marginal worker should increase
(decrease). This project determines whether or not procyclical productivity is
due to the effect of labor hoarding and changes in capacity utilization. The
project should provide new insights into the role of monetary policy as an
impulse to postwar US business cycles. Specifically, it will improve our
understanding of the role of liquidity effects as central components of the
monetary transmission mechanism. The project analyzes the impact of monetary
policy on financial markets and the observed dynamic co- movements between short
term interest rates, output and the money supply. The project also improves our
understanding of the dynamic co-movements between average productivity, hours
worked and output. In this research the focus is on the role which labor
hoarding and time varying capacity capital utilization rates play in generating
the observed procyclicality of labor productivity and the Solow residual. This
in turn leads to an investigation of how these phenomena impact on existing
estimates of the role of technology shocks in generating economic fluctuations.