* 9122155
* Locational Context For Efficiency, Innovative Performance   And Cohort Survival
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Bennett Harrison, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Holly
* 12/31/1995
* USD 299,538.00

Most quantitative research on the determinants of technological innovation has
focused on factors endogenous to the industry, firm, plant, or production
process. The largely case study-based research on industrial districts has
emphasized the positive impacts on firm performance of embeddedness into local
concentrations of similar productive activity. This research has not explicitly
examined locational factors affecting firm performance. This study will attempt
to formally model the ways in which the spatial and institutional context
conditions the impacts of technical, economic, and organizational variables on
the performance of manufacturing establishments in the metalworking sector of
the economy. It will investigate the extent to which variations among U.S.
counties in sameness, diversity, access, and business leadership help to explain
inter- plant variation in efficiency, technological innovation, and plant
survival. Data will come from two panel surveys of over 1000 establishments, the
U.S. Census of Manufactures, and corporate data base files. Several hypotheses
will be tested with multivariate statistical techniques. This study promises to
yield significant new information, and it will test a new theory on the
interplay between inter- organizational structures and spatial context. It will
implement new empirical measures of the extent to which agglomeration influences
the performance of manufacturing firms in the U.S.