* 9122129
*  Collaborative Research on Climatic Modification             Associated with Metropolitan Development
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1993
* Anthony Brazel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 08/31/1993
* USD 40,242.00

Recent research on global climate change has focused on global warming,
desertification, deforestation and related macro- scale changes in the
environment. While local and regional climatic modification has been included in
this theme generally, such research has tended to concentrate on micro-scale
studies of urban canyons. Meso-scale models consider the boundary layer of air
and the city's overall modification of it. Recent advancements in remote sensing
techniques, geographical information systems, and energy balance models permit
the matching of land use information with remotely sensed surface temperature
data at an appropriate scale of resolution so that climate modification
associated with desert metropolitan development can be analyzed. This project
will examine the causal links between urban development and climate modification
using surface temperature, reflectivity, vegetation indices, thermal inertia,
and current land use for the Phoenix, Arizona metropolitan area. Remotely sensed
imagery, climatic records, computer modeling and field work will be used to
understand the complex set of relationships between the urban fabric and near
surface and boundary layer climate at varying resolutions of spatial scale. This
research will improve upon existing models of urban climate modification by
analyzing data from different sources at the same level of spatial scale,
permitting more accurate assessment of the influence of human activity on
climate conditions at the surface. The use of the Phoenix area as a laboratory
to design and test methods for evaluating land use change on climate conditions
will have important extensions to critically sensitive arid and semi-arid
regions of the world.