* 9122575
* Preparation, Characterization and Catalytic Behavior of     Alumina-Supported Platinym/Tin Reforming Catalysts and      Related Model Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Gar Hoflund, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 04/30/1996
* USD 252,099.00

This is a fundamental study of alumina-supported, platinum-tin bimetallic,
hydrocarbon reforming catalysts. Model and real catalytic surfaces are studied,
including platinized tin oxide films, tin-decorated platinum crystals,
platinum/tin alloy surfaces, and platinum and/or tin deposited on planar
alumina, planar carbon, or porous alumina. Various surface analytical techniques
are used, including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Auger electron
spectroscopy (AES), ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS), electron energy loss
spectroscopy (EELS), secondary-ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), electron-stimulated
desorption (ESD), and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). Catalytic
reforming reactions are run at both low and high pressures using a reactor
attached to the ultrahigh-vacuum characterization system. Catalytic behavior is
correlated with elements of catalyst structure as elucidated by the
characterization studies. Bimetallic reforming catalysts, including the
platinum/tin system studied in this project, are the principal technology
enabling production of larger amounts of high-octane fuels from ever-decreasing
quality grades of crude oil. They also have an increasing role in environmental
amelioration. Despite their great economic importance, they are still poorly
understood. The volumes and added value produced with these catalysts are such
that even small improvements can have egret economic benefit. //