* 9122871
* Engineering Canola Oil With Altered Fatty Acid Composition
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1994
* Hugo Dooner, DNA Plant Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 11/30/1994
* USD 249,572.00

Among the economically important agronomic traits, the fatty acid (FA)
composition of oilseed crops is one of the most likely to be modified by
molecular breeding. In this proposal, we described experiments that will enable
us to engineer a canola (rapeseed) oil with a lower content of linolenic acid
(ALA), an undesirable component that, in addition to being of lower nutritional
quality, causes rancidity and flavor instability due to its tendency to auto-
oxidize. To effect this change the gene responsible for the formation of ALA
needs to be isolated. However, since the gene encodes a microsomal enzyme that
is difficult to purify, an alternative to the conventional biochemical approach
to gene isolation must be sought. We intend to use a powerful genetic approach,
transposon tagging, to isolate the corresponding gene. The small model plant
Arabidopsis thaliana is a genetically simpler relative of rapeseed. We propose
to isolate the fad3 gene, responsible for the formation of ALA in Arabidopsis,
as a first step towards the modification of the FA composition in canola. We
will use a streptomycin resistance assay (SPT) to visually detect transposition
of the maize transposon Activator (Ac) in Arabidopsis. Somatic excision of Ac
from an SPT:: Ac gene produces green spots on the white cotyledons of seedlings
germinated on streptomycin and germinal excision results in green revertant
seedlings in the same assay. Many of the green revertants carry a transposed Ac
element. There, the SPT:: Ac system allows us to for germinal transposition
events. By selecting green revertants from among the progeny of plants that
carry an SPT:: Ac gene only 5 cM from fad3, we should be able to identify tagged
fad3 mutations and to clone them by homology to Ac. The analogous gene from
canola can be isolated by homology to the Arabidopsis gene and subsequently
engineered to suppress the action of the endogenous fad3 genes when reintroduced
into canola.