* 9122729
* RUI: The 1992 Presidential Election in Prime Time
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1994
* Marion Just, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/1994
* USD 189,777.00

In the fifty years of social scientific examination of voting decisions in
presidential elections, the mass media have been transformed; so too has the
presidential election campaign. In addition to newspapers and magazines; and the
"two-step flow" of news from opinion leaders to the mass public, we now have an
array of broadcast media that bring citizens virtually in direct contact with
the presidential campaign. The historical political staple of lengthy campaign
speeches has been supplemented, if not supplanted, by 10-second "sound-bites"
and elaborately produced 30- second advertisements. The campaign itself, which
was once limited largely to a fall contest between two major party nominees, now
stretches through a calendar year, with voters taking a direct role in
nominations and the news media taking over the task of winnowing the field of
presidential candidates. Despite these changes in the campaign process, there
have been few studies that focus on how voters make sense of the new mass media
campaign, what information and understanding they acquire, and how they decide
to vote. The bulk of scholarly attention has been concentrated on campaign
coverage in prestige newspapers and network news, ignoring the role of
advertising, and neglecting the local newspapers and local TV news on which more
and more Americans depend on for information. This investigation seeks to bridge
this gap by looking closely at voters and their media environment during the
1992 presidential election campaign in four diverse communities: Los Angeles,
California; Boston, Massachusetts; Winston-Salem, North Carolina; and the twin
towns of Fargo, North Dakota-Moorhead, Minnesota. These sites represent a range
of very small to very large media markets in each major geographic region of the
country. Using a variety of methods, the researchers investigate how people in
these diverse communities use campaign news and political advertising, as well
as their contacts with other people to arrive at voting decisions. Through
content analysis of local newspaper and television news and the political
advertising broadcast in that media market, the investigators will compare and
contrast the information that is most available to voters in their communities
throughout the campaign. Particular attention will be paid to the primary
election phase. Voter decision-making will be explored in public opinion polls,
focus groups, and periodic in-depth interviews with representative panels of
citizens in four communities throughout the campaign season. The aim of the
project is to gain a fuller understanding of the news media environment, and how
citizens become interested in the campaign, acquire information, form
impressions of the candidates, decide what is important, take positions on
campaign issues, and, ultimately, decide how to vote.