* 9122454
* Bargaining Macroeconomic Agreements
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1992,08/31/1994
* Roberto Chang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1994
* USD 74,494.00

Many agreements in macroeconomics and international economics are the outcomes
of negotiations among a small number of participants or, in a game theory
setting, players. This project has two objectives. The first is to develop an
analytical framework to study macroeconomic bargaining problems. This framework
will include an explicit model of macroeconomic bargaining and an equilibrium
concept of sustainable bargaining equilibrium to represent the outcomes of the
model. The second objective is to apply the bargaining model to analyze three
important, contemporary, macroeconomic bargaining-problems. The first
application is to the monetary union problem faced by Europe in adopting a
common currency. Governments have conflicting interests because a common
monetary policy is likely to result in the redistribution of wealth across
member countries. The second application involves the debt renegotiations
problem between the developed and less developed countries. Typical renegotiated
agreements include rescheduling of debt payments, new lending, and debt
forgiveness. Obviously, banks and governments have opposite interests with
respect to debt repayment and debt reduction schemes. The final application
concerns negotiations between the major political parties in the U.S regarding
the budget deficit problem. In order to reduce the federal deficit, opposition
parties must agree on some combination of tax increases and expenditure cuts.
Conflicting interests arise because the parties respond to different
constituencies and have different preferences about alternative tax and
expenditure packages.