* 9122939
* Regional Systems and the Modern Transformation of Agrarian  Societies: Population and Development in France, Japan, and China
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1996
* G.William Skinner, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/1996
* USD 350,693.00

This project employs a model of spatial differentiation to analyze the modern
transformation of three agrarian societies - France, Japan, and China -- during
comparable spans of "development time" (1760-1896 for France, 1800-1926 for
Japan, and 1842-1990 for China). The research team, an anthropologist, a
geographer, a demographer, and an historian, will follow a comparative research
design to advance our knowledge of an important interdisciplinary issue: the
interaction between population processes and economic development in space and
time. Using disaggregated quantitative data and regional systems methodology,
the researchers will complete an analysis of each country's regional structure,
conceptualized as a hierarchy of central places and of their internally
differentiated hinterlands, and proceed to test propositions concerning
population and development. Then, in three comparable subregions (centered on
Bordeaux, Nagoya, and Ningbo) they will replicate the analysis at lower levels
of the hierarchy and pursue longitudinal studies, tracing the diffusion of
modern innovations downward through the spatial hierarchy. In selected local
systems within each of the targeted subregions, they will use the methods of
historical ethnography to extend the analysis to the village level. The project
is expected to demonstrate the analytical power of the regional systems model,
revealing its utility for a wide range of research in the social sciences.