* 9122659
* Analysis of Longshore Sediment Transport Theory Using Sand  Tracers
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1992,10/31/1994
* Karl Nordstrom, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 10/31/1994
* USD 21,999.00

Coastal erosion is often related to high wave energies associated with storms,
but it usually results from disparities in the coastal sediment budget
introduced by longshore transport gradients. Erosion, therefore, affects low
energy coastal environments as well as high energy coastal environments. The
rate of longshore sediment transport is an important factor in determining
erosion along a coast, and the accurate prediction of this rate is central to an
understanding of coastline changes and the effects of shore protection
structures. Understanding and prediction of longshore transport distribution
across the surf zone requires reliable and complete field and laboratory data.
This study will attempt to overcome many of the difficulties involved in
mounting a comprehensive field experiment of longshore sediment transport by
more accurately monitoring the variables which control sediment movement. The
study will evaluate longshore sediment transport theory with data from an
estuarine beach at Fire Island National Seashore. Its purpose is to gather and
analyze data as a basis for managing estuarine beaches in the Seashore, and it
will identify the processes that characterize wave energy and that cause erosion
and changes in the beach profile. The basic equations which describe longshore
sediment transport are usually tested with data from beaches and from wave tank
experiments in laboratory settings. While theoretically sound, the equations are
usually tested with poor quality data from beach studies. The accurate
measurement of sand movement in the surf zone of a beach is critical to any
study of sediment transport. The small dimensions and relatively low wave
energies of estuarine beaches facilitate field sampling and enhance the accuracy
of measurements. This project is designed to used specially colored sand as a
tracer in order to monitor movement of sediment along a section of shoreline.
This controlled experiment should generate the necessary data to accurately test
the equations for longshore sediment transport. The results of this study should
strengthen our understanding of sediment movement along shorelines which will
lead to better knowledge of shoreline erosion rates, their possible causes, and
to more effective strategies for preventing erosion along coastal areas.