* 9122463
* Topics in Macroeconomics and Forecasting
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Mark Watson, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1994
* USD 233,901.00

Overall, this project addresses three areas of time series econometrics and
empirical macroeconomics. The first area consists of methodological and
empirical issues in business cycle forecasting. The second concerns econometric
inference about the long-run properties of economic time series. The third part
of the project examines econometric issues about dynamic equilibrium
macroeconomic models. Recent advances in computational technology and data
availability have made it possible to contemplate macroeconomic forecasting with
literally hundreds of economic time series. This large number of potentially
important time series raises important methodological issues. This project
addresses empirical and methodological issues related to parameter instability,
changing cyclical patterns, and forecasting in high-dimensional systems.
Economic theory suggests and studies of individual relations (such as the money-
income relation) provide evidence of instability in reduced form forecasts of
the business cycle. Obtaining a better empirical understanding of this
instability is of interest from the perspectives of both macroeconomic theory
and economic forecasting. Understanding whether, how and when relations have
changed provides an empirical foundation for theoretical investigations of
macroeconomic dynamics and suggest ways to develop adaptive forecasting models.
This project is part of our economics of global change research agenda. It
relates to the very high priority goal of developing forecasting tools for
assessing the economic consequences of global climate change. The tools that are
now used by government and industry to make forecasts are subject to serious
methodological criticisms. The time series methods developed in this project
could provide much better forecasts of the impacts of the types of structural
changes in the economy anticipated from global warming and from government
policies to constrain or sharply reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.