* 9122201
* Tests of Expected Utility Theory at the Individual and      Market Levels
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1993
* Dorla Evans, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* N. John Castellan
* 07/31/1993
* USD 49,714.00

Finance and economics theorists assume preferences predicted by expected
utility (EU) theory hold at the market level even as evidence mounts that some
of those predictions are violated at the individual level. The objective of this
project is to determine the role of markets in disciplining behavior toward EU
outcomes. Specifically, is the distribution of EU violations different if
subjects participate in market-level decisions before individual- level
decisions? Do market design and gain versus loss payoffs affect the degree of
discipline provided by markets? Without empirical empirical evidence that EU
holds at the market level while its predictions are violated at the individual
level, the disciplines of finance and economics are ignoring possible weaknesses
in the models and opportunities to improve them. Proposed laboratory experiments
will record subjects' individual-level preferences for pairs of gambles which
are selected with specific constraints. Subjects will be given the opportunity
to participate in markets for these gambles. Individual and market preferences
will be compared with those predicted by EU theory. If the preferences violate
EU theory at the individual level but support it at the market level, there is
empirical support for the robustness of economic and finance models dependent
upon the EU assumption. If the preferences do not support EU at the market
level, then these models may have to be reformulated independently of the EU
assumption.