* 9122425
* Effects of Family Economic Resoures, Stress, and            Neighborhood on the Achievements of Young Adults
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Robert Haveman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 05/31/1996
* USD 148,620.00

The basic question addressed in this project is to what extent do family
circumstances and events during childhood affect a child's achievements and
economic status in young adulthood. On the basis of economic and sociological
theory, and preliminary evidence the following childhood circumstances and
events are analyzed: (1) The economic resources of the family which include
income levels, the source of income (whether earned or welfare transfers), the
nature of housing tenure, and the amount of time parents spent with the child;
(2) Stressful events in life such as divorce, separation, death, remarriage, and
geographical changes in residence; (3) Neighborhood characteristics like the
local poverty rate, unemployment, and welfare dependency; (4) Educational
attainment in terms of years of schooling; (5) Economic productivity measured in
terms of wage rates and earnings in post-school full time employment; and (6)
Teenage pregnancy and welfare dependency for young adult women. The purpose of
this research is to develop models characterizing the relationship between
--family economic resources, family stress, and neighborhood characteristics
when a child-- and economics success when adult; and then to estimate these
models. The models will be drawn from both the economic and sociological
literature, and the estimation will employ a data set consisting of 21 years of
longitudinal data on 1800 children aged 0-6 in 1968 and their siblings. The
determinants of economic success will be estimated by fitting statistical models
to the data, moving from the most straightforward regression estimates to models
designed to both capture the sequential nature of individual decisions and
account for inherent limitations of the data.