* 9122243
* Dissertation Research: The Exceptional Nature of the Noun   Phrase in Walloon: Its Significance for Comparative Romance Syntax
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1993
* NONE NONE, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 09/30/1993
* USD 5,000.00

ABSTRACT The dissertation student will spend two months in Belgium in order to
collect data on nominal structure in Walloon, a Belgian Romance language. The
results of this investigation will form an essential component of a doctoral
thesis concerning the comparative syntax of nominal structure across Romance
languages. Data will be collected primarily by interviewing and recording native
Walloon speakers living in the region of the Ardennes, as well as by consulting
local scholars in Louvain-la-Neuve and Liege and examining texts in university
and public libraries. The syntactic phenomena to be investigated include
adjective placement, nominal agreement patterns, clitic constructions, and
possessive pronouns. The proposed activity will be facilitated by the
collaboration of Professor Michel Francard, a Walloon dialectologist at the
Universite Catholique de Louvain. The significance of this project is twofold:
Firstly, as preliminary dissertation research has shown, unexpected syntactic
patterns of Walloon noun phrases shed light on an array of phenomena that have
eluded adequate explanation in recent work on comparative Romance syntax. In
addition, this research undertaking will provide the important opportunity to
gather and analyze syntactic data from this moribund language that, until
recently, has been studied only descriptively.