* 9122542
* Dissertation Research:  Genetic and Demographic Responses   of Wood Frogs to Induced Population Subdivision
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* NONE NONE, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1994
* USD 5,000.00

We propose to investigate genetic and demographic effects of human- induced
population subdivision on the wood frog (Rana sylvatica), an aquatic-breeding,
terrestrial-dwelling amphibian of mesic woodlands. Our study will examine
patterns of genetic variation within and divergence among 25 subpopulations of
wood frogs in a heavily urbanized area of southern Connecticut, U.S.A., where
subpopulations vary widely in size (10-1,000 individuals), length of isolation
(O, 10, 100, and 10,000 years), and degree of habitat connectivity. Features of
the landscape intervening subpopulations will be correlated with estimates of
genetic similarity between subpopulations to examine which geographic features
act as barriers versus paths to gene flow. A novel experimental procedure,
involving placement of artificial breeding pools in selected landscape
configurations, will be used to assess the "porosity" of human-created barriers
to disperse froglets. An examination of how habitat and population fragmentation
has proceeded in the study area during the last century (by inspection of maps
and aerial photographs) will aid in understanding how both zoogeographic factors
and historical demography shaped population-level phylogenies of wood frogs.
Such information is of particular interest to conservation biologists. who are
increasingly concerned with long-term maintenance of genetic diversity in
artificially fragmented populations.