* 9122778
* Industrial Organization, Spatial Organization, and          Industrial Competitiveness
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,04/30/1996
* Marshall Feldman, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 04/30/1996
* USD 65,000.00

Since the early 1980s, research on industrial organization has identified a new
form of flexibly specialized production in which large vertically integrated
firms engaged in mass production are being superseded by agglomerations of
spatially dense networks of small vertically disintegrated firms. Empirical
support for this thesis comes primarily from case studies of single industries
or isolated regions. Very little is know about how movement toward vertically
disintegrated industrial structures affects spatial agglomeration and industrial
competitiveness at the national or subregional level. This project will test
certain hypotheses relating spatial agglomeration, industrial organization, firm
size, and industrial competitiveness with unique data sets for industries at the
national level, and it should provide systematic statistical tests of key points
of contention in the debate over flexibility in industrial structures. The
project will map spatial patterns of agglomeration and vertical integration for
selected industries, and it will compare agglomeration and vertical integration
across regions by means of statistical tests of regression and analysis of
variance. This research will add new knowledge about the geography of industrial
organization in the U.S., and it will test some critical hypotheses about how
changes in industrial structure affect changes in competitiveness at regional
and national scales. It should further contribute to the debate about the impact
of industrial restructuring on the agglomeration of leading edge industries in
this country. At a theoretical level, the project will help settle some
important questions about the tendency toward flexibly specialized production
systems and their spatial concentration.