* 9122672
* Empirical Models of the Automobile Industry and             Implications of a Carbon Tax
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Ariel Pakes, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Vincy Fon
* 12/31/1994
* USD 235,312.00

The purpose of this project is develop a methodology for empirically analyzing
differentiated product industries, and apply it to study the changes that have
occurred in the U.S. automobile industry over the last two decades. The general
methodology has wide applicability, but the specifics of the model are tailored
to auto industry application. Therefore, the project will have both a
methodological and empirical output. The empirical goals are twofold: to come to
a broad understanding of the changes that have occurred in the U.S. auto market
during the last twenty years, and to provide an evaluation of public policies
that have been suggested for this industry. Of particular interest is the impact
of enviromnental regulation in the form of a carbon tax on the auto industry.
This project involves developing an estimable static model of differentiated
product markets. The key elements of the model are consumer preferences for the
characteristics of marketed products, the cost functions of firms, and a market
equilibrium assumption. The research focuses on three methodological concerns:
to develop a tractable model of consumer behavior that allows for reasonable
substitution patterns, to incorporate the presence of product characteristics
which are unobserved by the researcher, and to account for the process by which
firms choose the characteristics of new products. The resulting model will be
used to analyze a series of important public concerns in the automobile industry
including policies that aim to increase fuel efficiency, to regulate
international trade, and to implement anti-trust laws. Because the model starts
at the detailed micro level, it can provide results not only on the implications
of these policies for prices and quantities, but also for the distribution of
consumer welfare among income groups and the distribution of profits among
producers.