* 9123052
* Dissertation Research:  Consequences of Avian Seed Dispersalfor Understory Plants in Primary Forest in Lowland Costa    Rica
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1992,11/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Lindsay Fox
* 11/30/1993
* USD 7,687.00

This study will quantitatively examine the contribution to seed dispersal and
seedling establishment of understory shrub species by fruit-eating birds in a
Costa Rican wet lowland forest. Detailed data will be collected on the
distribution, fruiting phenology and seed germination and seedling establishment
requirements of two species of shrubby Melastomatacea and of Rubiaceae, both
dominant families in the understory at the site. These data will be combined
with dietary and behavioral data of three species of understory frugivorous
birds into a model to quantify seedling establishment of each plant species as a
result of dispersal by each bird species. Populations of the four shrub species
will be studied using standard measurement and phenology methods, and also
through quantification of light environments by hemispherical canopy photographs
and field germination and seedling survival trials. Bird populations will be
studied by direct observation of color-banded birds, fecal sample analysis, and
radio-tracking individuals of each species throughout the year. The combination
of plant and bird data into a mathematical model represents the first time that
this approach has been applied to a lowland understory system. Because of the
difficulty or impossibility of following the fates of individual seeds dispersed
from an understory plant, this model will provide a powerful tool for
quantifying interactions between understory plants and understory frugivorous
birds, a species rich, but little understood system .