* 9123568
* Deep Levels in Semiconductors by Microprobe X-Ray           Fluorescence and X-Ray Excited Luminescence
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1992,04/30/1996
* David Wittry, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/1996
* USD 224,200.00

Experimental studies on the characterization of impurities, particularly those
that form deep levels, in II-VI and other semiconductors by advanced X-ray
techniques are being conducted. The principal goal of the research is to obtain
a direct correlation of the luminescent properties of wide bandgap
semiconductors and local concentration of specific impurities. Although
remarkable results have recently been obtained for blue- emitting laser
heterjunction diodes based on ZnSe, the role of impurities in limiting the
maximum carrier concentration of p-type ZnSe is not understood, and it is
expected that the results of this research will be of significant benefit to the
understanding and improvement of II-VI materials, in general, as well as other
semiconductors. %%% This research is expected to aid in finding solutions for
several problems and to contribute to the understanding of outstanding issues in
II-VI materials related to impurities at low concentrations which adversely
affect fundamental radiative processes determining the feasibility and
efficiency of optoelectronic devices such as lasers and light emitting
diodes(LED). Understanding the fundamental nature of the influence of ultra-low
levels of impurities in these materials will contribute toward the realization
of improved optoelectronic devices operating in the blue spectral region.