* 9123291
* Metropolitan Restructuring, Neighborhood Change,            and Concentrated Poverty
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Hilary Silver, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/1996
* USD 138,318.00

This is a proposal to study why some urban neighborhoods become overwhelmingly
poor and black. The study will use census tract data to describe changes in
neighborhoods between 1970 and 1980. In attempting to explain such changes, the
investigators will consider first Wilson's so called mismatch hypothesis, which
sees economic restructuring as the basic reason for the concentration of poverty
in urban areas. An alternative explanation is provided by the out-migration
hypothesis which sees the outmigration of the black middle class from the inner
city ghetto as the primary reason for the changing composition of many urban
neighborhoods. The resulting geographic concentration of low-skilled, lower
class families and individuals then gives rise to emergent properties of
neighborhoods that may exacerbate social problems, such as deteriorated housing,
social isolation, joblessness, and female-headed families. The study will employ
a unique data set constructed by the Urban Institute. Census tract data from
1970 and 1980 are matched with geographical coordinates and additional SMSA-
level characteristics. The investigators will add further information about
metropolitan areas as well as longitude and latitude coordinates for each tract.
The resulting data file will be a national multi-level data base with
information on all census tracts, their geographic position, and the
characteristics of the metropolitan area in which they are located. The analysis
of neighborhood change will be done using first difference equation models with
variables specified at two levels, the tract level and the metropolitan area
level. This study will shed new light on the problem of concentrated urban
poverty in the United States. The study will go a long way towards resolving the
arguments both among social scientists and among policy makers about the causes
of the spatial concentration of poverty that was observed during the 1970s.