* 9123757
* Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Boundary Value Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1995
* John Sylvester, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1995
* USD 65,000.00

Continuing research on the mathematical theory of inverse problems in partial
differential equations will be supported by this award. The principal
mathematical ingredient of the work is the so-called Dirichlet to Neumann map:
The boundary values of a partial differential equation are given, the solution
is established and its normal derivative at the boundary is then given. The
relationship between the boundary values and the normal derivative is
established. One of the primary issues concerns the invertibility of the map and
the regularity of the inverse when it does exist. In the physical world it is
often much easier to measure the normal derivative - flux - than to know much
about the boundary values or the values of the solution within its region of
definition. This type of problem occurs in impedance tomography where one
attempts to measure internal resistivity in a body from measurements of voltage
and current at the boundary. Progress to date includes a variety of necessary
conditions for invertibility, but no good sufficient conditions are available
without the presence of symmetry assumptions. Better results have been achieved
in dimensions greater than two. The two dimensional tomography problem and
anisotropic cases (which can occur in geophysics) are important challenges.