* 9123273
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Applied and            Computational Mathematics: Analysis of Block and Two-Stage  Iterative Methods
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Daniel Szyld, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1996
* USD 10,750.00

This award supports Professor Daniel Szyld of Temple University to collaborate
in applied and computational mathematics with Professor Andreas Frommer of the
Institute for Applied Mathematics of the University of Karlsruhe, Germany. The
two researchers have worked on different aspects of the study of iterative
methods for the efficient solution of linear and nonlinear algebraic systems of
equations on both sequential and parallel computers. Frommer has worked
extensively on linear and nonlinear asynchronous methods and on multisplitting
methods. Szyld and his coauthors have worked on two-stage methods, including the
tools needed for their analysis and computational experiments. Recently the two
collaborators completed a study of two-stage iterative methods for H-matrices.
In the proposed new work, they will extend this study to block two-stage methods
and asynchronous (chaotic) parallel methods. They will look at both convergence
properties as well as implementation details. This work relies heavily on the
complementary expertise that each has developed in prior work. A central problem
in many science and engineering applications is the solution of large linear
systems of algebraic equations. The cooperating scientists will study
theoretical, computational and algorithmic aspects of the solution of such
systems and their applications. The project is likely to result in criteria to
determine an optimal or near-optimal number of inner iterations to guarantee
overall convergence and reduce parallel computing time.