* 9123488
* U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Electronic and     Magnetic Properties of Quasicrystalline and Amorphous Alloys
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1992,01/31/1998
* David Sellmyer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 01/31/1998
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports Professors S.S. Jaswal and D. J. Sellmyer of the University
of Nebraska to collaborate in condensed matter physics with Professor J>rgen
Hafner of the Technical University of Vienna. Their two research groups share an
interest in metallic glasses and propose to work together in a study of
amorphous and quasicrystalline transition-metal alloys. The collaboration will
bring together the theoretical expertise of the Austrian group in atomic
structure of liquid and amorphous metals with the experimental and theoretical
expertise of the U.S. group in the electronic structure and magnetic properties.
In addition, several other research groups in Europe and the U.S. will be
brought into the collaboration for particular necessary talents. At least one
young U.S. scientist, probably on the postdoctoral level, will be involved in
the collaboration. This project addresses mainstream issues in the field of
magnetic materials, and focuses on some particular active, important and
rewarding topics. The combination of theoretical and experimental work should
contribute to a better understanding of the short-range order and electronic
properties of 3d-5d transition metal glasses. The quasicrystals are much more
difficult to study theoretically because of their non- periodic long-range
order. Still, this effort to extend the theory on amorphous systems to the
properties of quasicrystals made up of simple metals has a good chance of
providing valuable new insights.