* 9123533
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Molecular Gas      Surrounding Newly Formed Massive Stars
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1995
* Edward Churchwell, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1995
* USD 11,150.00

This award supports Dr. Edward B. Churchwell and a graduate student of the
University of Wisconsin to collaborate with Dr. Malcolm Walmsley of the Max-
Planck Institute for Radioastronomy in Bonn, Germany. They are studying the
conditions under which massive stars form and subsequently evolve by
investigating the remaining molecular gas in which the star is embedded and the
star's interaction with it. In particular, they will test the bow shock
hypothesis by observing carefully selected molecular and atomic lines that probe
the ionized and molecular gas. These observations will be obtained from
observations at observatories in the U.S., Spain and Germany. This project is an
important extension of the ongoing research of Dr. Churchwell that would not be
possible without collaboration. Dr. Walmsley is an acknowledged expert on the
interstellar medium in general and particularly on the computation and
interpretation of the physical conditions in interstellar molecular and ionized
gas clouds. These areas are particularly important to their joint research. He
also provides convenient access to the 100 m telescope operated by the MPI in
Germany and brings expertise in using the specialized instruments. He will also
collaborate closely in developing detailed models of the molecular gas. Dr.
Churchwell offers expertise in VLA measurements and will use interferometric
instruments like the VLA in New Mexico to make observations in the US to study
these objects with high spatial resolution. Massive stars are formed in dense
condensations of molecular gas inside of giant molecular clouds. They play a
crucial role in the energetics of galaxies and the interstellar medium, but
their formation and early evolution are poorly understood. This project will
contribute new insights into the formation of such massive stars by obtaining
detailed physical parameters and spatial distribution of the surrounding hot
gas.