* 9123552
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Dynamic-Radiative Feedbacks in     Extratropical Energy and Moisture Cycles
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1996
* William Gutowski, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 10/31/1996
* USD 139,101.00

Interactions between atmospheric eddy dynamics and other physical processes
(radiation, convection, surface fluxes, etc.) play a significant role in the
energy and water cycles that maintain the extratropical temperature and moisture
distributions of the troposphere. These interactions thus play a significant
role in short-term climate variability, but our understanding of how they work
is incomplete. Dr. Gutowski and his collaborators will conduct a series of
numerical experiments designed to study the evolution of feedbacks in the
extratropical atmosphere among transient eddies, moisture, surface fluxes, and
radiation through the temperature and moisture distributions which are, in turn,
maintained by the eddies. The time scales under consideration are periods of
several days to several months. With this study, the PIs are building on their
series of results from studies of the interactions between baroclinic eddies.
Under the last grant, they looked at the effect of moisture. With this award,
they will explore the radiative effect. This research is an important part of
current efforts to better understand, and eventually predict, short-term
climate. This grant consists of two awards which are being made to separate
institutions for a collaborative effort. The other award is ATM-9213852 to Dr.
Branscome at Environmental Dynamics Research, Inc.