* 9123242
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Computer Simulation of     Fluids With Restricted Flow Geometrics
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1996
* Sohail Murad, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1996
* USD 14,950.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in chemical
engineering between Sohail Murad of the University of Illinois at Chicago and
J.G. Powles of the University of Kent, United Kingdom. They propose to conduct a
comprehensive study of the molecular and macroscopic behavior of fluids with
restricted flow geometries, using computer simulation methods. They will examine
well-defined geometries, such as slits and pores, and more irregular geometries,
including random porous systems. The investigators' collaboration during the
last six years has resulted in a novel technique that attaches a subset of
molecules in the simulation to appropriate positions for obtaining any desired
geometry. This technique will allow them to study the behavior of fluids as the
boundary changes from impermeable to a permeable wall. The international aspects
of this collaboration are significant. Both the U.S. and British investigators
are expert in molecular dynamics and theory. The two groups will carry out
independent molecular dynamics studies and numerical simulations. They will
compare data and results. Their joint effort will allow rapid progress and
advance our understanding of the molecular behavior of polar fluids such as
ammonia and hydrogen chloride. Their research is of fundamental and practical
interest to a wide variety of disciplines in materials science, chemsitry and
biology, where permeable and semipermeable membranes and porous flow are
encountered.