* 9123819
* U.S.-Western Europe Cooperative Research on the             Communication Network of Territorial Songbirds
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,05/31/1996
* Christopher Clark, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1996
* USD 10,550.00

This award supports Professor Christopher Clark of Cornell University and a
graduate student to collaborate with two groups of European biologists in a
study of songbird communication. Professor Clark has developed a passive
acoustic system for locating vocalizing animals using an array of microphones.
The system computes the locations of individual birds which are vocalizing
anywhere within 200 meters of the center of the array. This technique allows him
to simultaneously follow the movements and acoustic behaviors of many different
birds within a community and study the details of their vocal interactions. He
will apply this system to two well marked and studied populations of European
birds through field work in England with Dr. Peter McGregor of the University of
Nottingham and in Denmark with Dr. Torben Dabelsteen from the University of
Copenhagen. These collaborators have marked populations of blackbirds and other
species, and have pioneered interactive playback systems that are biologically
meaningful. Bird song and singing behavior among territorial birds are very
complex and poorly understood phenomena. This research plan introduces
innovative techniques that will help surmount technical problems associated with
studying communication networks. The results should be significant new
information about how animals communicate with their vocalizations.