* 9123071
* Mathematical Sciences: Structural Stability and Floquet     Theory for Parabolic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Kening Lu, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 11/30/1994
* USD 35,000.00

The main goal of this research is the development of a local and global
structural stability theory for parabolic partial differential equations and a
Floquet theory for time dependent linear parabolic equations. Structural
stability was first introduced in the study of ordinary differential equations,
in particular for dynamical systems. Many concepts of dynamical systems have
been adapted to infinite dimensional systems, especially to partial differential
equations which define dynamical systems on non-compact spaces. However, those
systems generated by parabolic equations are not reversible. This characteristic
creates difficulties not encountered in the study of finite dimensional
dynamical systems and new methods must be developed to understand the nature of
these systems. A theory for scalar reaction-diffusion equations has recently
been obtained. Specific classes of equations such as the Cahn-Hilliard Equation
and Phase-Field System will be considered for specific analysis. Other work will
study structural stability of flows near periodic solutions for time-periodic
parabolic equations. In the same spirit, efforts will be made to carry over the
Floquet theory (too technical to describe here) from finite periodic systems to
parabolic partial differential equations of similar type.