* 9123884
* Beliefs, Scale, and the Human Response to Global            Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Robert Mitchell, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 06/30/1995
* USD 98,255.00

Awareness of global environmental change as a problem for human societies and
the biosphere has developed rapidly during the past decade. Humans respond
positively to environmental change in one of two ways, by either adapting to
changes which affect their activities or by anticipating unacceptable
environmental change with the goal of preventing or minimizing its effects. The
ways in which individuals respond to global environmental change as perceived is
little understood and under researched. This project will focus on the public's
perception of global environmental problems and how this shapes the way in which
people respond to these problems. It will also examine the influence of
geographical scale on public beliefs and attitudes. The study will engage focus
groups of citizens in several cities on various aspects of their attitudes and
beliefs about global change at different spatial scales. A national telephone
survey will provide both qualitative and quantitative information about public
perceptions of global change and the range of possible responses people might
make to combat it. This research will improve existing knowledge of the societal
response to global warming by investigating the role that behaviorally relevant
beliefs play in shaping people's interest in it, their perception of its
characteristics, their assumptions about its effects, and the likelihood that
they will take personal action or support societal action to minimize these
effects. It will enhance theoretical understandings of the human response to
threats of global change, and it will inform public policy as to the ways in
which global warming is perceived.