* 9123549
* Functions of mRNP Proteins in the Process of Translation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1992,07/31/1995
* John Hershey, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Valerie W. Hu
* 07/31/1995
* USD 80,500.00

Regulation of mRNA translation constitutes an important aspect in the control of
gene expression mammalian cells. Most examples of translational control involve
modulation of the initiation phase of protein synthesis. Two kinds of initiation
events can be distinguished either of which may be regulated: 1) initiation on
polysomes, thereby maintaining a full complement of ribosomes on the mRNAs; and
2) initiation on messenger ribonucleoprotein (mRNP) particles, thereby
mobilizing non- active mRNAs into active polysomes. The latter event is poorly
understand, yet its regulation is encountered frequently. The PIs propose to
characterize proteins that bind to mRNP particles and that mask their activiies.
One such protein of 50 kDa has been purified in Pushchino, and its mechanism of
action as a translational inhibitor will be probed. Its site of binding to mRNAs
will be determined, and the inhibited step of protein synthesis will be
identified. They also plan to clone its cDNA and determine the effect of
overexpression in transfected mammalian cells. Preliminary evidence from
Puschino suggests that the 50 kDa protein may itself be regulated by an
"activator"; the "activator" will be purified and characterized. These studies
rely on classical biochemical techniques of protein purification and chemistry
presently used in both Davis and Puschino, employ in vitro cell-free
translatiion systems, some highly fractionated and reconstituted with purified
initiatiion factors from Davis, and employ state-of-the-art transfection
methods. %%% The project is designed to shed light on the basic molecular
mechanisms of how mRNP particles are activated and inhibited for translation,
and thus should help elucidate this major poorly understood area of gene
regulation.