* 9123464
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Multi-User Network Securityand Subliminal-Free Channels
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Yvo Desmedt, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in communications
and network security between Yvo Desmedt of the University of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee and Michael Burmmester and Frederick Piper of the University of
London. The project is concerned with the possibility of communicating
unintended secret messages in multi-sender and multi-receiver networks. The
objective is to design secure communications and network systems to protect
against abuses in cryptographic protocols. Dr. Desmedt brings to this
collaboration his background in theoretical computer science and his
understanding of practical issues in communication network systems. His recent
research, in cooperation with the British investigators, has shown that a
geometric approach to these problems could be useful for developing abuse-free
cryptosystems and subliminal free authentication communication channels. British
expertise in finite geometry and applications to multi-user network security
complements Dr. Desmedt's background. Multi-user network security is likely to
grow in importance with the development of large voice and data networks and
their worldwide availability. Information security and protection of privacy are
important issues in this area. This project offers an innovative geometric
approach and possible solutions to these problems.