* 9123668
* CRB:  Restoration of Logged Rain Forests in Sabah, East     Malaysia
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Diane Davidson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1996
* USD 170,320.00

This project addresses (1) means of hastening recovery of logged secondary rain
forests, which buffer remnant primary forests from species losses, and (2) ways
to enhance economic value of forestry lands, to relieve pressure on uncut
forests, and prevent forest conversion to uses incompatible with maintaining
biodiversity. Experiments investigate potentially key roles of pioneer trees in
recovery of Sabah Malaysia's tropical rain forests after selective logging. In
three post-logging disturbance regimes, seed addition experiments assess the
extent to which pioneer patchiness after logging reflects seed availability
versus site specificity of pioneers. Other studies in recently logged areas
address seasonality of seed delivery, impact of seed predators on pioneer seeds,
and effects of herbivore exclusion on succession. Date on vine-host interactions
will help evaluate the effectiveness of specific plant traits in shedding vines
that retard post-logging succession. Other experiments focus on later
successional stages and favorability of pioneers as "nurse plants" for
recolonization by persistent dipterocarps. Experiments compare dipterocarp
germination and survivorship in pioneer and primary forests. Enrichment
plantings of dipterocarp seedlings with and without trenching quantify below-
ground competition from pioneers. Moderate liberation thinning of pioneers over
dipterocarps will help assess responses of different sized dipterocarps to
release from light competition.