* 9123185
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program: Electron ScatteringInvestigations
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* T Donnelly, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Emily B. Rudin
* 01/31/1995
* USD 9,960.00

This award from the U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program supports
collaborative research in nuclear physics to be conducted Drs. T. William
Donnelly and Ernest J. Moniz of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Drs. Mahir Hussein and Helio Diaz of the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil. The
focus of the research will be to carry out collaborative theoretical research
nuclear physics, specifically calculations of the nuclear response to high
energy electron scattering. The output of such calculations would greatly
further the experimental programs at several high priority laboratories in the
U.S. and Brazil. The project will provide calculations of the nuclear response
to high energy electron scattering. Electromagnetic nuclear physics is one of
the top priority activities in nuclear science and the investigators are amongst
the leaders worldwide in performing such calculations. The investigators will
explore the use of overlapping resonances and non- resonant background terms in
understanding giant resonance electro-excitation. They will also probe the
microscopic basis for the resonance picture. In addition, they will investigate
the role of two-body interactions when imbedded in a nuclear medium, focussing
on the repulsive core part of the nucleon-nucleon interaction and how it
introduces short range correlations and modifies the electron scattering
response functions. The calculations will enhance the experimental programs at
CEBAF and Bates (high priority laboratories in the U.S.) and for the lower
energy facilities under construction in Brazil.