* 9123167
* Thermodynamics and Kinetic Theory of Structural             Transformations in Metal and Ceramic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Armen Khachaturyan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1996
* USD 300,000.00

Theoretical studies will be done on the thermodynamics and kinetics of
morphological and structural transformations in technologically advanced
materials, multiphase metal alloys with intermetallics and in ceramic systems.
An understanding of underlying mechanisms of atomic and structural
transformations is crucial for processing and materials design. An evolution of
the atomic structure as well as mesoscale pattern formation along the
transformation path will be considered. The emphasis will be on the
decomposition and ordering which results in a reduction of the point group
symmetry. The problem of transient metastable phases and their relation to the
mesoscale structure will be addressed. We will concentrate on attacking problems
concerning precipitation of non-cubic ordered intermetallic phases from a cubic
matrix, strain-induced coarsening, mesoscale pattern formation, problems
involving virtual metastable phases, and structure formation in ceramic systems.
%%% Theoretical studies utilizing analytical and computational techniques will
be done to understand the structural transformations which occur in metals and
ceramics. A knowledge of these transformations is important in the processing of
these advanced materials in order to correlate materials properties to the
underlying crystal structure.