* 9123860
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research: Pattern Transitions at the Shoot Apex of Plants
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Jeanne Selker, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1993
* USD 10,000.00

This award for U.S.-U.K. cooperative research will support a long- term visit to
the United Kingdom. Dr. Jeanne Selker of the University of Oregon and Dr. Robert
Lyndon of the University of Edinburgh will jointly study the transition in
patterns of appendage formation in developing plants. They will study two plant
systems: (1) Silene transition to flowering; and (2) watercress root-to-shoot
conversion. The proposed work will involve observations of the growth of apices
during the transition period and experiments aimed at identifying the causal
events which either prevent transition or produce no effect whatsoever. Dr.
Selker brings to this collaboration expertise in the biophysical
characterization of cell patterns in plant apices. This is complemented by Dr.
Lyndon's extensive work on the Silene and watercress systems and his innovative
experimental approaches to characterizing and manipulating plant developing
systems. Plant appendages, such as leaves, petals and stamens, are produced at
the shoot apex in a pattern. Researchers do not understand how appendages are
produced in a specific pattern or what causes these patterns to change. The
proposed research will yield valuable knowledge and correlations about the
transition processes and pattern formations.