* 9123384
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Experimental           Geochemistry at High Pressures and Temperatures
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Michael Drake, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1994
* USD 12,500.00

This award supports Elisabeth McFarlane and Valerie Hillgren, two graduate
students of Professor Michael Drake, University of Arizona, to travel to Germany
to take advantage of an unique combination of facilities and personnel at the
University of Bayreuth to carry out experimental geochemistry research.
Professor Drake made an extended visit to the Geological Institute there in
1991. Now he has arranged for further related work to be carried out by his
students under the guidance of his principal collaborator at Bayreuth, Dr. David
Rubie. In addition to fruitful interactions with Dr. Rubie and other experts at
the Geological Institute, the students will benefit from the availability of two
highly advanced and very rare pieces of equipment: a multi-anvil press and an
x-ray microdiffractometer. Both of these apparatus are invaluable in conducting
ultrahigh pressure trace element partitioning experiments between various metal
and silicate phase pairs. The results of their experiments will be applied to
understanding the early thermal history and differentiation of the Earth and
Mars, and the origin of the Moon. The principal research program of Professor
Drake involves experimental studies of elemental partitioning among solid
silicate, oxide, and metal phases and silicate and metallic melts at high
pressures and temperatures. Knowledge of these partition coefficients is
essential to the interpretation of elemental systematics in the mantle and
mantle-derived materials. This bears specifically on the question of the
formation and early differentiation of the Earth and the intimately associated
problem of the origin of the moon.