* 9123572
* U.S.- U.K. Cooperation Research: Body Composition and       Survival in Sturnus Vulgaris
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1992,02/28/1994
* Charles Thompson, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 02/28/1994
* USD 15,625.00

This award will support U.S.-U.K. cooperative research between Charles F.
Thompson of Illinois State University and Christopher M. Perrins, Director of
the Edward Grey Institute, Oxford University. The investigators will examine the
relationship between body fat stores and survival in fledgling and juvenile
European starlings. Their objective is to test the hypothesis that bird survival
is positively correlated with fat storage capacity at the time of nest-leaving.
Fat storage capacity is thought to be important for survival in many species of
birds whose offspring leave the nest before they are capable of obtaining food
for themselves. The investigators will employ European starlings, used
extensively for ecological research at University Farm of Oxford University.
Data on body composition will be collected and fat content will be determined
using the TOBEC method, a new, safe measuring technique in avian biology. Dr.
Thompson brings to this collaboration his extensive background on the house wren
and his experience with the TOBEC method. This is complemented by the British
group's background on the evolution of life history traits in birds. The Edward
Grey Institute has been at the forefront of avian biology and ecology since the
1940s. This cooperative research effort will advance our knowledge about the
relationship between variation in the condition of offspring in certain species
of birds, their survival and ultimately the reproductive success of the parents.