* 9123722
* Functionalized Polyolefins:  Synthesis and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Tze Chiang Chung, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1995
* USD 180,000.00

This research relates to a new class of polymers, functionalized polyolefins,
which have unique molecular (comb-like) structure. The functional group is
located at the end of the side chain with several flexible methylene spacers.
This type of polymer could be a very useful material, not only in the sense of
having mobile primary functional groups to interact with other materials, but
also because many of the desirable physical properties of polyolefins-such as
crystallinity, thermal stability, and processibility-are preserved. The
chemistry involved in preparing this type of functional polyolefin involves
borane monomers and transition-metal catalysts, such as Ziegler-Natta and olefin
metathesis catalysts. Borane monomers are generally stable to transition-metal
catalysts and are polymerizable to high-molecular-weight polymers. In turn, the
borane groups in these polymers are easily converted to other functional groups
under mild conditions to polyalcohols. This new functionalization chemistry will
include: (1) a systematic study of borane monomers which are polymerizable with
transition metal catalysts; (2) the extension of this functionalization
chemistry to polyolefins containing amino and halide groups; (3) a new synthetic
route to prepare telechelic polymers with functional groups at both ends of the
polymer chain; (4) the utilization of reactive polyolefins to prepare other new
classes of materials, such as block and graft polyolefin copolymers; (5) the
application of functionalized polyolefins to immobilize catalysts for chemical
processes; (6) the evaluation of functionalized polyolefins in polymer blends
and alloys. This study will be a colloboration with Dr. Charles C. Han of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Overall, the goals are not only
to extend this functionalization chemistry, but also to study the potential of
applying these research findings to the preparation of materials with novel
properties.