* 9123941
* CRB:  Species-centered Environmental Analysis for the Red-  cockaded Woodpecker
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Frances James, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/1996
* USD 178,526.00

The objective of the project is to develop a new approach to basic research in
conservation biology--Species-Centered Environmental Analysis (SCEA)--and to
apply it to an extensive analysis of the population dynamics of the endangered
Redcockaded Woodpecker (Picoides borealis) in relation to its environment. A
graph (envirogram) containing information on extrinsic factors that directly and
indirectly affect the reproduction and survival of the population of interest is
constructed. These factors include predation,competition, with other species for
cavities, quality and amount of foraging habitat,properties of cavities, and the
distances among social units. The second step is causal modeling by path
analysis using structural equations. In the third step,field data for 160 social
units from three study areas in northern Florida and Southern Georgia and
additional data from North Carolina is obtained. The fourth step is an explicit
interaction among theory, previous knowledge about causal relationships, and
statistical data analysis. Finally, the results are simplified into a graphic
summary of the covariance structure of factors thought to be limiting the
populations. The method, Species-centered Environmental Analysis (SCEA),
searches the system of responses of units to their respective environments for
the combination of key environmental factors that could support a viable natural
population at each site. For the Red-cockaded Woodpecker, this research is
crucial. Provision in a modern managed landscape of the specific features of old
growth that it requires. We think that the SCEA approach will help researchers
develop interpretable descriptions of factors regulating populations. One of its
potential applications is in the development of recovery plans for endangered
species.