* 9123394
* Economic Issues in Medical Malpractice:  Dispute Resolution and the Shift to No-Fault
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Michelle White, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 01/31/1995
* USD 48,558.00

Medical malpractice represents the intersection of patient concerns about the
quality of medical care with the use of law to redress a perceived grievance.
When patients are dissatisfied with the quality of the medical care they
receive, they can either register a complaint at a hospital or file a lawsuit.
If they register a complaint, the hospital's complaints office may respond by
offering a forum for an individual to air a grievance, providing compensation in
the form of forgiveness of a patient's outstanding bill, or by offering cash
compensation. If an offer of compensation is made, the patient has a choice
between accepting the offer or rejecting it, in which case (s)he may file a
medical malpractice lawsuit. If no offer of compensation is made, the patient
has a choice between filing a lawsuit or taking no further action. To date, very
little research has been completed which seeks to examine how complaints evolve
into settlements, and into medical malpractice lawsuits. Dr. White will fill
this gap in medical malpractice research by collecting a rich set of data on
complaints registered in a specific hospital and merging it with an existing
data set concerning medical malpractice lawsuits from the same source. Utilizing
the merged data set, models will be constructed to analyze what determines
whether complaints evolve into lawsuits, assess which side benefits most from
resolving disputes early, and estimate whether negligence matters in determining
the hospital's expected liability at the complaint stage of the dispute
management process. This phase of the project should provide considerable
insight into the pre-litigation dispute resolution process in general and how
the early stages of dispute processing influence the evolution of complaints
into settlements or into lawsuits. Using a simulation approach, the second phase
of the project investigates the costs and benefits of shifting from the current
system of liability in medical malpractice to a hypothetical no- fault system.
This phase of the project will investigate a series of important policy
questions, including an estimate of the effect of a shift to no-fault on the
level of total compensation paid and the cost of administering the compensation
system.