* 9123392
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Gender Talks: The       Language of Women Doing "Men's" Work
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1992,11/30/1993
* John Rickford, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1993
* USD 2,100.00

ABSTRACT Ethnographic studies of women in traditionally all-male, working-
class jobs demonstrate that such women must present themselves as masculine in
order to be perceived as competent. Such studies repeatedly refer to women who
talk tough, talk rough, women, in short, who talk like men. This study examines
the speech of policewomen and policemen in Pittsburgh, examining their
management of verbal conflict, lexical encoding of affect, pitch range and pitch
dynamicity, and use of vernacular phonlogical variables to determine when and
how women choose to talk in masculine ways. Questions considered include: Do
policewomen employ the same verbal strategies for resolution of conflict as do
policemen? When do policewomen and policemen manipulate inexpressiveness to
legitimate their authority in the community, and what are the linguistic markers
of inexpressiveness? Have women whose speech is perceived as masculine adopted
more monotonic, less dynamic intonational contours? The study also considers the
widespread finding that men are more likely to use vernacular phonological forms
to project themselves as tough than are women of the same class, by
investigating the following Pittsburgh vernacular variables: vocalization of
/\/, neutralization of tense-lax vocalic contrasts before/\/, monophthongization
of (al) and (aw), use of apical nasals for velar nasals in the morpheme -ing,
and realization of voiceless and voiced interdental fricatives as stops. This
study critically examines the common sociolinguistic assumption that although
language varies across social contexts, social attributes like gender do not. In
particular it focusses on the ways that linguistic projections of gender-typed
characteristics vary according to speaker's occupation. Finally, the study
suggests that rather than understanding the use of certain linguistic features
as marking a social roles (e.g. understanding vocalization of /\/ as a male
marker), sociolinguistics should explore how linguistic features are associated
with certain linguistic styles (e.g. tough, masculine) that that are normatively
associated with certain social groups, situations and occupations. The project
then becomes to understand how individual speakers manipulate the available
speech styles to project the social identities they wish to create for
themselves.