* 9123215
* Trans Geometry Complexes of Ru and Os for Photophysical and Electrochemical Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* Thomas Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 09/30/1994
* USD 11,250.00

This Science in Developing Countries award will support the collaboration of
Thomas J. Meyer of the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and Barbara
Loeb L. of Pontificia Universidad Catolica, Chile. The project will focus on the
design, synthesis, characterization, and systematic investigation of the
properties of a novel class of monomeric and multinuclear ligand-bridged metal
complexes. The research aims to synthesize trans-- (poly)pyridyl (d)6 metal
complexes of Os(II), Ru(II), and Re(I), in which intramolecular photochemical
and electrochemical electron transfer processes from spatially controlled
electron donor and acceptor sites can be studied. The project will pursue three
different approaches to synthesizing these trans- metal complexes in order to
(1) compare the solution phase photophysical responses of the trans complexes
with those of cis analogs; and (2) assemble uniform monolayers of these trans
complexes on the surface of metal oxide electrodes to explore possible molecular
diode-type rectifying behavior. The collaboration is expected to lead to the
development of new molecular systems that will allow more thorough investigation
of intramolecular electron transfer events. The Chilean team has synthetic
expertise, facilities, and manpower for performing the syntheses most
efficiently. The U.S. side will gain knowledge to duplicate synthetic
development in the U.S. By observing in the U.S. methods of photophysical and
electrochemical investigations of the anticipated new compounds, the Chileans
will gain experience needed to establish a laboratory in Chile.