* 9123883
* MAB: Agronomic and Economic Analysis of Progressive Green- house Warming: Impacts on Grain Yields, Cropping Patterns, and Farm Profitability
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1994
* Susan Riha, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 12/31/1994
* USD 49,499.00

Agricultural ecosystems are key elements of the life support systems of all
developed societies. These systems are so dominated by human factors that a
reasonable understanding of their responses to large-scale changes in the
physical environment necessarily requires consideration of economic influences
on human decision making, which modulate the biophysical aspects of agricultural
production. The economics, in turn, are critically influenced by the biological
responses to the physical environment, which determine yield potential and
commodity supplies. A credible treatment of these interactions requires
integration of physical, biological and social science approaches and tools.
This research project will jointly assess the predicted economic and
agricultural impacts of evolving climate changes caused by gradually increasing
greenhouse gas concentrations. A recently developed methodology, which focuses
on the response of farm-level decisions to changes in the physical environment,
will form the basis of the study. The project will consider the major grain
crops of North America, for which reasonably comprehensive agronomic,
climatological and economic data are available. The proposed research will
contribute to the scientific understanding of interactions between human and
biophysical determinants of food production and prices in the context of a
changing climate. It will track the effects of gradual climate changes through a
set of physiological crop models to a sequential linear programming model of
farm-level decision making, and is thus truly interdisciplinary in nature. The
results will provide tools which can contribute usefully to informed decisions
regarding the consequences of both energy and agricultural policy on landscape
patterns, food production and prices.