* 9123140
* SGER:  Plant Connexin - Structure, Location, and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1992,08/31/1993
* Melvin Schindler, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1993
* USD 40,000.00

It has long been known that plasmodesmata are involved in the symplastic
transport of solutes between adjacent plant cells. The overall aim of this
project is to study the compositional, structural and functional organization of
plasmodesmata in higher plants. Recent data have suggested that proteins present
in plasmodesmata may resemble connexin proteins present in the gap junctions of
animal cells. Gap junctions are involved in the symplastic movement of ions and
perhaps small molecules between animal cells. The hypothesis being tested in
this proposal is that plant connexins reside in plasmodesmata and are involved
in intercellular transport processes. The primary thrust of this project is to
produce and purify a panel of monospecific antibodies directed against protein
motifs present in a putative plant connexin that has already been obtained from
a cDNA expression library from Arabidopsis. The antibodies will be used in
ultrastructural immunolocalizations, with the aim of demonstrating their
specific distribution in or around plasmodesmata. Later, the antibodies will be
used in a fluorescent dye transport assay, where their specific associations
with plasmodesmatal components are expected to block intercellular movement of
the fluorochrome. Collectively, these studies will contribute to our
understanding about the structural organization and functional roles connexin-
like proteins in plasmodesmata.