* 9123858
* Development of a more efficient insect transformation system
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Ross MacIntyre, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1994
* USD 53,500.00

The long term objective of the proposed research is to develop physical and
genetics systems for the delivery of cloned DNA to any insect species with
subsequent site specific integration into the genome. We will explore the
ability of Drosophila melanogaster embryos whose vitelline membranes have been
permeabilized by a recently developed procedure to take up both DNA and
nucleotide precursors. We will also utilize Drosophila embryos which are mutant
for two predominant deoxyribonucleases to increase the persistence of the
introduced DNA in both the somatic and germ cells. The third aim of the research
is to adapt the "Flip recombinase" system from yeast for use in insect hosts.
Initially Drosophila and Musca domestica (housefly) embryos will be transformed
with the recombination site sequence (FRT). Then, the recombinase gene will be
introduced along with selectable marker genes in plasmids containing a single
FRT sequence. Site specific recombination of the marker genes will be monitored
by genomic Southern and chromosomal in situ hybridization analysis. Because such
a more efficient and site directed transformation system that is developed for
Drosophila as a model system should be applicable to any other insect species,
it will be possible to introduce genes at will into insect pests and vectors of
human disease. This ability should allow biologists to devise new strategies for
insect control.***//