* 9123222
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in High-level Synthesis   Algorithms, Tools and Designs
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Giovanni De Micheli, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/29/1996
* USD 12,300.00

This award supports Dr. Giovanni De Micheli of Stanford University to
collaborate in computer science research with Dr. Raul Camposano of the German
National Research Center for Computer Science (GMD) in Sankt Agustin, Germany.
They are linking their research efforts in the process of transforming high
level, behavioral descriptions of digital hardware into logic- level
specifications. In particular, they plan to enhance the front-end of the
"Olympus" synthesis system, developed at Stanford, by providing a VHDL input, as
well as a synthesis policy for VHDL. This effort will benefit tremendously from
Dr. Camposano's experience with VHDL models; he will take primary responsibility
for this part of the project. Both of them will work on more efficient
algorithms for constraint-based synthesis of concurrent hardware, such as the
scheduling problem for large scale circuits, where well known techniques are
inefficient. They also plan to work separately but cooperatively on hardware
designs, with the goal of synthesizing four to six real designs between the two
sites. This proposal joins the efforts of two well- respected researchers in the
design automation community in a project that can have significant impact on
progress in electronic system design. The enhancement to the Stanford Olympus
synthesis system will make it available to the mainstream of electronic system
designers. Improving algorithms for constraint-based synthesis will result in
more efficient ways to design systems.