* 9123943
* CRB:  Influence of Captive Breeding Strategies on           Population Viability
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1996
* Paul Leberg, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1996
* USD 120,000.00

As the number of species facing extinction in the wild continues to increase,
the role of captive breeding programs in preserving biotic diversity will become
more important. Decisions regarding management of captive populations can have
large impacts on their genetic diversity and may ultimately affect the survival
of threatened species. The influence of captive breeding strategies on the
viability of individuals and populations will be assessed in two related
experiments. First, small populations of the mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis)
will be managed using one of four strategies that have been suggested for the
management of captive populations. This experiment will determine how these
strategies affect the reproduction, growth, development and survival of
individuals in captivity. Second, individuals from these populations will be
used to found populations in large microcosms, designed to simulate small ponds.
This experiment will determine if the way a captive population is managed will
affect its ability to establish successful wild populations. The influence of
captive breeding strategies on the number of individuals that need to be
released to establish successful wild populations will also be examined. This
research will help improve management of captive breeding populations, while
also helping to ensure the success of reintroduction programs.