* 9123080
* Dissertation Research: A Molecular Examination of Homoploid Hybrid Speciation in Penstemon
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1994
* USD 7,300.00

The role of hybridization in the formation of new species, particularly at the
diploid level, is a central problem of plant evolution. Graduate student Andrea
Wolfe, under the direction of faculty advisor Wayne Elisens at University of
Oklahoma, proposes to test various hypotheses of homoploid hybrid speciation in
a complex of four species of herbaceous perennials in the genus Penstemon, using
molecular and genetic markers. Individual plants sampled throughout the range of
each species will be surveyed for isozyme (protein) variation and for mutational
differences in chloroplast DNA and in nuclear ribosomal DNA. Because these data
provide genetic markers which minimize problems of character intermediacy and
dominance, they are especially appropriate for testing hypotheses about
hybridization and introgression, and the origin of new species from stabilized
hybrid recombinants. The study represents a unique opportunity to test two
examples of hybrid speciation in a group of closely related plants. Because one
purported parental species, Penstemon centranthifolius, has numerous diagnostic
molecular and genetic markers which distinguish it from other members of this
hybrid complex, the group of species also offers an excellent system to test
models of introgressive hybridization, the "leakage" of genes from one species
into another.