* 9123532
* Mathematical Sciences: Heat Flow of Harmonic Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1997
* Yunmei Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1997
* USD 90,000.00

The focus of this project is the mathematical analysis of solutions of partial
differential equations defined on surfaces or manifolds. The work is intuitively
geometric in that it seeks to determine when smooth mappings between manifolds
can be deformed into harmonic maps between the same manifolds. The question can
be rephrased in terms of parabolic partial differential equations where the
deformation becomes the evolution of the solution in time. Considerable work has
been done on problems of this nature, especially in Euclidean space. It is known
that solutions need not evolve for all time, a phenomenon commonly referred to a
finite-time blow up. In the present context, the known conditions which preclude
blow up are related to the dimension and sectional curvatures of the target
manifold. The best results are known for two dimensional manifolds. In the
present work, efforts will be made to establish global existence of the heat
flow of harmonic maps with boundary in higher dimensions and to understand the
character of singularities when they do occur. A second objective is that of
understanding the boundary regularity of the heat flow for harmonic maps in
higher dimensions. Evidence suggests that the evolving solutions to the heat
equation cannot first encounter singularities at the boundary. This may be
difficult to show in higher dimensions, but there is reason to believe that a
complete analysis is possible in two and three dimensional manifolds. Partial
differential equations form the backbone of mathematical modeling in the
physical sciences. Phenomena which involve continuous change such as that seen
in motion, materials and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are
expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships between partial
derivatives. The key role of mathematics is not to state the relationships, but
rather, to extract qualitative and quantitative meaning from them.