* 9123390
* Dissertation Research: Evolution and Cultural Meaning of    Courts in the Copan Acropolis
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1992,06/30/1993
* NONE NONE, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1993
* USD 10,216.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Sharer, Ms Loa Traxler will collect data for
her doctoral dissertation thesis. She will participate in the excavation of the
Acropolis of Copan and determine how architectural construction changed over
time. Copan, located in Honduras, is one of the major Mayan sites and it
documents the rise and subsequent decline of Mayan society. A large mound or
"Acropolis" marks the center of the site and consists of superimposed temples,
palace buildings and other structures. Although other Mayan sites also contain
such a sequence of buildings, Copan is unique because an erosional cut along the
eastern portion allows ready access to all major construction levels and
presents a rare opportunity for extensive exposure of superimposed architecture.
Dr. Sharer and his colleagues have developed a tunneling strategy which lets
them follow buried walls and reconstruct building size and shape. Ms Traxler
will continue to collect and analyze such data. In Middle America,
archaeologists have tended to concentrate either on monumental structures which
provide insight into elite behavior or on smaller outlying sites associated with
lower class status. The site of Copan is particularly important because of the
long term settlement pattern survey and excavations which have focussed on the
latter. As a result of this work, archaeologists now understand how population
changed over time and how the utilization of the Copan Valley changed. Within
this context, the data which Ms Traxler will collect is extremely important
because it will permit her to examine how these two levels of society
interacted. This research will provide new insight into the rise and decline of
Mayan civilization. It will result in data of interest to a large group of
archaeologists and assist in the training of an extremely promising young
scientist.