* 9123396
* Peasant Household Strategies and Socio-Economic             Differentiation: A Comparison of Transmigrants in South     Sumatra and the Moluccas
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1993,12/31/1994
* Thomas Leinbach, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Holly
* 12/31/1994
* USD 26,354.00

Agrarian transformation receives considerable attention in the literature on
social and economic change in the developing nations of the world. Socio-
economic differentiation of the peasantry is poorly understood at the household
or village level, particularly with respect to household strategies of petty
enterprise and labor mobility. This project will investigate social and economic
differentiation of the peasantry in the context of the Indonesian Transmigration
program. Under this program, poor, landless households in Java and Bali are
recruited to move to the outer islands to new settlements where they receive
land, allowances and training in agriculture. This attempt to cope with
population growth and deforestation of the inner islands is seen by other
nations as a possible solution to problems of overpopulation and its associated
problems. Little is known about the impact of this resettlement scheme on the
transmigrants, particularly their economic behavior and its effect on the
household. This pilot project will employ surveys, in-depth interviews, and
focus groups to examine the process of socio-economic differentiation at the
regional and household level in selected areas involved in the transmigration
program in Indonesia. Traditional agriculture continues to dominate the peasant
economies of most developing parts of the world. In many areas, economic
development has contributed to the commercialization of rural economies, leading
to profound social and economic changes which threaten the viability of peasant
economies. This project will provide new knowledge about how differentiation
proceeds as a result of government sponsored migration. It will also refine a
methodology for doing research in newly settled areas which are undergoing rapid
socio-economic change. The results of this research will inform not only theory
but also policy regarding an important regional development strategy.