* 9123196
* Dissertation Research:  The Effects of Fire on Tree         Demography and Species Composition of South Florida         Tropical Hammocks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* NONE NONE, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1995
* USD 10,000.00

How the frequency of fires influences the relative abundance of tree species in
south Florida tropical forests on the mainland of the United States will be
studied. The stewardship of such forests within Everglades National Park
requires understanding how their composition may have been altered by an
increased frequency of fire following the partial drainage of the Everglades in
the last century. Such questions can be answered by constructing a simple
computer model in which the abundance of certain types of trees (e.g. shade
tolerant or shade intolerant) is predicted in forest that burn at differing
intervals of time. Permanent plots, in which ass trees are tagged and mapped,
will be established. Some of these permanent plots are being established within
forests that burned during a large, drought-induced natural fire in 1989. These
plots will, for the first time, document the initial recovery of these forests
from fire. Greenhouse experiments, to assist in the construction of the model,
are also planned. When combined with information from additional plots
established in forests that burned in the more distant past, a better
understanding of the current species composition in the tropical forests of
south Florida, and whether it would differ significantly from forests within a
consistently wetter, less altered Everglades habitat, will result.