* 9123463
* Specificity, Case and Incorporation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Murvet Enc, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 07/31/1995
* USD 82,000.00

ABSTRACT This project is a fine-grained investigation of the relationship
between syntax and semantics in linguistic theory. The investigator aims to
explain the correlation of the semantic phenomenon of specificity with case
morphology and word order. Specificity is the semantic property of reference to
a particular individual, as in "a certain policeman" or "one particular
student". The beginning hypothesis is that specific and nonspecific noun phrases
(NPs) do not have the same syntax, and that both the determiner and the noun of
a nonspecific NP are either incorporated into the verb or reanalyzed with the
verb. As a corollary, only specific NPs occur in argument positions. The
research will be organized into three phases: 1) study of Turkish, a language
which exhibits interesting surface correlations between the semantics and the
morpho-syntax of NPs; 2) study of English, a language significantly different
from Turkish in terms of surface case morphology and word order; and 3) a
typological study to investigate the cross-linguistic behavior of specifics and
nonspecifics. In each phase, support for the incorporation/reanalysis hypothesis
will be sought from morphological and syntactic evidence, including i) case
morphology, ii) word order and iii) argument structure and argument projection
strategies. The rare phenomenon of nonspecific subjects of unergative and
transitive verbs, observable in Turkish, will be investigated in relation to the
incorporation of subject nouns, which once again is rare and observable in
Turkish.