* 9123028
* Novel Reactivity and Structures of Bis{(perfluoroalkyl)     sulfonyl}imides and Their Carbon Analogues
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1992,04/30/1997
* William Pennington, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 04/30/1997
* USD 234,000.00

This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo- metallic
Chemistry Program, will undertake the synthesis and characterization of new
examples of carbon and nitrogen acids that have very high acidities as a result
of substitution by perfluoroalkylsulfonyl groups. The conjugate bases of these
acids are predicted to be highly stable and to have very low nucleophilicities.
In a second area, metal salts of these strong acids, both monoprotic and
polyprotic, will be prepared and their solid state structures determined by
x-ray crystallography. Preliminary studies indicate that such derivatives are
likely to have layered or zeolitic structures with potentially useful
applications. Finally, in a continuation of earlier NSF-funded research, further
studies of the fluorination of organic compounds by fluorobis(polyfluoro-
alkylsulfonyl)amines will be undertaken along with efforts to develop larger
scale syntheses of this class of compounds. %%% The high electron withdrawing
capability of fluorine as a substituent results in very unusual properties for
its compounds. At the same time introduction of fluorine into many compounds,
and organic compounds in particular, is difficult because of the highly reactive
nature of the element and many of the reagents used for this purpose. This
project will undertake further fundamental studies of the synthesis and
properties of highly fluorinated materials. Potential uses for the new compounds
to be synthesized include ionic conductors, catalysts, and high temperature
electrolytes.