* 9123283
* U.S.- U.K. Cooperative Research:  A Cosmos Study of         Magellanic Cloud Clusters
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Paul Hodge, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1994
* USD 10,000.00

This two-year award supports U.S.-U.K. cooperative research in galactic
astronomy between Paul W. Hodge of the University of Washington and Harvey
MacGillivray of the Royal Observatory in Edinburgh, United Kingdom. The
objective of the research is to search for and identify and characterize star
clusters in the Magellanic Cloud and Small Magellanic Cloud using unique
instrumentation at the Royal Observatory in Edinburgh. Dr. Hodge brings to this
collaboration his extensive knowledge about the cluster system and stellar
content of the Magellanic Clouds and other local galaxies. He has some of the
best 4-meter telescope plates of the Magellanic Clouds. This is complemented by
Dr. MacGillvray's extensive experience in image analysis and access to the Royal
Observatory's COSMOS instrument which is considered to be the finest plate-
scanning instrument and software in the world. The COSMOS machine will be used
to scan the 4-meter telescope plates in order to eventually obtain a complete
map of the Magellanic Clouds' clusters. The Magellanic Cloud and Small
Magellanic Cloud are very useful objects for the general study of clusters,
their evolution and formation, and for understanding the history of these two
galaxies. The results of this research will provide astronomers with new
clusters to study. It will also advance understanding of the evolution of
galaxies in general.