* 9123658
* Dissertation Research: Locomotor Adaptations in the         Ceratomorpha (Mammalia, Perissodactyla): The Effects of     Body Size, Phylogeny, and Ecology
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1994
* NONE NONE, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Emerson
* 05/31/1994
* USD 5,621.00

Graduate student Maria Cole, with direction from faculty advisor William
Jungers, is studying quantitative aspects of skeletal size and shape and effects
on locomotor adaptations in the vertebrate group Ceratomorpha (Mammalia,
Perrissodactyla) which includes the living tapirs and rhinoceroses and a diverse
radiation of now extinct relatives, known from extensive fossils. Postcranial
variation will be examined with respect to differences in body size, ecology and
relative phylogenetic relationship. Ceratomorphs present an ideal case for
assessing variation in locomotor anatomy with respect to these interrelated and
often confounding factors. Because of enormous variation in body size
(ceratomorphs include the largest known land mammals in the fossil to
investigate the more general question of the mechanical basis for patterns of
mammalian size-scaling. Analysis of external size and shape will be supplemented
by cross-sectional geometric data (second moment of area, section moduli,
cortical area) derived from computed tomography. Special attention will also be
paid to long bone curvature, mechanical advantages of extensor muscles, and
articular size and shape. These data and analyses will provide new insights into
the functional anatomy and paleobiology of ceratomorphs specifically and should
contribute to our understanding of general principles governing diversity of
structural design in the mammalian locomotor system.