* 9123842
* Integration of Petrology with Aqueous Geochemistry in a     Recent Mixing Zone, Southeastern Barbados, West Indies
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1992,12/31/1996
* John Humphrey, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1996
* USD 125,058.00

Late Pleistocene raised reef terraces on the island of Barbados provide an
unparalleled setting to investigate early, near-surface diagenesis in carbonate
rocks. Dolomite has been encountered in core samples from within the modern
mixing zone in southeastern Barbados. This dolomite may be Recent in age and
related to the modern water chemistry. We well further investigate this dolomite
occurrence with additional core-drilling, lithologic, geochemical, and
hydrogeochemical studies. Four boreholes will be drilled atop sea-cliffs along
the windward southeastern coastline, in an area where there is significant
meteoric phreatic discharge and a potentially thick mixing zone. Southeastern
Barbados provides the ideal site to test the mixing versus marine models and to
directly sample fresh, mixed, and normal marine pore waters in contact with
carbonate sediments and rocks actively undergoing diagenesis. The mixing zone
model has not received universal acceptance. It is therefore important to
document the occurrence and geochemistry of the dolomite and pore fluids in
question to test the validity of the model. This will be accomplished through
minerologic, petrographic, trace element, stable isotope, strontium isotope,
fluid inclusion, and absolute dating techniques. In collaboration with R. K.
Stoessell, pore waters from the boreholes will be characterized by temperature,
salinity, conductivity, pH, Eh, alkalinity, dissolved oxygen, dissolved hydrogen
sulfide, major and minor elements and ions, saturation indices and stable
isotopic compositions. Given the geologic/hydrologic setting of Barbados, the
fluid/rock interactions responsible for dolomitization must necessarily be
confined to either a normal seawater or mixed meteoric/marine model. This
integrated petrologic and hydrogeochemical approach represents a comprehensive
effort to answer important questions regarding the enigmatic process of early
dolomitization, and will directly test the viability of each of these possible
models.