* 9123207
* Dynamics and Mechanism in Organic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1994
* William Doering, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 09/30/1994
* USD 92,000.00

An investigation of the competition between energy randomization and chemical
reactivity in a series of carefully chosen reactions will be conducted with the
goal of testing the RRKM theory of kinetic reactivity. The addition of carbon
labelled singlet methylene to selected dienes and a fluorinated aryl vinyl
system will be evaluated. Perturbation of the Cope rearrangement by phenyl
groups will also be investigated. In addition, the concept of solvent friction
and the resultant effect on chemical reactivity of steroidal heptaenes will be
investigated under a variety of conditions. Finally, the effect of configuration
and substitution on the stability of pentadienyl radicals will be determined,
and the two-step dimerization of polyenes will be explored. %%% This grant from
the Organic Dynamics Program supports the continuing work of Professor W.
Doering at Harvard University. The studies are designed to provide critical
information for a number of reactions which proceed upon exposure to heat. The
objective of the investigation will be to determine how molecules decide to
direct the energy they absorb: do they distribute the energy evenly throughout
the molecule or do they direct the energy to weak parts of the molecule which
subsequently undergo specific chemical reactions? Another aspect of the
investigation will be to determine the critical effect that solvent viscosity
has on the reactions of chemical species that are comprised of a series of
doubly bonded carbon atoms.