* 9123000
* Photochemistry of Charge Transfer Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1995
* Kirk Schanze, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Paul H. Smith
* 03/31/1995
* USD 143,300.00

This award, from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo- metallic Chemistry
Program, is for the support of studies of the photochemistry of excited states
of two types of rhenium complexes in which the rhenium atom has six d-electrons.
In the first case the complex will contain a bidentate diimine ligand that
serves as an electron acceptor in the excited state and a monodentate ligand
that serves as an electron donor in the excited state, and which is reactive in
its electron deficient form. Photochemical excitation of these molecules will
generate a ligand-ligand charge transfer (LLCT) excited state. Objectives of
this phase of the investigation include: 1) delineation of the photochemical
reactions that occur andidentification of reactive intermediates produced via
LLCT excitation, 2) determination of the kinetics of rearrangements and bond
fragmentations of the reactive groups, and 3) utilization of the rate constants
obtained in 2) to determine the effects of structural and energetic factors on
the lifetime of the LLCT excited state. In the second case, sigma-to-pi
antibonding excitation processes in rhenium(I) complexes that contain bidentate
diimine and alkyl ligands will be examined. Here the results of bond scission in
the excited state will produce metal- and carbon-based radicals. A primary
objective of this work is to relate rhenium-carbon bond strength to the rate of
excited state bond fragmentation. %%% Charge transfer in photochemically
generated excited states is a fundamental aspect of biological light energy
harvesting systems. How charge transfer states are sufficiently stabilized in
biological systems so that productive reactions occur faster than charge
recombination is a mystery that continues to stimulate exciting research.
Successful emulation of biological systems could mean more efficient utilization
of solar energy for technological purposes; determination of the reactivity of
the excited state in systems such as those to be examined here may be useful in
this regard. The chemical systems under study may also be useful as
photochemically activated catalysts for polymerization reactions.