* 9123875
* Dissertation Research:  Subsistence and Technological       Organization Among the Pume of Venezuela
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1992,09/30/1994
* NONE NONE, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1994
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Lewis Binford, Mr. Russell Greaves will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will study the Pume, a group of
horticulturalists and hunter gatherers who live in southwestern Venezuela. His
research will focus on how the Pume make and use tools for subsistence
activities. To do this, he will follow the process from the collection of raw
materials through manufacture and subsequent use and discard. In particular, he
is interested in the time tradeoffs involved between tool manufacture and other
activities such as subsistence. He will collect data in a number of ways.
Randomized time allocation studies will be conducted. He will also follow
individuals and groups on subsistence trips and record the time spent in
different activities. He will also note what tools are taken, how they are used
and how patterns may change based on the goal of the expedition, the number of
participants and the distance traveled. Although this study is ethnographic, the
significance is primarily archaeological. Because they are virtually
indestructible, stone tools are found in most paleolithic sites - often they are
the only material recovered - and archaeologists of necessity focus strongly on
their interpretation. On the basis of these often difficult-to-understand
remains, prehistorians attempt to reconstruct diverse cultural attributes such
as group size and movement patterns and they have developed many theories about
how tools and behavior are related. The problem is that very little empirical
data support many of these observations and Mr. Greaves research is designed to
address this problem. This project is important for several reasons. It will
help to provide analytic methods of general archaeological use. It will shed new
light on a traditional South American group and will assist in the training of a
promising young scientist.