* 9123742
* Mathematical Sciences: Determined Inverse Boundary Value    Problems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Ziqi Sun, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 09/30/1995
* USD 55,700.00

The project continues work on inverse boundary problems and their application
to inverse scattering theory. Inverse problems are common in physical
experiments where one only knows the outcome of some process and tries to
determine the physical parameters which could produce such a result. In this
work, one seeks the coefficients of a partial differential equation from
knowledge of the associated map taking Dirichlet data (boundary values) to
Neumann data (boundary flux). Inverse problems have clear applications to
electric current tomography. In addition, it is an example of how specific
applications can lead to new methods, which then lead to new and unexpected
theoretical developments. In the present context, the new method is the use of
exponential solutions of elliptic partial differential equations. It may be
viewed as an elliptic analogue of geometrical optics. The method has led to
major advances in inverse scattering and several other, related problems. It is
now beginning to yield results on problems involving systems (such as Maxwell's
equations) rather than scalar equations. The success of this viewpoint for
elliptic problems has also spurred work on analogous questions for hyperbolic
equations. The goals for future work involve further exploration of the global
uniqueness question in two dimensions (a major concern in all inverse problems,
with two dimensions being the most difficult) and further progress on systems
such as Maxwell's equations or those of elasticity.