* 9123561
* RUI:  Collaborative Research on Varieties of Legal          Consciousness
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Susan Silbey, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 12/31/1996
* USD 77,430.00

Studies of legal consciousness attempt to address questions about the place and
meaning of law in the lives of ordinary citizens. Until recently, two competing
theoretical perspectives have dominated the scholarship on legal consciousness.
One school of thought treats consciousness as the ideas and attitudes of
individuals; from this perspective the meaning that people give to law and the
role that it plays in their lives is representative of the ways that individuals
create or shape the world around them. A second school of thought holds that
legal consciousness is a by- product of the social institutions and structures
that define peoples lives. From this perspective, legal consciousness is the
product rather than the source of the world people find themselves living in. In
recent years, a growing body of empirical studies reject both the individual and
structural conceptualizations of legal consciousness. Instead, this school of
thought views legal consciousness as cultural practice that mediates between the
individual and the social structure. Consciousness evolves within a framework of
expectations about what is the normal and moral way to act, what kinds of wrongs
warrant action, and what kinds of remedies are acceptable and appropriate as
well as probable and effective. With this view, legal consciousness varies and
changes with local situations, norms and customary ways of doing things. Silbey
will advance this cultural perspective theoretically, introducing a typology of
legal consciousness, and exploring whether and how people express their ideas
about law in ways that are consonant with one or more of these typifications.
Also, the project introduces a unique data set. She uses indepth, face to face,
interviews with 300 persons in four New Jersey counties. The questions enable
her to collect rich stories of troubles and minor disruptions, as well as formal
experiences with legal agents. By combining this methodology with probability
sampling, she will be able to trace greater variation in legal consciousness
among American citizens than has been achieved to date, including variations
among African-American and Hispanic, as well as white populations. Finally, she
introduces a unique, two stage plan of analysis. Specifically, one phase focuses
on the analysis of discrete words while the second examines the thematic content
of the interview narratives. Overall, the study will make substantial
contributions to the growing body of work on legal consciousness by extending it
demographically, methodologically, and theoretically.