* 9123675
* U.S. Participation in the Development of a Transnational    Database on Family Income
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Timothy Smeeding, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 09/30/1995
* USD 201,809.00

The Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) project is an internation-al social science
consortium currently participated in by 18 in- dustrialized nations which have
agreed to pool microdata on the incomes of families living within their diverse
economies. The data so furnished are made statistically comparable and stored at
a central facility in Luxembourg, where they may be accessed by researchers
either on-site or remotely through a computerized telecommunications network.
The LIS database provides a rich resource for multifaceted analyses of income
distributions, of systems of cash and noncash income transfers, of relative
levels of economic well-being across different demographic groupings, and of
many other topics which are now, or soon will be of worldwide societal concern.
Support for the data facility is provided by the consortium of member nations on
a shared-cost basis. Funds provided by the National Science Foundation
constitute United States participation in the consortium, and these funds help
assure that the potential value of the LIS database to U.S. social scientists
will be realized. The full cooperation of all member nations is required in
order to guarantee feasibility of data retrieval, maintenance of high standards
of data quality, and gradual relaxation of methodological constraints on certain
types of data analysis. National Science Foundation funds not only represent
U.S. cooperation in the enterprise, they also assure U.S. involvement in all
important developmental decisions as well as helping to offset the cost of
database maintenance and update. In its nearly ten years of existence the
results of this transnational project have been impressive.