* 9123946
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Hydrodynamics and          Magnetohydrodynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Susan Friedlander, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1995
* USD 65,000.00

The investigator, in collaboration with Dr. M. M. Vishik of University of
Chicago, will continue to investigate topics in fluid dynamics. She uses inverse
scattering techniques to obtain solutions to the Euler equations that govern the
flow of an incompressible, inviscid fluid. This work follows from a Lax pair
formulation for the Euler equations derived by the investigator and Vishik. She
also proposes to apply dynamo theory techniques to extend the applicability of
the instability criteria that she and Vishik have recently obtained for the
linearized fluid equations. The investigator will continue her examination, via
the use of Hamiltonian techniques, of the stability/instability of three
dimensional axisymmetric magnetohydrodynamic equilibria. The primary subject of
this research concerns criteria for the existence of instabilities (i.e., when a
small change in a steady configuration becomes larger and larger with time.)
Fluid instabilities are crucial factors in determining the behavior of many
important physical systems. For example, the so called baroclinic instability
governs the large scale circulation of the atmosphere; convective instabilities
play an important role in air-sea interaction with implications for possible
global warming; magnetohydrodynamic instabilities underlie the phenomenon of
plasma fusion; the existence of terrestrial and solar magnetic fields is
dependent on dynamo instabilities. The investigator's mathematical analysis of
the equations of fluid motion has led to specific criteria governing the
existence of certain types of instabilities and her proposed research will
continue to advance our understanding of the behavior of geophysical and
astrophysical fluids.