* 9123550
* U.S. - Belgium Cooperative Research: Classification of      Rhizomonas and Rhizomonas - Like Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1993
* Ariena van Bruggen, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 07/31/1993
* USD 8,000.00

This award supports U.S.-Belgium cooperative research in systematic biology
between Ariena H.C. van Bruggen of the University of California at Davis and
Monique Gillis of Ryks University in Gent, Belgium. The objective of their
research is to investigate the taxonomy of the genus Rhizomonas and recently
isolated Rhizomonas-like bacteria. The investigators will determine the
relationships among soil borne bacteria closely related to Rhizomonas and
classify the different groups found within Rhizomonas. They will use modern
methods of DNA and RNA sequencing, hybridization studies in developing data for
classification of the groups. The U.S. group brings to this collaboration their
expertise in rDNA sequencing. This is complemented by the Gent's group expertise
in DNA and RNA hybridization and their extensive data base on bacterial genera.
The taxonomy and relationships among groups of soil-borne bacteria have not been
studied widely despite their possible use for biological control of plant
pathogens and Further classification will provide scientists with a means for
differentiating among useful and harmful bacteria. The project will provide new
data on rRNA methods system that could be applied to the classification of the
majority of bacteria.