* 9123265
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Questions in Nonlinear          Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1996
* Paul Rabinowitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1996
* USD 145,000.00

This project continues mathematical research on questions related to ordinary
and partial differential equations. The research considers properties of
solutions obtained by combining global topological techniques with analytic
tools. Work on ordinary differential equations focuses on systems, called
Hamiltonian systems, which serve as models for the motion of finite systems of
particles. Since the 1970's there has been considerable progress in the study of
periodic solutions of Hamiltonian systems through newly developed techniques
growing out of the calculus of variations. Current research will use past work
in analyzing other types of global solutions (the periodic ones are the
simplest, but there are others). The solution paths, often called orbits, are
much more difficult to treat because of the loss of boundedness. Still, there is
some promising preliminary work which can be pursued further. There are
analogous questions which can be raised for semilinear elliptic partial
differential equations. Earlier research has led to the existence of solutions
which do not change sign. Although there is considerable literature on the
subject now, the results say little about the nature of the solutions (e.g. how
can one describe the rise and fall of solution surfaces?). Work will be done on
questions of this nature.