* 9123665
* Highly CO2-Soluble Surfactants for Supercritical Fluid      Reaction, Separation &amp; Impregnation Process
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Robert Enick, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/1996
* USD 226,976.00

The combination of benign environmental impact and tuneable solvent power has
led to a variety of extraction/separation applications for supercritical carbon
dioxide. Despite these inherent advantages, the low solubility of highly polar
or hydrophilic compounds in non-polar CO2 has blocked the use of supercritical
fluid technology in areas such as protein purification, the remediation of heavy
metal contamination, and non-VOC based coatings formulations, where generation
of a highly pure and readily recoverable product would be a significant advance.
Recent research by other groups has shown that the formation of micelles in
supercritical fluids provides a means by which low solubility of polar compounds
in non-polar fluids can be overcome. Despite this advance, formation of stable
micelles in CO2 (as opposed to alkanes) has remained elusive, due primarily to
the low solubility of commercially-available surfactants in carbon dioxide at
moderate pressures. Thus this project proposes to synthesize model amphiphiles
where the "hydrophobic" tails contain functional groups, such as fluoroethers
and silicones, which are known to interact favorably (in a thermodynamic sense)
with carbon dioxide. Preliminary results at the University of Pittsburgh with
fluoroalkyl, fluoroether, and silicone materials show that this premise is
indeed valid. This project extends these successful preliminaries with a program
of rational synthesis of surfactants and phase behavior studies.