* 9123888
* SGER:  Evaluation of Sediment Trap Fluxes by Thorium        Scavenging, a Three Dimensional Approach
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1991,05/31/1993
* Anthony Michaels, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

This activity will conduct an unambiguous (or nearly so) calibration of free-
drifting cylindrical sediment traps using the in situ scavenging of 234-thorium
as an independent predictor of the sinking flux. Thorium fluxes as measured by
the sediment trap will be compared with predicted thorium fluxes from the in
situ scavenging. To avoid historical problems with the interpretation of single
thorium profiles, an expanded experiment will be performed in which both the
thorium scavenging through time and the variability in space will be followed.
The new profiling technique also averages the entire water column vertically,
thus ensuring that any small-scale thorium minima in the profile will be
quantitatively included. This set of measurements will provide the most
unambiguous prediction to date of the thorium-bearing particle flux that a
sediment trap is predicted to collect. If the sediment trap measured thorium
flux differs greatly from the predicted value, it will be able to be concluded
that the trap does not quantitatively collect the particles that are responsible
for thorium transport and thus may be unlikely to be accurate for other particle
classes as well. If the values agree, it can be concluded that the trap is
accurate for the particles that transport thorium and thus suggest that they may
be accurate for other particle classes as well. In either case, this experiment
will demonstrate a robust method for the calibration of sediment trap data in
the field that will be useful for other experiments on trap performance (e.g.
hydrodynamics).