* 9124014
* Physiology and Behavior of Endangered Marine Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1995
* Max Amoss, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 07/31/1995
* USD 170,625.00

Fundamental research aimed at elucidating principles that underlie the
conservation and restoration of biological diversity is of utmost importance.
This is the priority of Dr. Owen's research program. The goal of this project is
to continue his work at the Santa Rosa National Park in Costa Rica on an
endangered marine species. These animals and several other large vertebrates in
the region are under severe over exploitation and accidental capture pressure in
their oceanic environment which, in turn, is causing dramatic drops in their
population. Previous NSF support has resulted in state-of-the-art research on
some of the most difficult problems in marine animal biology. Dr. Owens will now
employ small satellite, sonic and radio transmitters to monitor the migratory
behavior of these sea-going animals. In addition, he will measure the level of
steroid hormones to determine the correlation between endocrine physiology and
reproductive and migratory behaviors. A major collaborative research effort has
been established between Dr. Owens and Costa Rican students and scientists.
Their goal is to gain new insights into understanding the conservation of these
animals within their natural habitat. The outcome of this work will not only
provide a more complete understanding of their basic biology but may lead to
improvement in the conservation and survival prospects for this economically
valuable marine species.