* 9124001
* Proposal to Design a Program in Engineering Ethics for      Doctoral Engineering Students
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1992,03/31/1994
* David Marks, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/1994
* USD 51,970.00

To exercise leadership, science and engineering educators need to provide their
students with the tools to identify and respond appropriately to professional
problems with ethical dimensions. This project involves four to eight
undergraduate engineering students in the identification of promising sources of
ethical questions and problems that can provide the basis for a curriculum in
engineering ethics for graduate students. Under the supervision of the principal
investigator, in association with a group of collaborating faculty, the students
will gather information about current dissertation topics that are promising
sources. They will meet with the faculty and students working on these topics to
obtain information about how the ethical issues are being handled. They will
also consider ethical issues that arise in engineering more generally. As the
results from their research and interviews are developed, they will be
incorporated and tested in a graduate course in engineering ethics to be taught
at MIT in the spring. Research will continue over the summer and fall, to
identify new issues and examine those previously identified more deeply. Results
will be incorporated into graduate engineering as well as other programs at MIT,
and be reported on widely at meetings and in engineering publications. This
proposal focuses on an important area in Ethics and Values Studies. The
investigators are very well qualified; the plan is thoughtful and feasible;
university support is good. Results are likely to improve the teaching of
engineering ethics on this campus and in graduate curricula nationwide. Support
is highly recommended.