* 9150624
* Can Algebra Save the World, or Can the World Save Algebra? ANew College Freshman Mathematics Course: Algebra with       Applications to Environmental Issues
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Christopher Schaufele, Kennesaw State University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/1993
* USD 75,372.00

The project is to pilot, refine, and implement an introductory level college
mathematics course, Algebra with Applications to Environmental issues (AAEI),
which will replace the traditional college algebra. The format and context are
radically new, stressing experintial learning motivated by real-world problems
in conservation, ecology and the environment. AAEI is designed in the spirit of
the NCTN Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics adapted to
the college level, emphasizing mathematical modeling of real data, decision
making, reading and writing. Use of technology eliminates the boredom and
drudgery of manipulation. Group assignments, individual analysis, student
presentations and written reports, will replace traditional classroom lecture
and provide students with hands-on experinece in mathematics. This course is
appropriate for all entering college students, even those with limited
mathematical experience, and offers greater access to further study inthe
sciences, engineering ro mathematics. AAEI will be fully integrated into the
institution curriculum and will then be disseminated to each Institution in the
University System of Georgia for consideration as a course to satisfy the core
mathematics requirement. A newsletter is planned to introduce AAEi nationally.
The response to units of this course already piloted indicate that students have
gained a new perspective on mathematics as a tool, thus increasing awareness,
enhancing interest and appreciation of its role in society. Perhaps we can even
eliminate the time-worn question, "What's this stuff good for?."