* 9150287
* Laboratory for Modern Optics Using the Comprehensive        Unified Physics Learning Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Joseph Haus, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/1994
* USD 44,680.00

This project utilizes recent progress in educational techniques and computers to
provide undergraduates with interactive access to a full range of laboratory
optical technology, from the simplest to the latest high technology optics,
while reducing cost and unifying the learning experience in physics and
engineering. The need for national preeminence in the area of rapid and precise
handling of optical information requires students who are well and consistently
trained across the spectrum of optics in physics and engineering. The project is
based in CUPLE (Comprehensive Unified Physics Learning Environment) program,
which provides a base of computational and video techniques. It provides access
to a broad range of optics technology in a consistent manner that enables the
student to move in an interactive manner from familiar to less familiar
material. This program is comprehensive, because it draws on innovative
developments in classroom, laboratory, lecture demonstration, and computer based
materials developed by a consortium of excellent educators and unified in that
it presents a consistent user interface to students, lecturers, and
experimentailsts across different applications and different media, such as
laboratory instruments, data arrays, graphical displays, and video recordings.
This approach can bring a larger number of undergraduate students into closer
and more timely contact with laboratory experience in a flexible manner at
significantly reduced cost as compared to conventional methods. The present
project is developing a set of trial modules on modern optics combining
instruction simulation, and experiments within the CUPLE environment.