* 9150156
* Microcomputer Technology for Strengthening Life Science     Instruction for Deaf and Hearing Students
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1996
* Jane Dillehay, Gallaudet University
* Continuing Grant
* M.Patricia Morse
* 12/31/1996
* USD 517,786.00

The main objectives of the project follow two themes: 1) the collection and
assessment of several hundred life science microcomputer software programs for
use by hearing impaired students, including examination of the differences and
similarities between hearing and hearing impaired students using the same
programs 2) the dissemination of information about the results of these
assessments. These objectives are closely associated with the objective of
increasing the population of qualified hearing impaired people going into the
field of science. By encouraging the use of microcomputers in the life of
sciences, students in the 1000 deaf institutions/programs will benefit from the
use of good quality software. The project will use as subjects and evaluators
hearing impaired students and professional working with these students. The
assessments will be made at Gallaudet University, selected schools for the deaf
and some mainstreamed hearing impaired programs. The assessment will not only
select the best programs for the hearing impaired but it will determine if the
results may be generalized from the deaf to the hearing population. As data is
gathered on these assessments, a wide dissemination effort will provide
information to the science education community on preferred software programs
for both the hearing impaired and the hearing population.