* 9150037
* Project A-STEP:  Reformulating Teacher Preparation in       Mathematics &amp; Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Richard McDermot, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 01/31/1995
* USD 568,056.00

Allegheny College seeks funding for a three-year program: Project A-Step:
Reformulating Teacher Preparation in Mathematics and Science. The project,
developed with a planning grant from NSF and the Exxon Foundation, will redesign
the teacher preparation programs in mathematics and science at Allegheny and
will make discipline-specific preservice education a central focus of the entire
college. The department of education has already been restructured, and all
positions are or will be filled by faculty with dual appointments in mathematics
or science departments. There is a structure in place, The Schools Partnership,
which ties the college to six school districts. The Partnership will be involved
in project activities with faculty and students through joint programs,
institutes, workshops, student mentoring, student field-experiences, and program
development in Project A-Step. A component of the Partnership is an electronic
computer network which will provide teachers, students, faculty members access
to each other and to the college's computer as well as to the Pittsburgh
Supercomputer Center. The Allegheny faculty has formed a Task Force on teaching
to develop programs in mathematics and science education for preservice teachers
which have as the basic premise a strong command of the discipline, knowledge of
the connections to related disciplines, and discipline specific pedagogy. The
faculty and top administration are committed to make Allegheny a model for small
liberal colleges that prepare teachers in mathematics and science. Allegheny has
received funding for related components of the project from the Amoco
Foundation, the Vira Heinz Endowment, the Pew Charitable Trusts; and the Knight
Foundation. In addition, Allegheny's cost share will be 62% of the NSF total
costs.