* 9150251
* Authentic Assessment Systems for Constructivist Based       Elementary Science Programs
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1991,01/31/1996
* Richard Clark, Minnesota Environmental Sciences Foundation Inc
* Continuing grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 01/31/1996
* USD 1,197,819.00

This project will educate elementary teachers so that they will be able to
improve their teaching of science and institute a comprehensive authentic
assessment and reporting system into school districts of varying sizes and
characteristics. In these districts, as in others across the country, there is a
strong need for alignment among what is taught (curriculum), how it is taught
(instruction), how it is measured (assessment), and how it is shared
(reporting). Too often student performance within hands-on science programs is
not documented at all or is subject to being measured by standardized tests that
often offer little correlation to what is expected from these programs. During
this project personnel from four Minnesota school districts (Minneapolis, Osseo,
Duluth, Wayzata) will work in partnership over a three year period of time with
the Minnesota Department of Education to (1) become knowledgeable about recent
research and developments in assessment alternatives, (2) adapt and further
develop their elementary science programs, and (3) inservice others in their
districts to use these authentic assessment systems as standard operating
procedures. When successfully instituted, this program will have directly
affected more than 1,500 teachers and 45,000 students. The cost sharing will be
16 percent of the NSF portion.