* 9150808
* Biological Education: Development of Curriculum Frameworks  for High School, Two-Year and Four-Year Non-Majors Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1992
* Gordon Uno, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/1992
* USD 231,228.00

Articulation of biology education and reform of undergraduate programs for non-
majors requires clarifying fundamental biological concepts, recognizing the
unique characteristics of institutions, and considering the role and influence
of pre- college education in the life sciences. The Biological Science
Curriculum Study (BSCS) proposes to complete a design study of biology education
at pre-college and college levels. The goals of the study are to elaborate the
conceptual structure of biology and to determine appropriate curriculum
frameworks for high school, community colleges, and undergraduate courses for
non-majors. The development of curriculum frameworks for collegiate courses for
non-majors biology can provide substantial leadership for the biology education
community. The concurrent development of high school programs based on a similar
conceptual framework will help accomplish the objective of bridging the gap
between precollege and undergraduate science. Because the proposed undergraduate
program includes two-year colleges large numbers of women and minority students
will be served, groups that are currently underserved by science education.The
eleven-month study will use experts to identify and clarify the major concepts
of biology and recommend curriculum frameworks for pre-college and college
programs. The recommendations of this study will be published and disseminated
to professional societies in biology and biology education for further
distribution.