* 9150079
* Visual and Interactive Modes for Integrated Learning of     Science and Mathematics
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1998
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 04/30/1998
* USD 754,477.00

This project is investigating the cognitive and motivational development of
diverse groups of high school students as they work with highly visual, dynamic
simulations of the laws of random phenomena as exhibited in a wide variety of
physical, biological and chemical systems. Students manipulate models of
physical reality in a fashion similar to the modelling methods used by the
research scientists who are conducting this project. The investigators
hypothesize that students underrepresented in mathematics and science, including
women and minorities, will particularly benefit from these visualization tools
and from their participation in current scientific research. Research questions
include the following: What is the cognitive significance of pairing hands-on
experiments with compute models in learning activity? What are the cognitive
consequences for students of working with dynamic, time-dependent
representations of systems and phenomena that are impossible to represent
directly in prose or still photographs? What are the consequences of multiple
representations, such as liquid water viewed at a microscopic and macroscopic
levels? What are the central anchoring concepts students need in order to use
dynamic visual models to explore and understand both the scientific processes of
modeling and the concepts of randomness and order in nature? What are the
consequences for high school students and teachers of cognitive apprenticeships
with graduate students who are carrying out the research modeled in the teaching
materials?//