* 9150197
* Numerical Simulation Assisted Teaching Laboratory on        Physical Phenomena
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Yong Kim, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1994
* USD 49,940.00

A critical analysis shows that the very successful tradition of formalism-
intensive physics teaching has inadvertently deprived college students of the
opportunity to learn about, and experience with, a wide range of physical
phenomena of contemporary interest. The key to remedy the situation
significantly is to expose the students early in their college education to
physical phenomena, the very stuff that sustains physics. This project involves
a new concept of laboratory teaching with a strong phenomenological orientation
in order to bring about a balance to the otherwise effective and rigorous
tradition. The two key requirements are to compensate for the gap in the
students preparedness and to break down the physical phenomena of interest to
the point where it is both transparent and accessible. This can be accomplished
by complimentary use of numerical simulation and experimental measurement with
emphasis on optical and electrical visualization. A new teaching laboratory has
been created toward this goal, suitable for an introductory instructional
setting where students of broad curricular background participate. A number of
theme- oriented experiment modules have been developed to different levels of
completeness, with topics drawn from mechanics, electricity and magnetism,
optics, spectroscopy and thermodynamics. Further research and development of
selected experiment modules are being carried out, with a view toward ready
transferability of the concept to other institutions as well as to other
scientific disciplines.