* 9150311
* Structural, Organizational, and Narrative Coherence:        Designing the Introductory Physics Laboratory to Increase   Retention of Prospective Science and Engineering Majors
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1995
* Patrick Kenealy, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/1995
* USD 200,943.00

Nationally less than 50% of the students who originally choose a science or
engineering major complete a degree in that major. It is clear that the problems
of retaining interested students are severe enough that the traditional college
physics laboratory approach must be questioned in a scientific way, using
existing scientific knowledge on how people respond to teaching, how people
learn new concepts, and how they incorporate new information. In order to
increase retention, this project is restructuring social and intellectual
interactions in the introductory physics laboratory in such a way that its
operation is more in line with both the way modern students learn, and the way
the scientific community deals with experimental information and evaluation of
data. "Conferences" and "Public Reports" are being made a formal part of the
laboratory. The project actively and systematically considers special
populations of students: women, minorities, and future teachers. Problems that
research has identified as crucial are capsulized in the following: 1) a demand
for narrative coherence; 2) a student-to-student approach to teaching problem-
solving; 3) instructional strategies designed to produce a sense of community;
and 4) establishment of a culture of competence and cooperation in the
laboratory and classroom. The project postulates that these strategies will
serve well all students. The laboratory in introductory physics is the project's
main focus. The content of these introductory laboratories is staying close to
observations connected to direct sensory and perceptual experiences. The
emphasis in this development is not on the design of "new" experiments, but 1)
on the interaction of the students, and 2) on the context and coherence of their
total laboratory experience. A strong evaluation plan is an integral part of the
project.