* 9150211
* ADVANCED COMPUTING FOR SCIENCE EDUCATION
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Philip Miller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 01/31/1995
* USD 1,288,294.00

The Advanced Computing for Science Education project proposes to utilize and
build upon state of the art computing technology to construct a general purpose
science learning environment. The environment will provide a powerful and unique
integration of computing tools that is specifically targeted to the needs of
students in a scientific discipline. It seeks to develop a general language and
learning environment that supports student efforts to pose and answer broad
classes of questions of scientific interest and to test them in a simulated
environment. The proposed work is innovative in that it promotes a style of
learning and scientific inquiry that is not available in current computer-based
learning environments for science. This is accomplished by utilizing a
programming language as a vehicle for scientific discourse, exploiting
abstraction as a means of dealing with complexity, and incorporating high
quality graphics and animation capabilities. It is intended to supplement a
complete science curriculum with a virtual laboratory that allows
experimentation which may otherwise be impossible or require prohibitive
resources. In contrast to traditional systems, student participation is not
limited to avenues that have been anticipated in advance by the author of the
lesson. The proposed work is important because it addresses widely perceived
problems of science education by motivating and encouraging students to apply
their knowledge and develop their skills of scientific inquiry in exploring
important and interesting topics of advanced science. This work postulates that
a computer programming language is useful and powerful as a language of
scientific discourse. This assertion will be tested by evaluating the
effectiveness of the environment in situations of varying teacher-student
computing backgrounds in an advanced course in developmental biology, freshman
college course, and in a high school biology course. //