* 9150028
* A Model Program for the Preparation of Mathematics and      Science Teachers at the Secondary Level
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1998
* Alan Schoenfeld, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 02/28/1998
* USD 1,182,553.00

The University of California, Berkeley, seeks funding for a five-year program:
A Model Program for the Preparation of Mathematics and Science Teachers at the
Secondary Level. The project will serve a model Credential-Plus-Master Degree
program for preservice teachers in mathematics and science with research and
program development components. The program for teachers is based on the
following premises: a solid preparation in mathematics and/or science; knowledge
of and participation in state-of-the-art research on teaching and learning; and
extensive experience in the use of instructional technology. The certificate
program normally takes a year to complete at UC-Berkeley; however, this program
will include the master level work and a total design change from traditional
teacher preparation programs. For example, instead of a one-semester student
teaching experience, the students will work in schools throughout the project.
Senior faculty members will be involved in teaching the courses and the unifying
seminar. Faculty, graduate students, and inservice mentor teachers will work
with all aspects of the school-based experiences and seminars. There is an
important component of professional development and preparation for graduate
students to become future leaders in mathematics and science education. The
research component is intended to help mathematics and science educators learn
more about the preparation of teachers in the disciplines and how such a program
might be implemented elsewhere. In particular, the research will focus on: the
role of videoportfolios in teacher development; how teacher beliefs affect their
classroom practices, and how those beliefs evolve; the effects of the teacher
preparation on the research and teaching of the graduate faculty; and how the
"school cultures" in the schools where students are placed interact with what
they study in the program. The amount of non-NSF cost-sharing by the University
of California at Berkeley is 45% of the total budget requested from NSF.