* 9150159
* "DARKENED WATERS: PROFILE OF AN OIL SPILL" -- A MUSEUM EXHIBITION
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* BETSY PITZMAN, Homer Society of Natural History/Pratt Museum
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 01/31/1996
* USD 389,297.00

The Pratt Museum, a natural history museum in Southcentral Alaska, proposes to
bring before the public an exhibition on oil pollution. Using the historic
disaster of the March 1989 grounding of the Exxon Valdez, the museum presents a
dramatic, grassroots story of the desperate struggle to protect the environment
and preserve traditional lifestyles. The exhibit's purpose is to increase public
awareness of national and global issues pertaining to the development,
transportation, and use of petroleum. The 1,500 square foot presentation shows
what an oil spill is like through photographs, maps, graphics, and three-
dimensional participatory elements. The exhibit is scheduled to open at the
Smithsonian's Museum of Natural History in early 1991, beginning a three-year
tour of 12 museums that will reach between 1.5 and 2 million viewers. The NSF
contribution will support the circulation of the exhibit and the development of
interactive components to enhance both the permanent and traveling
presentations. Computerized graphic displays and an educational chest of
learning tools will enhance the basic exhibit through multi- sensory activities
designed for hands-on gallery use, increasing accessibility for children and
disabled visitors. This cooperative project invloves private foundations,
individuals, the Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, and Alaska Department of Fish and Game.