* 9150158
* SCIENCE CARNIVAL CONSORTIA: A COLLABORATIVE BETWEEN THE     PACIFIC SCIENCE CENTER AND NEW OR DEVELOPING MUSEUMS
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1991,10/31/1996
* Dennis Schatz, Pacific Science Center Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 10/31/1996
* USD 1,399,172.00

New and developing science centers make up a significant percentage of ASTC
membership. They often have limited funds, facilities, exhibits, education
programs and experience developing and operating a science center. These
institutions desire ready-to-use exhibits, demonstrations and education
materials, as well as management workshops concerning the basic operation of a
science center. This project proposes the formation of a Science Carnival
Consortia, a partnership of the Pacific Science Center and five to eight new and
developing science centers. Building on the success of the Pacific Science
Center's Science Carnival, Consortia members: (1) Obtain twenty to forty Science
Carnival exhibits (2) Obtain six ready-to-use demonstrations (3) Obtain
supplementary education materials (4) Obtain appropriate training regarding the
implementation and maintenance of the above items (5) Participate in a week long
management workshop at the Pacific Science Center (6) Receive ongoing
consultation with Pacific Science Center Staff (7) Participate in three annual
meetings of Consortia members The project also produces a Science Carnival
"cookbook" which provides instructional for fabricating and maintaining all
exhibits in Science Carnival, plus scripts and material lists for each
demonstration, and enrichment class. The project also evaluates the success of
this model for serving other new and developing science centers.