* 9150252
* Project LINCS for Grades 4-8:  Lead Teachers Involved in    Making Connections
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1995
* Jane Swafford, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 07/31/1995
* USD 692,929.00

Illinois State University will conduct a three-year program to enhance 56
mathematics teachers of grades 4 through 8. Each teacher will attend a four-week
summer institute and six half-day academic year seminars each year and will be
given released time to meet with project staff and to mentor preservice teachers
and their peers. The project emphasizes "LINCS" between research and
instruction, elementary and high school mathematics, self-improvement in
mathematics instruction and building mathematical leadership, and inservice and
preservice teachers. Approximately 60 preservice teachers will be mentored by
the participants. Approximately 100 second-wave teachers will also be enhanced
through the project, and the local school districts have pledged to support
further inservicing of teachers after the NSF funding terminates. In all, 60
preservice and 150 inservices teachers will be effected by this project. Major
mathematical topics include the integration of technology into mathematics
teaching and learning; problem solving in the content areas; the teaching and
learning of prealgebra/algebra concepts and skills; probability, statistics and
graphing; geometry and measurement; and developing number sense and proportional
reasoning. Eighteen graduate credits may be earned and applied toward a Master
of Arts degree. Illinois State University and school district cost-sharing
accounts for 25% of the NSF budget. This inservice program which LINCS with a
current NSF funded preservice program could become a model for Teacher
Preparation Centers.