* 9150120
* Life in the Universe - An Exciting Vehicle for Teaching     Integrated Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* David Milne, SETI Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Alice Moses
* 12/31/1994
* USD 659,723.00

This project proposes to develop six Guides for teachers (three each for
elementary and middle-school grades). Each Guide will contain about ten hands-on
science activities suitable for from ten to twelve weeks of study. The
activities will present many sciences and some non-science disciplines that are
naturally linked and integrated by a research discipline that uses all of them,
SETI--"Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence". The activities in each Guide
will be organized to begin with a look at the Earth, solar system, and universe,
then examine questions about life on Earth. This segments ends with questions
and imaginative constructs on the possibility of life elsewhere in the universe.
In so doing, they will present biology, Earth science, physical science, and
other standard classroom taught sciences from a fresh perspective of their
possible bearing on the existence of life elsewhere. They will also integrate
the sciences with some non-scientific subjects, such as art, history, and social
sciences, in a natural manner specified by the SETI/LIFE-IN-THE-UNIVERSE
connection. The activities will emphasize hands-on learning and how learning is
acquired, as well as subject matter, in a way that develops both communication
skills and critical thinking. We expect that the great interest to young
students in SETI, with the natural integration of subjects that it mandates,
will upgrade students skills in the sciences and sustain their interest in
seeking careers in science.