* 9150837
* Miami University Physics Education Program,                 Introductory Level Sequence
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Jan Yarrison-Rice, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1993
* USD 120,029.00

Miami University Physics Education Program, Introductory Level Sequence.A
Prototype Project consisting of a three-semester sequence of new calculus-based
introductory physics courses emphasizing laboratoy experience is being developed
and implemented. Its intent is to enhance student interest, while providing more
insight into how physicists think, by introducing, as early as possible,
advances made in physics in the twentieth century. Featured in the first two
semesters are major sections on quantum mechanics, statistical physics, and
special relativity. The third-semester Contemporary Physics course builds on the
first two semesters: it develops basic concepts in order to describe recent
research results.The three-semester sequence serves as the introductory
component of an undergraduate physics education program, as typified by the
Freshman and Sophmore years. The entire sequence is appropriate for students
majoring in engineering, mathematics, and the sciences, and in other technical
fields. However, because for many students in majors other than physics the
first two semesters constitute the only physics course taken, these two
semesters are designed to stand alone. They introduce ideas of twentieth century
physics which can be used in advanced courses taken by students in other science
and technical majors. The three-semester sequence is designed to be
transportable to other Colleges and Universities where class size is moderate to
large.