* 9150224
* A Cross-cultural, Multi-Media, Ethnographic DataBase
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1991,07/31/1994
* Alan Lomax, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 07/31/1994
* USD 927,843.00

This project will develop a hypermedia, interactive data base that presents an
audio/visual enthnography of world culture and provide the analytic tools for
its analysis for classroom instruction in schools and colleges. This "Global
Jukebox" will bring the world-view of anthropology to the classroom and will
find wide use in teaching and research in human geography and other fields. The
purpose of this data base is to make available non-print materials and related
data that capture the nature of human beings and the*l*;r culture. For example,
the 20th century brought a major advance for research in the performance arts,
as song and dance were recorded on tape and film in every part of the wotld,
making it possible for the first time to study the whole range of the rhythmic
arts. The Columbia University Cross- Cultural Study of Expressive Behavior
applied methods for the systematic descriptions of performance to large samples
of audio/visual data from a stratified sample of cultures, where coded data on
social relations was also available. Out of this comparative study came linked
taxonomies of song, dance, orchestration and speech style, together with a body
of social theory sufficient to explain the cross-cultural variations of style.
This whole data-base, including its hundreds of illustrative selections of
music, dance and speech, can now be made available in an interactive media
format. The GLOBAL JUKEBOX will allow laymen, students and specialists to
explore the broad universe of human creativity and culture in a systematic
fashion, with audio/visual illustrations. This interactive learning facility
realizes, indeed challenges, the potentials of present-day computing systems,
stretching their capacities for storage, retrieval, analysis, and multi-tasking,
in handling and presenting this multi-scalar, multi-modal audio/visual database.
For lay users, it will offer an enlightening vision of cultural variety and
integrity. For students and specialists it will provide a platform for the study
of expressive behavior in it total cultural context. The materials will be
evaluated in schools, colleges and public libraries.