* 9150027
* The Effects of Problem-Based Instruction on the Geometric   Knowledge of High School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1995
* W. Gary Martin, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/1995
* USD 1,151,994.00

The Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics of the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics calls for a shift in paradigm in the teaching
of school mathematics from skills-based instruction to problem-based
instruction. This proposal describes a research project in which the effects of
problem-based instruction on the concepts and thought processes of high school
geometry students will be studied. Over the course of the proposed three-year
project, a teaching model which focuses on student solving of problems and which
is accessible to students of varying abilities will be designed. The effects of
the instruction will be assessed from two contrasting yet interactive
perspectives--use of problem-solving processes and knowledge of particular
geometric concepts. The geometric problem-solving processes to be investigated
include the abilities to (a) generalize from empirical evidence, (b) generalize
using deductive evidence, (c) deal with reverse trains of thought, (d) flexibly
refocus a train of thought, and (e) visualize a geometric situation. The
geometric concepts to be investigated include the concepts of (a) proof, (b)
infinity, (c) similarity and congruence, (d) area, perimeter, and volume, (e)
parallelism, and (f) transformations. Data collection will be three-fold,
including (a) teaching experiments with individual students to assess particular
instructional approaches; and (b) teaching experiments with intact classes to
assess the changing nature of instruction and classroom interactions; and (c)
status testing to document developing concepts and processes. This project is
jointly funded by the Instructional Materials Development Program.