* 9150026
* Discrete Mathematics Instruction in a Cooperative Problem-  Solving Mode
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Robert Gaines, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1995
* USD 179,625.00

Colorado State University seeks funding for a three-year project: Discrete
Mathematics Instruction in a Cooperative Problem Solving Mode. The idea for the
development of the project is the recommendation that Discrete Mathematics
become a part of the secondary school curriculum, as outlined in the Curriculum
and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics for the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics. The PI proposes through this project to develop and
implement a course sequence in discrete mathematics required of secondary
mathematics preservice teachers. The course will be team-taught in a cooperative
learning/problem solving mode by mathematics faculty members who will have
received special instruction, and two graduate students who have extensive
teaching experience as former high school teachers. The project will also
emphasize writing in mathematics and model alternative instructional formats.
The preservice students will take the course with a required lab in which: they
will be studying about the teaching and learning of mathematics in these modes;
they will be assistants in the teaching of a freshman course in discrete
mathematics taught by the same faculty team; and cooperatively they will develop
instructional modules to be use in the elementary course which can also be used
in high school classes with minor modifications. Thus, the preservice teachers
will gain knowledge and experience in discrete mathematics, in cooperative
learning, in complex problem solving strategies, and in writing in the
mathematics discipline both as teachers and learners. Inservice teachers will be
invited to take the courses and to produce projects for their own classes. The
training components for faculty will also be open to area teachers. The project
is one which can be easily replicated and disseminated and has the potential to
become a model for content and instruction not only for the preparation of
teachers, but for the teaching of mathematics for all students at the collegiate
level using alternative formats of instruction. Colorado State University is
supporting the project by providing 40% of the total cost.