* 9150108
* Assessments for Science Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1991,04/30/1997
* George Pallrand, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 04/30/1997
* USD 701,088.00

This is a proposal for a three year project to develop new forms of assessments
and teaching protocols for use by high school science teachers. Explanation-
based and procedural-based assessments that will be presented via video tapes
are proposed. Initially, the assessments will be based on teaching materials
which are used to introduce topics of current interest in science and technology
into high school courses. These materials, science teaching modules, have been
developed by teams of university and industrial scientists working
collaboratively with high school teachers through the University/industry
scientists Science Modules Program at Rutgers University. This program will
extend materials selected from module topics to create innovative assessments
and teaching protocols. These assessments will later be broadened for general
use by high school science teachers. This will be accomplished through the joint
efforts of faculty and staff from Rutgers University and Educational Testing
Service (ETS) working with high school science teachers. ETS researchers have
been leading a number of efforts involved in developing non- traditional
assessment models. The ETS programs emphasize teacher collaboration in the
development of assessment instruments and in the assessment of student
performance. The association of Rutgers and ETS researchers forms a
collaboration that draws upon the unique strengths of individuals from both
institutions. *** //