* 9150104
* Cooperative Mathematics Project:  Developing Number Sense   Through Problem Solving
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1991,05/31/1996
* Shaila Regan, Developmental Studies Center
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 05/31/1996
* USD 2,289,902.00

This four-year project will develop a program for kindergarten through sixth
grades that fosters the development of number sense concepts through a problem-
solving approach.l The program will provide conceptual edperiences to promote
students' understanding of number, quantity, and operations. It will model new
teaching strategies and content for elementary mathematic instruction. The
projecat will develo;p, pilot, and evaluate three units per grade level. Each
unit will be two tothree weeks long and have a dual focus: to deepen students'
understanding of mathematical concepts and to develop their interpersonal skills
and commitment to values of caring, fairness, and responsibility. The units will
provide opportunities for students to explore number concepts as they
cooperatively investigate problems and communicate about their thinking and
learning. The units will be devel;oped through a process that includes repeated
trials in classrooms by teachers and CMP staff. The units will be published by
Addison-Wesley. An evaluation will assess: (1) how teachers use the materials in
their classrooms; (2) how participation in a staff development program
influences teacher implementation; and (3) the impact of the program on student
concept attainment and teachers' and students' attitudes about mathematics.