* 9150573
* Modern Introductory Physics:  The Second Semester Course
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1991,11/30/1994
* Joseph Amato, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 11/30/1994
* USD 176,614.00

Colgate is engaged in a major revision of its introductory calculus-based
physics curriculum. This is being done to address three concerns: declining
enrollments, inadequate preparation of incoming students, and low minority
representation. The first semester of the new curriculum, called Modern
Introductory Physics, has been developed and taught over the past five years.
Organized about the theme of atoms, it presents to freshmen the central ideas of
twentieth century physics. This is a strong motivator, and the course has been
well received by students. This project is directed at development of the second
semester curriculum. The theme chosen, unification, builds naturally on the
first semester material, easily encompasses the traditional topics of the
introductory course, and presents physics as the great unifying science. The
three sections of the course are Newtonian Mechanics, Conservation Laws, and
Statistical Physics. The course concludes by discussing the origin of the
elements, bringing students full circle to the beginning of the first semester
study of atoms. Faculty expect to generate 300 pages of supplementary written
materials plus eight novel laboratory exercises blending classical and modern
physics. An outside consultant will be employed to teach staff the methods of
course evaluation, and the results will be reported in the published literature.