* 9150140
* Soundprint Explores Science
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1991,04/30/1993
* WILLIAM SIEMERING, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 04/30/1993
* USD 106,945.00

SOUNDPRINT, the weekly half-hour, nationally heard public radio documentary
series proposes SOUNDPRINT EXPLORES SCIENCE, five programs that will make
science more understandable and accessible to general audiences, with secondary
use in instructional settings. SOUNDPRINT proposes three different treatments of
science: 1) Programs that profile scientists and the life of a scientist; 2) A
comprehensive examination of a long-term science project; and 3) Explorations of
issues on the frontiers of science. Two programs will profile scientists to
illustrate what it is like to live the life of a scientist, how she/he became
interested in a particular subject, why it is important, current research on the
subject and scientific method. One program will trace, over time, a scientific
project: it will be recorded over time and presented in a compressed half hour.
Listeners will learn about the scientific method, share in the human interest
and suspense. Two programs will bring listeners the latest thinking on a subject
from individuals working on a scientific frontier and present it in an engaging,
understandable manner. SOUNDPRINT has a successful track record of initial
science programming within the on-going series. SOUNDPRINT documentaries combine
journalistic excellence, personal storytelling and state-of- the-art audio
production to create compelling programs which present issues and ideas in an
accessible, memorable way. Distributed by the American Public Radio Network,
SOUNDPRINT reaches over 300,000 listeners each week; cassette copies of program
reach a broad post-broadcast audience in schools, libraries, community centers,
youth centers, colleges and informal sharing by listeners.