* 9150001
* GLOBE-NET: Changes in the Global Environment: A Curriculum  Development Project Grades 4-12
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1996
* Harriett Stubbs, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* M.Patricia Morse
* 10/31/1996
* USD 1,393,738.00

New instructional materials that incorporate scientific research on global
environment changes will be developed for grades 4-12 to be infused into ongoing
curricula. Capitalizing on ten years experience in the development, publication
and dissemination of materials on air quality issues, and the network already
established between scientists, educators, teachers and students, GLOBE-NET will
create, evaluate, and prepare materials for publication which are bias-free and
scientifically and educationally sound, taking into account findings of research
scientists in subject areas and current research on how students learn science.
These materials will be designed to be infused into existing and established
courses and study in life, earth, physical, environment sciences, biology,
chemistry, physics and other science curricula. Dealing with global
environmental changes these materials will provide hands-on experiences,
cooperative and inquiry learning and other research-based strategies. The
materials will meet the standards of the National Diffusion Network and will be
published Carolina Academic Press and disseminated by Carolina Biological Supply
Company and others. This project will translate and transfer the most current
information on this vital topic - to teachers to students and ultimately to the
general public. GLOBE-NET will help teachers, students and parents learn more
about science and will lead toward an informed citizenry that is cognizant of
scientific issues of major international concern. Cooperators from the SCI-LINK
Project, supported by the National Science Foundation, include personnel from
local, state and federal government agencies, universities and corporations,
many students and teachers from different schools. GLOBE-NET is a joint project
of the Colleges of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Physical and Mathematics
Sciences, Forest Resources, Education and Ecology, and Behavioral Biology,
University of Minnesota.