* 9150138
* Global Warming Exhibition and Interpretive Programs
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Stephanie Pfirman, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 01/31/1994
* USD 1,001,278.00

The American Museum of Natural History and the Environmental Defense Fund will
produce a major exhibition on global warming. The prospect of global warming is
viewed by many with increasing attention and concern, but conflicting reports
have resulted in public confusion about predictions of climate change. Thus, a
need exists for education on this timely subject, particularly in the direct and
vivid way that only an exhibition provides. Wide-spread awareness of the
significance of potential climate change will lead to making informed decisions
and taking necessary actions regarding this complex and serious problem.
Visitors will learn about the forces that drive climate change, the sources and
properties of greenhouse gases, how scientists study climate, and debates on the
accuracy of global warming predictions. The exhibition will also focus on
potential environmental, social, and economic consequences of global warming and
what choices individuals and nations can make to reduce emissions of greenhouse
gases. Visitors will be able to explore these topics in depth and integrate the
information with personal experience. The exhibition will present scientific
data objectively, clearly distinguishing between what is known and what is
predicted. The American Museum and EDF will produce scientific symposia,
educational programs, and publications for greater outreach to general visitors,
schools and the media. Consultants will monitor and evaluate the content and
design, from planning through fabrication and display, to ensure the educational
effectiveness of the exhibition.