* 9150407
* Longitudinal Study of Effects of Innovative Teaching Methodsin Chemical Engineering at North Carolina State University
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1993
* Richard Felder, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/1993
* USD 119,962.00

A cohort of students is to be instructed by the principal investigator in four
successive chemical engineering courses, beginning with the introductory
sophomore course. The courses incorporate a number of teaching methods that have
been shown by educational research to promote effective learning, including
inductive/global presentation, open-ended problems, problem creation exercises,
cooperative (team-based) learning, and assessment and remediation of motivation
and study skill deficiencies. Two groups are studied: an experimental group
consisting of students who experience the proposed approach for three or more
semesters, and a comparison group of students who progress through the regular
curriculum. The products of the research include a detailed profile of entering
engineering students--distribution by sex and race, high school and freshman
year records, reasons for selecting engineering, expectations of success, and
levels of confidence and anxiety. The objective of the research is to
demonstrate that the systematic and repeated use of the methods listed above can
have significant beneficial effects on academic performance, retention, problem
solving ability, and attitude toward engineering as a curriculum and career
choice. The effects are expected to be particularly pronounced for minority
students and other students considered to be at-risk academically.