* 9150244
* New Mexico FAME
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1996
* Richard Griego, Albuquerque Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 01/31/1996
* USD 534,877.00

The Albuquerque Public Schools seeks funds for a three-year program to enhance
15 teachers of grades K through 4 to become Fellows for the Advancement of
Mathematics Education (FAME) and to serve as school-based mathematics teacher-
leaders. Each year Fellows will participate in a two-week summer session and
weekly classes during the academic year. They will study such mathematical
topics as number systems and number theory, algebra and geometry, the history of
mathematics, computer application, discrete mathematics and intuitive calculus.
Attention will also be paid special concerns of teaching in a multicultural
setting, learning theory as related to the learning of mathematics, pedagogical,
leadership development, and working with parents. Each year, 15 additional
teachers will be selected from the Fellows' schools to be FAME teachers. These
teachers will work closely with their Fellows to improve classroom mathematics
instruction and will also study university mathematics content. Fame Fellows
will have extensive responsibilities as teacher-leaders and will receive
released time to handle these responsibilities. It is anticipated that a minimum
of 73 teachers will be enhanced. Fame Fellows will earn 30 graduate credits
which may be applied toward a master's program or an education specialist
degree. Albuquerque Public Schools and the University of New Mexico's cost-
sharing accounts for 26% of the NSF budget. This project couples a solid
mathematics component to a school-based leadership component. It is run by and
for teachers, with excellent backup by university mathematics and mathematics
education staff. It may serve as a model for K-4 district-wide systemic change
in mathematics teaching and learning.