* 9150241
* Spreadsheet Applications in the Instruction of High School  Physics
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1991,05/30/1994
* Paul Otto, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 05/30/1994
* USD 120,683.00

Spreadsheet Applications in the Instruction of High School Physics During the
1991-1992 school year, the project staff will do an extensive literature review
and resource search, will develop communication linkages with other physics
educators working with spreadsheet software and data acquisition devices in
physics instruction, will attend AAPT meetings, and will visit three other sites
where extensive physics- spreadsheet instructional activities are ongoing. Based
upon this preparation, the staff will develop and field test three spreadsheet
modules for delivery of high school physics content. During the spring of 1992,
a summer institute will be planned for 20 well-prepared high school physics
teachers. The teachers will be selected from school in the state of South Dakota
and the 150 mile region surrounding the University of South Dakota. These
teachers will be brought to campus for a two-week 1992 summer institute. The
institute, presented by the project staff, will consist of training in the use
of microcomputers, spreadsheet software, data acquisition devices, and
communications software. The 20 teachers will practice with the instructional
modules developed by the project staff and will study instructional strategies
appropriate to the use of computers in physics instruction and learn physics
content using spreadsheets. The 20 teachers will use the instructional modules
and the instructional strategies during the 1992-1993 school year in their own
high school physics instruction. They will be provided consultative support by
the project staff by way of phone, mail and electronic mail. The 20 teachers
will also be encouraged to communicate among themselves via the same methods.
Three regional meetings, hosted by one of the participating high schools and
conducted by two of the project staff, will be used to support the trained
teachers and to inservice other physics teachers in each region. Feedback about
the effectiveness of the instructional modules and the instructional strategies
will be obtained from the participating teachers. Cost sharing equals 37% of the
NSF award.