* 9150186
* Committee on Biology Teacher Inservice Programs.
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1991,05/31/1994
* Donna Gerardi, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 05/31/1994
* USD 310,265.00

The National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council is concerned about
the state of science education in the Nation's schools. This project will
address the issue of teacher enhancement for teachers of biology and the life
sciences. The Board on Biology will convene an expert committee to examine
selected inservice activities currently available to secondary-school biology
teachers. Since biology is one of the most widely offered and most frequently
taken courses in middle and high school, a focus on continuing education of
biology teachers should have an impact on the quality of science education
offered to most, if not all students. The committee will consider important
recent advances in biology, links between content and pedagogy, the curricula
and teaching materials currently available, and the possible use of new
technologies to improve teaching and learning. Emphasis will be placed on
collaborative projects and will consider ways to maintain linkages between
teachers and scientists after the completion of the formal inservice training.
Most importantly, the components of exemplary programs will be identified that
can serve as templates for the development of future inservice programs for both
public and private organizations. As such, it will contribute significantly to
the set of materials on biology education already published and disseminated by
the Academy.