* 9151985
* Laboratory for Introductory Computer Science Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Paul Campbell, Beloit College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1994
* USD 47,201.00

This project establishs a laboratory of microcomputers to expand use of directed
laboratory periods in introductory and intermediate computer science courses.
Experimental laboratory periods in two introductory computer science classes are
being introduced, and this is expanded and introduced into one additional
course. The new laboratory complements the small Macintosh Lab, which is shared
by all of the sciences. The new lab makes possible the regular scheduling of
directed laboratory periods in the target courses under directed faculty
supervision.Networking of the computers to the faculty network aids faculty in
integrating computing resources into coursework. It enables simplified
distribution of instructor- prepared data files and software, the efficient
shared use of certain commercial software (in accordance with licensing), and
improved communication between faculty and students regarding problems in using
the course software. Although the use of laboratories in intermediate and
advanced computer science courses is becoming widespread, the use of directed
laboratories in the introductory computer science curriculum appears to be a
newly emerging trend. Most current efforts in these areas are tool-oriented:
teaching the programming environment, debugging tools etc. Use of these labs to
teach structured programming and software engineering topics appears to be a
valuable innovatIon. Student response to the experimental lab periods has been
highly positive, and course success rates have been enhanced, especially with
non-majors.