* 9151748
* Instrumentation for the Introductory and Advanced Optics    Laboratories at Southern Illinois University
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1994
* Gerald Pogatshnik, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/1994
* USD 29,948.00

Funds from this program are being used to acquire laboratory equipment and
computers for use in an introductory and advanced optics laboratory course for
physics and engineering majors. The laboratory courses are a part of a new
optics program being instituted at Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville.
The introductory laboratories are designed to use computers both as an aid to
the collection of data, and for data analysis and modeling of optical systems.
The advanced laboratory is designed to introduce students to lasers, fiber
optics, and holography, and to provide them with a suitable background for
conducting research in optics. While the field of optics has grown tremendously
in terms of its technological importance, it is significant that there are no
established optics programs at public institutions of higher education in the
state of Illinois. The objective of the program is to use faculty expertise in
the field of optics to develop a model optics curriculum that provides students
with a marketable specialization in optics. Major instrumentation purchased
under this program includes computers and data acquisition hardware, along with
optical components for student use in experiments in holography, fiber-optics,
spectroscopy, and thin-film physics. In addition, the equipment is being used in
an annual series of workshops for high-school science students throughout the
St. Louis area.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds from non-federal
sources.