* 9151784
* Computer Integration into the Undergraduate Physics         Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1991,11/30/1993
* Wallace Freeman, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1993
* USD 45,641.00

This project is integrating computer use into the intermediate and upper-level
undergraduate physics curriculum through use of a local-area network. The
specific courses affected by the project are Intermediate Experimental Physics,
Computer Applications to Physics Laboratories, and Computational Physics.
However, the proposed network also provides a framework to later serve the
undergraduate core sequence and newly implemented Applied Physics Program. The
grant provides funding for a network consisting of a file server, a
computational server, and eight relatively modest workstations linked by
Ethernet. The computers in laboratories make practical the upgrading of existing
experiments, the teaching of modern methods of computer interfacing, and the
future introduction of contemporary new experiments into the undergraduate
curriculum. A key component of the network is the computational server which
provides high-performance computing to each network workstation. This allows
undergraduate students to perform simulations of complex physical systems and
processes, large-scale data analysis, and 2D and 3D graphical renderings for
animations not feasible on modest workstations alone. It also enables students
to develop detailed physical intuition not possible from hand-waving arguments
that ordinarily are the only means to discuss these problems in undergraduate
courses. Most significantly, the project enables the department to better
prepare students for what is expected of them in graduate study, industrial
positions, and secondary school teaching.NSF grant funds are being matched with
funds from non-federal sources.