* 9151557
* Development of an Undergraduate Semiconductor               Laboratory for Electrical Engineering Majors at Arkansas    State University
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Robert Engelken, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1994
* USD 99,638.00

A senior-level laboratory in semiconductor materials and device fabrication is
being developed to provide hands-on experience with abstract concepts obtained
two semiconductor device and one optical electronics courses. The experiments
center on (1) semiconductor/metal film deposition,(2) semiconductor processing
and characterization, an (3) simple device formation. The laboratory also
supports an undergraduate honors course which has an independent student
research component culminating in a required article, abstract submission, or
senior thesis. The laboratory provides practical experience, including
computerized data acquisition, with the fundamental material aspects of
semiconductors. Innovative aspects include (1) in-class electro- and
"electroless" deposition of most metal chalcogenide films to be utilize and (2)
a "team-within-a-team" concept where 2-3 person teams symbiotically coordinate
with other teams to complete projects. Major items of equipment include an x-ray
diffractometer (phase and grain size determination), a UV/VIS/NIR
spectrophotometer for optical absorption/reflectance spectroscopy (band-gap and
free carrier determination), electromagnet and computerized data acquisition
system for Hall and van der Pauw measurements, annealing oven (annealing and
contact firing), microbalance (thickness determination), diamond wire saw
(sample shaping), bell jar evaporation system (contact deposition),
monochromator system (photoconductivity, photo-current, and luminescence
spectra), and capacitance- voltage meter/curve trace (both for junction/contact
characterization).