* 9151873
* Integrating Method and Theory in Introductory Science       Through Multimedia Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* David Whisnant, Wofford College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 03/31/1994
* USD 63,979.00

This project is creating a multimedia computer network with interactive
hypermedia courseware that integrates lectures and laboratories in introductory
chemistry and geology courses. This courseware complements current laboratory
experiences and encourages students to critically study the context and content
of their experiments. The project is equipping a multimedia laboratory with
eight computer workstations interfaced with videodisc players, networked to a
fileserver computer. The project utilizes two additional computer workstations
and video recording equipment for courseware development. Using hypermedia
authoring software, sets of exercises are being produced which students will use
after completion of laboratory experiments. These computer-based exercises
feature text, computer graphics, still images captured from live video of
laboratory experiments, image sequences from videodiscs, and simulations. In
doing these exercises, students are required to interactively solve problems
relating to the laboratory. As students work with these exercises they use a
hypertext database of information within an expert system context, to logically
blend information from lectures and readings with laboratory observations and
procedures.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds from non-Federal
sources.