* 9151925
* Coordinating the Teaching of Physics and Mathematics Using  a Common Computer System
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Richard Vandervelde, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/1994
* USD 98,700.00

This project enables coordinating the teaching of physics and mathematics via
the use of common software and hardware systems. The project introduces a common
computer laboratory for the large number of students enrolled in both General
Physics and Calculus. A coordinating group from the Departments of Physics and
Mathematics has been established to develop a unified pedagogical approach. a
unified technological approach will be used which includes a common computer
system, common software systems such as Mathematica and 20/20, a common
graphical system, and common text processing systems. The coordinating group is
overseeing the introduction of topics, the development of appropriate
techniques, and the assessment of the efficacy of the methods chosen. The
initial emphasis in physics is in the development of new approaches for the
teaching of general physics laboratory while in mathematics the emphasis is on
the development of computer based methods of teaching the calculus. Following
these, the approach will be applied to instruction in the mathematical methods
of physics and differential equations. It is expected that the systems and
methods introduced at each stage in the project will be applicable in all
succeeding courses in both departments.