* 9151756
* Analytical Instrumentation for Improving the Environmental  Studies Program
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Jeffrey Niemitz, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/1993
* USD 43,200.00

Funds from the NSF-ILI Program are being used for the purchase of an Atomic
Absorption Spectrophotometer and the upgrading of a Gas Chromatograph/Mass
Spectrometer with a Headspace Sampler. These additions allow significant science
curricular enhancement to a rapidly expanding Environmental Studies program
which now interacts formally with all physical and life sciences at Dickinson
College. These enhancements benefit non- science majors in introductory courses
in Environmental Science, Geology, and Chemistry; Geology and Chemistry majors
and Environmental Studies certificate participants in intermediate-level,
required and elective courses; and many students in these disciplines engaged in
independent research and internships. Focus of the project is on a more in-depth
examination of the chemical aspects of environmental issues of increasingly
great concern to students and society.Specifically, this project is
incorporating this analytical component into the broader environmental
curriculum at three levels: A) Introducing a broader range of chemical data into
the introductory level courses. Heretofore, it has been impossible to deepen the
discussion and questioning about prevailing chemical paradigms involving toxic
metals and organic pollutants associated with local environmental degradation,
the basis for most laboratory/field work at this level of inquiry. B)
Introducing theory, operation, and limitations of instrumentation at the
intermediate level in innovative ways. Small, well controlled, course-based
environmental research projects are teaching the process of formulating a
research project with the application of instrumentation to important real-life
scientific problems. C) Using instrumentation as tools for independent research
and internships to solve more difficult, self-conceived problems.NSF grant funds
are being matched with funds from non- Federal sources.