* 9151595
* Development of Laboratory for Distributed Computation and   System Programming at Southern Illinois University at       Edwardsville.
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Bernard Waxman, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1994
* USD 24,289.00

This award provides an experimental network to serve as a test- bed for student
projects, including both class projects and undergraduate research projects.
These projects include the design and testing of protocols, the development of
network applications, the management of networks, and the development of
distributed systems. Students, through the use of this network, gain hands on
experience in network system programming and the development of applications for
local area networks. The School of Sciences at SIUE supports two summer research
projects: the junior year summer year research program and the minority summer
research program. Many of the projects have been designed with these programs in
mind. The network consists of six UNIX based workstations that are connected by
a complete point-to-point topology as well as through an Ethernet bus. This
innovative connection scheme allows for a wide variety of projects and
laboratory exercises, including the study of multipoint routing. In addition,
the network is connected to the department's existing Ethernet through a gateway
allowing students to develop projects without interfering with the operation of
the existing network by disconnecting the gateway from the department's network.
Later, after a student's project has been thoroughly tested, it can be run on a
larger network by reconnecting the gateway.