* 9151283
* Improvement in Instrumentation and Equipment for Teaching   Cellular and Molecular Biology at Saddleback College
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Ruth Wrightsman, Saddleback College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 23,985.00

Project Summary: The modern biology curriculum should acquaint students with
concepts and methodologies derived from cellular and molecular biology.
Currently at Saddleback College, students have the opportunity to explore
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell structure using standard compound and dissecting
microscopes, as well as viewing cell structures using scanning and transmission
electron microscopes. We would like to augment the teaching of cell structure
and function through the fractionation and analysis of cells using
centrifugation, protein gel electrophoresis, nucleic acid gel electrophoresis,
and ultraviolet spectroscopy. This equipment will allow us to isolate cellular
organelles and macromolecules in our cell biology, microbiology and introductory
biology laboratory courses, and to perform simple exercises in recombinant DNA
technology. With the purchase of a refrigerated high speed centrifuge, tabletop
mini-centrifuges, protein and nucleic acid electrophoresis gel boxes,
electrophoresis power supplies, and ultraviolet spectrophotometer attachments,
we feel that we will strengthen and update our laboratory curriculum in cell
biology and microbiology. Since many of the students in cell biology and
microbiology courses transfer to four year colleges and universities to complete
their baccalaureate degrees, their exposure to the techniques of modern cellular
and molecular biology will enhance their future for academic success,
particularly for those students who transfer to research-oriented universities.
Furthermore, we plan to introduce some aspects of these techniques to
introductory general biology courses and non-majors biology courses in an effort
to increase the scientific literacy of these students in the areas of modern
molecular biology.