* 9151962
* Incorporation of Plasma Etching Experiments in UndergraduateMicroelectronics Fabrication Laboratory at University of    New Mexico
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Charles Fleddermann, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1994
* USD 25,525.00

Plasma etching has become an invaluable tool in the fabrication of modern
microelectronic integrated circuits, making possible the high packing density of
electronic components that has become standard in modern circuitry. Many
colleges and universities offer laboratory courses designed to give
undergraduate students "hands-on" experience with fabricating microelectronic
components. However, these courses ignore plasma etching in favor of the easier,
but no longer industrially useful, wet-chemical etch methods, leaving the
graduating engineer with limited knowledge and no practical experience in plasma
processing of semiconductors. This project incorporates experimental work in the
undergraduate microelectronics laboratory designed to give students a knowledge
of basic plasma processing equipment, to teach students techniques for etching
semiconductor materials, and to facilitate the students' understanding of
fundamental plasma processes and diagnostic techniques. Diagnostic tools
suitable for use in an undergraduate laboratory allow the student to understand
the processes taking place in the plasma, as well as to evaluate the results of
plasma etching of materials. Using this equipment, students perform a series of
experiments learning the characteristics of rf plasma systems, perform some easy
diagnostic studies, and evaluate the results of etching of various semiconductor
materials. A relatively modest capital expenditure provides the student with an
in-depth knowledge of plasma etching, and its implementation in the
semiconductor industry.