* 9152573
* Laboratory Upgrade for Undergraduate Radio Astronomy        Techniques Course
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1993
* Ronald Snell, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1993
* USD 5,124.00

The project enables a major upgrade to the laboratory component of the course
Techniques of Radio Astronomy taken by junior and senior undergraduates in the
Five College Astronomy Department. This effort is centered around the 21-cm horn
antenna constructed for this laboratory some years ago; the present project
allows the addition of a high resolution autocorrelation spectrometer for use in
spectroscopic observations of hydrogen in the Milky Way. This instrument has
replaced a low resolution filter spectrometer that had been on loan to this
laboratory, but which was far from ideal and is no longer available. The
autocorrelator is based on a 80386- personal computer, which takes the data and
performs Fourier Transforms to obtain the spectral power distribution, as well
as basic tasks such as calculating the direction in which the (manually
operated) telescope is to be pointed. The computer also runs the spectral line
reduction software package developed at the Five College Radio Astronomy
Observatory. After the period during which data are taken, the computer and
software are available to students on an unscheduled basis, with several sets of
laboratory exercises to be completed. These get students to go through the
process of reducing their data after taking it. Examples include determination
of peak velocities at different Galactic longitudes to study Galactic rotation,
and measurement of the basic form of the Galactic disk. These projects greatly
enhance the laboratory component of the course and thus the value of the course
as a whole.