* 9152407
* Undergraduate laboratories in Environmental Sciences:       Environmental Analysis and Monitoring in an Urban Setting
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Sherman Bloomer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/1993
* USD 23,758.00

This project is developing innovative laboratory exercises for science and non-
science majors involved in an interdisciplinary program in Environmental
Studies. Grant funds are supporting the purchase of an atomic absorption
spectrometer with heated graphite furnace and a scanning spectrophotometer.
These instruments are key components of laboratories built around the
examination and analysis of soils, water, and vegetation of the Charles River
Basin in urban and suburban Boston. Experiments introduce students to the nature
of the scientific method with a non-traditional approach--the field and
laboratory acquisition and interpretation of data, rather than the completion of
"demonstration" type labs. Each experiment includes four components:
experimental design, field observation and sample collection, laboratory
preparation and analysis, and data interpretation. Emphasis in the first year is
on developing experiments for a two semester natural science sequence for non-
science majors and for an Environmental Biology course which is one of the core
courses for the Environmental Science major. A laboratory manual for both
sequences is being produced which can be used as a model for similar programs.
The equipment also is being used to support the modification of laboratory
exercises and independent study projects for majors in Environmental Science,
Biology, and Geology.