* 9152174
* Computer Education for Undergraduates in Meteorology/       Climatology and Geographic Information Systems: An          Integrated Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* J. Clark Archer, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 12/31/1993
* USD 50,000.00

The purpose of this project is to develop a meteorology/geographic information
systems computer network that allows the exchange of raw data and finished
products between the meteorological and geographic information systems (GIS)
laboratories. Each laboratory consists of a local area network (LAN) comprised
of a file server and several workstations, with appropriate printers, plotters
and other peripherals attached as shared resources. These laboratories allow
students to analyze and display meteorological, climatological and geographic
data in non-traditional ways. One laboratory is primarily devoted to
meteorological data display and analysis using the NSF-funded Unidata data
stream and PC-McIDAS display and analysis software. The second laboratory is
used primarily for geographic information systems (GIS) applications using both
raster- and vector-based software. The laboratories are joined through the
University computing network (HuskerNet) to allow data interchange between LANs.
The synergistic relationship of the laboratories creates a unique environment
for innovative undergraduate education and research. Existing courses in
meteorology-climatoloqy and GIS are improved by the up-to-date computer
equipment and the expanded capabilities allow additional courses to be added to
these programs. The coupled laboratories allow an emphasis of the inseparable
nature of the physical world and societal activities in courses and provide a
model program for other departments around the country.NSF grant funds are being
matched with funds from non-federal sources.