* 9152065
* Development of Engineering Technology Motion Control        Laboratory at Cleveland State University
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1994
* Donald Anthan, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 12/31/1994
* USD 30,208.00

This project equips a laboratory with scientific hardware and software to teach
the fundamentals of motion control systems. This equipment is incorporated into
the laboratory portion of the automatic control systems curriculum for
Electronic Engineering Technology undergraduate students. Motion control, along
with computer technology, is the basis for much of the work being done to
upgrade U.S. manufacturing capabilities. The purpose of the laboratory equipment
is to complete the student's understanding of the complexities of motion control
applications. The laboratory experiments complements classroom lectures and
computer dynamic simulations of the motion control process. The hands-on
experience make the student better able to comprehend the intricacies of the
multifaceted physical and position feedback control systems. Both rotary and
linear output motion are available. Actuation devices are DC servomotors and
stepper motors, and high efficiency pulse-width-modulated drive electronics are
provided. Measurement devices are analog and digital transducers (e.g.
tachometers, potentiometers, resolvers, and encoders). Intelligent axis cards
are used to study motion profile capability closely related to automation
applications. A multi-axes demonstration system is included to provide a
complete understanding of motion control flexibility. The laboratory experiments
insure that the students receive a strong fundamental understanding of the basic
principles of high-performance motion control.