* 9152892
* Instrumentation for Freshman Physics Lab - The Study of     Motion
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1991,09/30/1993
* Charles Robertson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1993
* USD 47,425.00

The University of Washington is initiating a major program to improve entry-
level science courses. A major goal, as stated by the University Provost, is
improvement of laboratory courses, and the requirement that all students
enrolled in the lecture course shall also take the corresponding laboratory
course. The program in Physics is addressing both issues: improvement of
thelaboratory courses, and preparing for increased laboratory enrollment. The
Physics plan begins with improvements in the mechanics laboratory experiments in
introductory courses. Faculty and staff who are participants in this project
have been working for the past few years developing computer-based experiments
that provide new opportunities for students to investigate motion in one and two
dimensions with much more accurate and versatile tools than were previously
available. The experience to date with lab sections where these experiments were
tested shows that students are able to investigate a much wider range of
phenomena with a deeper understanding of the concepts of motion. NSF support is
being utilized to match the University funds provided to purchase workstations
(PC 386/SX) and two motion digitizing devices: a video system and optical
encoders. These elements are being integrated in a "motion measurement station"
and form the backbone of a laboratory measurement and analysis system.NSF grant
funds are being matched with funds from non-federal sources.