* 9152727
* Development of Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Laboratory   for Robotics, Machine Vision and System Integration at      Indiana University, Purdue University at Indianapolis
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Yaobin Chen, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/1994
* USD 48,604.00

An interdisciplinary undergraduate laboratory for robotics, machine vision and
system integration is being developed to serve senior-level undergraduate
students in Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering. The laboratory
provides the students with hands-on experience in the state-of- the-art robotics
and manufacturing technology for reinforcing the scientific and engineering
principles learned in related lecture courses. The laboratory consists of four
experimental stations, including (1) desk-top CNC machine station, (2) robot and
CNC machine integration station, (3) computer vision station, and (4) robot and
vision integration station. In addition, a computer-controlled linear conveyor
is used for simulating a flexible manufacturing workcell. Each station contains
a PC-type computer with appropriate software. The equipment supplements existing
equipment currently available in the Robotics Laboratory of the Department of
Electrical Engineering and is housed in a room of 900 sq.ft. located in the new
Science, Engineering and Technology Building 11. The experiments performed by
students range from robot fundamentals to vision-based automated manufacturing.
The students are be required to develop software to coordinatively command the
robot, CNC machine and other components to perform various tasks with the aid of
sensing devices. In addition, all students in the Departments of Electrical
Engineering and Mechanical Engineering benefit from the laboratory in related
lecture courses and their senior engineering capstone design project courses.