* 9152131
* Symbolic Algebra in the Engineering Classroom: The Coming   Revolution
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1991,03/31/1994
* Mark Yoder, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/1994
* USD 82,817.00

This project develops a curriculum innovation that promises to increase student
understanding, productivity, and participation in the classroom and shift the
focus of the class to more open- ended and design-oriented problems. The
equipment requested are 30 powerful workstations running Mathematica. This
classroom/laboratory is used to teach a year long, Sophomore level, Electrical
Engineering, Circuits & Systems class sequence.Recent NSF-funded projects (both
on our campus and others) have shown that students learning calculus and
differential equations in computer algebra equipped classrooms have increased
productivity, understanding, and participation. Installing workstations in an
engineering classroom allows students to participate actively in the lectures.
The powerful plotting routines allows them to visualize the relationships
between voltages, currents, etc in a circuit. The computer algebra system's
ability to manipulate symbolic equations both increases the student's
productivity and requires less time in the lecture for re-teaching manipulative
mathematics skills. This extra lecture time is used to address design-oriented
topics such as worst-case studies and sensitivity analysis. Finally, student
retention in engineering is expected to increase since those students who have
weaker manipulative mathematical skills will be at less of a disadvantage, and
therefore less likely to drop out.