* 9152938
* Equipment for a Full-Year Course in Discovering Physics for Pre-college Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1994
* S. Leslie Blatt, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1994
* USD 28,132.00

Equipment is being utilized for the development of a two- semester introductory
level laboratory course entitled "Discovering Physics." The course emphasizes an
understanding of the basic concepts that naturally lead us to ask "How do we
know...?" and "Why do we believe...?" questions about physical phenomena. The
story lines of "What is light?" and "What is randomness?" are utilized for their
general interest, their accessibility, and their importance in physics. The
course is oriented toward students planning to become elementary school
teachers, adopts the same teaching philosophy that should be used in the
elementary school classroom, and has a fifty percent enrollment of female
students. The laboratory emphasizes a cooperative learning environment and
encourages students to develop hypotheses and to propose and perform experiments
that generate real data and experiences. Funds are being utilized to purchase
and construct more sophisticated equipment that will yield quantitative results,
reduce one layer of student confusion, and allow further experiments related to
electro-magnetic radiation, nonlinear phenomena, and chaos. Since there are no
available textbooks for a course of this type, project staff are producing a
university-level modular-based Discovery Workbook. The proposed project is
strengthening the laboratory based course at Clark University and having
national impact.NSF grant funds are being matched with funds from non-federal
sources.