* 9152988
* Scanning Electron Microscope with Image Capture/Playback    System for Classroom Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1993
* W. Britt Leatham, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 10/31/1993
* USD 62,645.00

This is an interdisciplinary project involving the Departments of Biology and
Geology from the California State University at San Bernardino. Faculty are
incorporating in lectures, laboratories and student research information about
ultrastructural surface morphology of various specimens. In order to show this
information to students faculty are using an Amray 1810 Scanning Electron
Microscope (SEM) to observe surface ultrastructure of specimens ranging from
rock to biological tissues. The images observed in the SEM are captured on an
optical disc with a Panasonic optical disc recorder/player. The ultrastructural
images are incorporated in classroom instruction in the various departments
using a video workstation, consisting of a Panasonic optical disc player, a
high-resolution monitor and a Macintosh computer controller. In addition, images
obtained from other microscopic systems currently available are captured on
disc, thus achieving a range of magnification of specimens from 1 to 100,000 X.
This system allows a variety of courses to use information not found in
textbooks or commercial videodiscs directly in the lecture room and in
laboratory exercises. The knowledge gained by undergraduate students, especially
in the upper-division courses is greatly strengthened by this novel approach. In
addition, students have hands-on use of the equipment in laboratory exercises
and independent research. Further, interactive video programs are being
developed to allow students to simulate experiments using the stored images.NSF
grant funds are being matched with funds from non- federal sources.