* 9152052
* Undergraduate Laboratory in Engineering Biology at          Princeton University
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1994
* Steven Karel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 02/28/1994
* USD 67,234.00

A coherent set of laboratory experiments is developed that demonstrates the
application of chemical engineering principles in biotechnology. This program is
used in the undergraduate Chemical Engineering laboratory course to provide a
core set of experiments that introduces Chemical Engineering students to
biotechnology, and provides in-depth exposure for students in the newly
instituted Engineering Biology Certificate Program. The laboratory experiments
center around the production, isolation and purification of alkaline
phosphatases from bacterial fermentations using either E. coli or Bacillus
subtilis. The experiments follow the processes that would be used in the
commercial production of the enzyme. They include: 1) a fermentation experiment,
demonstrating microbial growth and product formation as well as O2 mass
transfer; 2) an extraction experiment, demonstrating cell lysis and membrane
permeabilization; 3) a cell harvesting experiment, comparing ultrafiltration and
centrifugation and emphasizing scale-up considerations; 4) a purification
experiment, demonstrating chromatographic and electrophoretic methods for
isolation and characterization of proteins; and 5) an enzyme kinetics
experiment, demonstrating methods for testing enzyme mechanisms by analysis of
the kinetics of product inhibition.