* 9152722
* Integrated Undergraduate Laboratories for Biochemistry and  Molecular Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Donald Lueking, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 50,000.00

A key challenge in educating today's undergraduate students is to bring together
understanding of biochemistry, immunochemistry, microbiology and molecular
biology in a functional manner. The aim of this project is to develop a year-
long laboratory course with 3 integrated modules for undergraduate majors in the
Department of Biological Sciences' Bachelor of Science degree programs in
Biochemistry and Microbiology which are now being expanded to include Molecular
Biology. These laboratory modules are designed to provide up- to-date training
for the students in fundamental methods used in biochemistry, immunochemistry,
microbiology an molecular biology. This laboratory course sequence will
complement the year-long lecture course in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
which is a set of 3 one-term modules required for students studying Biochemistry
and Microbiology. The current situation is that only a single one-term
laboratory course is offered and it covers only the basic methods used in
biochemistry and a brief introduction to nucleic acids. The proposed project is
a logical extension of our curriculum, which would bring together contemporary
methodology using modern instrumentation to enhance the learning environment for
these students. To achieve this program development, we will integrate our
offerings in laboratory methods to link the student's understanding of
biochemistry, immunochemistry and microbiology to molecular biology. The major
instruments to be purchased include: UV-Vis spectrophotometers, PhastSystem gel
electrophoresis system, FPLC chromatography system (including an IBM-type
personal computer), preparative centrifuge, bench-top fermenter, DNA sequencing
gel apparatus and DNA sequence analysis software. The significance of this
project lies in the unique integration around a central theme of biochemical and
immunochemical methods for analysis of enzymes and recombinant gene products,
the regulation of gene expression in bacteria, and the cloning and
characterization of bacterial genes.