* 9152655
* Development of Computer-Based Instrumentation Electronics   Laboratory for the Technology Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* Richard Nord, Franklin Institute of Boston
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1993
* USD 20,887.00

An advanced electronics laboratory using computer-based data acquisition and
analysis instrumentation is being developed at Franklin Institute of boston for
its technology majors. The instrumentation consists of six workstations, each
with a 386- based AT personal computer with internal boards for use as: a
digital logic analyzer (DLA); and, an analog instrumentation system (AIS)
comprised of a digital oscilloscope, function generator and multimeter. The DLA
will improve the timing analysis of a microprocessor-based system bus
architecture. The AIS will allow a further explanation of electronics and
electrical circuits through its capability to extract data and its software
manipulation in frequency and characteristic curve analysis. The students using
this laboratory are in the 2nd year of two-year engineering technology programs,
and they will have had one year of electrical and electronic circuits. The
project is significant because it implements an efficient, cost-effective
system, of a type currently utilized in the private sector, that will improve
our students' educational experience while preparing them for a career in
industry. By demonstrating the efficacy of this system and developing the
accompanying instructional materials, the project plans to facilitate the
implementation of computer-based electronic laboratories by other educational
institutions.