* 9152957
* Freshman Hands-On Instructional Laboratory in Modern AppliedOptics For Engineering Students at Cornell
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1994
* Michael Isaacson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1994
* USD 27,775.00

Acquisition of laboratory instructional instrumentation allows a quantum
improvement to be made in the quality of applied optics instruction offered to
Cornell engineering students by the Engineering Physics program at Cornell. The
equipment yeilds substantial and material improvement in the instructional and
laboratory content of an existing, and already quite successful, laboratory
course on "The Laser and Its Applications in Science, Technology and Medicine",
a course which is currently taken by 25% of all Cornell engineering students. It
is our contention that students more easily grasp difficult concepts in modern
optics if they have hands-on experience with these tools and are exposed to
experiments that vividly illustrate particular principles. Experiments are being
developed that demonstrate short optical pulse and low light level detection,
dye laser tuning, Raman scattering, and spectroscopic "finger printing".The
motivation behind our objective is simple; the extensive use of advanced optics,
and lasers in particular, is pervasive in almost all scientific and engineering
disciplines and is rapidly growing. Despite this fact and the widely published
forecasts of the coming photonics revolution in the next century, minimal
attention is generally given to the adequate education of significant number of
U.S. engineering undergraduates in the principles underlying applied optics, and
in the practical use of these optical tools.