* 9152528
* Enhancing Robotics and Intelligent Systems Laboratory       in Computer Vision
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/1991,10/31/1993
* Marko Vuskovic, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1993
* USD 12,277.00

This project improves the existing Robotics and Intelligent Systems Laboratory
(RISL), currently consisting of a PUMA 562 manipulator, two RTX educational
robots and extensive VME-based hardware. The lab is used for class
demonstrations, programming assignments, term projects, and research in
undergraduate courses which cover robotics, artificial intelligence, computer
control, neural computing and computer architectures. Improvement of the RISL is
provided by a robot vision system with the following major components: frame
grabber (DIGIMAX and FRAMESTORE boards), video convolution module (VFIR board),
feature extraction and histogramming module (FEATUREMAX board) and supporting
video software library (IMAGEFLOW). All these components are a set of Datacube's
compatible boards which are be plugged into existing MPC-200 workstation. New
equipment consisting of a standard CCD cameras with lenses, stands and
monochrome monitor is being used in a sequence of pilot projects which starts
with 2D recognition and locating simple known objects, and continues with 3D
vision. These projects provide basic tools for further undergraduate research in
robotics (path planning, object handling, simple assembly tasks, etc.) and
artificial intelligence (image understanding, representation and planning in
blocks world). This project expands the application areas of existing robots,
especially in the area of artificial intelligence, and makes undergraduate
courses in robotics and AI more modern and attractive to students seeking
practical experience with high-tech instruments, such as robots and machine
vision systems.