* 9152211
* Development of an Undergraduate Laboratory for Presentation of Computer Science Learning Modules for Introductory       Courses at Northeastern University.
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Viera Proulx, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1994
* USD 51,230.00

The goal of this project is to develop an exciting, attractive environment for
learning computer science through hands-on exploration and experimentation. The
curriculum aspect consists of a series of related but reasonably independent
learning modules covering the introductory courses through data structures. They
are usable by a wide range of students, from high school to university. The
modules use graphics and visualization to provide direct exposure to the
problems and processes which are important in computation, complementing what
can be understood by logic with what can be learned by working with the hands
and observing with the eyes. The modules consist of manipulative materials,
demonstration programs based on visual representations of important concepts,
hypercard-based learning materials, source code, and teaching guides. This
project equips a classroom with enough computers so that students can work on
line during the class. Such a laboratory enables students to work with the
materials in class as concepts are introduced, so that class time becomes a time
for doing instead of just watching and listening. It gives faculty a chance to
evaluate student comprehension of new material as it is presented and to provide
additional assistance where it is needed. The experience in the classroom also
introduces students to a style of active learning which they can carry over into
other contexts.