* 9153890
* A Nationally Distributed Planetarium Star Program & Chart onExploration: "From the Earth to the Stars"
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Von Del Chamberlain, Hansen Planetarium
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 01/31/1994
* USD 238,318.00

The Hansen Planetarium proposes the creation, writing, and production of a
50-minute star theater program, From The Earth To The Stars, and educational
chart aimed at informally educating over a million individuals regarding the
exploration of our planet, the planets of our solar system, and the stars
beyond. The further production of three interactive exhibits is planned to
accompany the program. This program will be marketed and distributed at a
nominal charge to 250 national planetariums, with 50 additional production
packets planned for loan. In this fashion, top-quality, accurate, and timely
science education can be guaranteed to a large selection of audiences. In
America today there is growing awareness and concern surrounding the serious
deficit our society will soon experience in the fields of science and
technology. The Hansen Planetarium's goal is to stimulate learning and interest
in astronomy and other sciences for students of all ages across the country.
Exploration is, perhaps, the human activity in western culture which can most
provoke debate, excite intense interest and stimulate scientific and cultural
growth. The utilization of expert consultants, in conjunction with Hansen
Planetarium staff, will insure this program presents the most current
information available about the past, present, and future of exploration. Its
interactive format is designed to stimulate a proactive approach to problem
solution on the part of the audience as a stimulus to the learning process. The
star show format, with its dynamic special effects, will enhance the learning of
science in America today.