* 9153985
* INCREASING MINORITY ACCESS TO CAREER IN INFORMAL SCIENCE...
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1992,04/30/1995
* Fran Atchison, St Louis Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Roger D. Mitchell
* 04/30/1995
* USD 1,250,576.00

This program will provide funding to employ and train a total of 61 minority
participants, who will enter into one of three different program categories. The
first category will be for 11 young professionals - minority individuals who
have both special needs and abilities. Their needs are for continued specialized
training to facilitate career advancement and they would, as would the other two
classes of interns, benefit greatly from the establishment of a support network
encompassing other minority individuals interested in careers in science
museums. They also have unique abilities, stemming from their prior experience
in science centers or other science-related institutions, that will allow them
to serve as models for participants in the other two categories in the program.
Their component of the program will span two full years. The second program
category is for 10 post-baccalaureate minority individuals who are just entering
the job market and who, with the proper training and support, are likely to
pursue a career in science museums. They will participate in an 18 month program
that will provide them with both specific career skills as well as an overall
introduction to careers in the museum context. The third program category will
provide half-time internships for two cohorts of 20 minority individuals who are
currently enrolled in college. Each cohort will participate. The total cost of
the project is $2,041,485.00. The National Science Foundation is asked to
provide $1,051,298.00 and the members of the consortium will fund $990,187.00.
The cost to the National Science Foundation, approximately fifty percent of the
project cost, is about $8600.00 per minority participant per year.