* 9153719
* New Image of Programming: In Search of an Educationally     Powerful Concept Technological Fluency
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1995
* Seymour Papert, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 01/31/1995
* USD 1,725,000.00

This project seeks to describe a new vision of programming, as part of an
effort to define and refine the idea of technological fluency as a source of
learning power. Our Constructionist theory leads us to view technological
knowledge as "reflexive," valuable not only in its own right, but also capable
of enhancing the learning of many other things. In the past, th focus has been
on programming as the most accessible form of such reflexive knowledge. Now new
ideas and new advanced computers make possible a dramatic extension of this role
of technological fluency. Programming continues to provide a natural entry
route, but in this new context a new sense of what programming means. As a means
of developing and studying this extended notion of programming, three
complementary activities are in proposed. In the "Pogramming Paradigms"
activity, the focus is on transferring new computational frameworks, most
notably multiprocessing, into education. In the Robotics activity, the classical
construction kit to include new computational elements. In the "Software Design"
activity, the learning that takes place when children develop complete,
multimedia software "products," designed for use by others will be explored.
Each of these three activities involves technology development. But in each
case, the main focus is on conceptual development and new educational issues and
strategies. In each activity, the appropriability of its technologies and its
ideas in close interaction with schools and particularly with communities that
have traditionally been undeserved or intellectually disenfranchised will be
studied.