* 9153553
* A Comprehensive Regional Network for American Indians in    Science and Technology
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/1991,02/29/1996
* John Amend, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Ruth Jones
* 02/29/1996
* USD 3,097,884.00

This project is continuing to develop and implement a comprehensive cooperative
Northwest regional "network" to address the serious underrepresentation of
American Indians in science and technology. The eight-state Northwest region
consisting of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South
Dakota and Minnesota, is home of more than 300,000 American Indians and 18 of
the nation's 24 tribally controlled community colleges. The regional network
consists of a productive, active partnership between schools, colleges,
universities, communities, parents, state and local agencies, professional
organization, businesses and industries designed to nurture, motivate and
encourage Indian students to consider careers in science and technology. Each
tribal unit is developing a master plan to address the educational needs of
American Indians in science and technology and to integrate their plans into a
long-range regional network master plan. The regional network is focusing on
areas of high American Indian student population (i.e. reservation schools) and
key transition points to facilitate the transfer of students from middle schools
to high schools, from high schools to colleges/universities and between
community colleges and four- year institutions. The regional network is
developing and maintaining a comprehensive student data tracking system,
conducting periodic evaluations to measure achievements, and seeking additional
sources of funding to sustain and institutionalize successful program
activities.