* 9153819
* USC-LAUSD Science Institute for Elementary School Teachers -PRAXIS
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1992,06/30/1996
* Harold Slavkin, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 06/30/1996
* USD 2,903,442.00

Dr. Harold Slavkin is a research scientist at the University of Southern
California, and an active participant in efforts to improve pre-college science
teaching in the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD). Dr. Slavkin has
organized Project PRAXIS, a 24-school effort to develop and implement an
exemplary hands-on inquiry-based elementary school science curriculum. These
schools are located in central and eastern Los Angeles, in regions of high
minority populations with little previous emphasis on science teaching. Teachers
and school administrators will work with university scientists and science
educators to develop school-based instructional programs. Teachers and
administrators will be trained in the use of instructional science kits, which
will be managed and refurbished at LAUSD regional Science Centers. Project
PRAXIS will create 24 centers of exemplary science teaching, from which other
Los Angeles schools will draw expertise and guidance. The students in the 24
participating schools will be immersed in direct and relevant science activities
that will develop their abilities to inquire and investigate independently.
Their success will promote more widespread adoption of this approach, giving
this project the potential for wide-ranging impact in this large school
district. The Los Angeles Unified School District and the University of Southern
California are providing cost sharing during the project's three years that
amounts to 104% of NSF's contribution.