* 9153162
* The Interactive Electronic Blackboard for Natural Science   and Math Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1991,09/30/1993
* Gary Novak, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 09/30/1993
* USD 98,934.00

This project's purpose is to substantially increase retention of natural science
and math students, especially those with poor academic preparation and English
language deficiencies, through a highly visual, user friendly computer-based
learning environment that is interactive, powerful and intuitive. An electronic
classroom of 25 NeXT student stations is being used in a comprehensive plan for
developing this visual and intuitive approach. Discipline specific courseware
already created by CSLA faculty along with available commercial applications is
being used. Each student's station serves as an interactive electronic
blackboard so that science and math can be seen, heard, and explored, thus fully
engaging the senses in learning. Eight faculty from 5 target disciplines have
already spent 2 years developing curricular materials and designing courseware
for the NeXT. In this project the team teaches approximately 10 courses in the
proposed lab involving more than 150 natural science and math undergraduates and
100 general education students annually. Four new interdisciplinary courses are
being developed: Using Mathmatica in Science, Spreadsheets for Scientists,
Visual Display of Scientific Information, and Electronic Networking as a Tool in
Scientific Research. Targeted existing courses are: Biometrics, Biological
Modelling, Population Genetics, Intro. Chem., Physical Chem., Physical Geology,
Computer Aided Map Making, Calculus, Computer Graphics, Object Oriented
Programming, General Relativity, and Theoretical Physics and Astronomy. Project
results are being disseminated regionally and nationally, taking advantage of
faculty experience in running statewide faculty workshops on NeXT courseware
development.The grantee is matching this award from non-Federal sources.