* 9153995
* Women in Science and Engineering: Improving Participation   and Performance in Doctoral Programs
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1994
* Herbert Fusfeld, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Iris C. Rotberg
* 01/31/1994
* USD 230,778.00

NOTE: This is a collaborative project with the Pennsylvania State University.
Hence, the same abstract is cited with both projects. The study aims to
determine the departmental conditions and programs that do and do not work to
improve the participation and performance of women in doctoral education--thus
addressing the critical national problem of human resources in science. Its
purpose is to identify and assess organizational factors--such as entry into
area of specialty, inclusion in or exclusion from the culture of the workplace,
and the role of evaluative factors--that affect the participation of women in
doctoral education, their retention, reported satisfaction, publication
productivity, and job placement. The project is a cross disciplinary analysis of
women's success in doctoral education in physics, chemistry, biology, electrical
engineering, and computer science, focusing upon the departmental environment.
The study employs in-depth interviews, institutional analyses, and surveys of
quantitative indicators at three types of departmental sites: (1) departments
with significant programs in place to remedy problems women face in academic
science--the vantage point of programs; (2) departments that have made
objectively notable improvements in the participation of women (in the absence
of programs); and departments that have made no progress in raising the
enrollment levels and graduation rates of women students--also the vantage point
of outcomes. The research is relevant to policy intervention at the doctoral
stage of science education for women; (1) it encourages creation of a critical
mass of women faculty in academic science and engineering; (2) it revises the
image of high level careers in science and engineering for women from an
anomalous to a more "normal" role, thereby enhancing the incentive of
achievement among younger people.//