* 9153702
* Calculator Institute for Middle School Mathematics Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1991,06/30/1995
* George Bright, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 06/30/1995
* USD 284,510.00

The University of North Carolina at Greensboro will conduct a three-and-one-
half-year program to enhance 20 experienced middle school mathematics teachers
in integrating calculator use into the mathematics classroom and curriculum.
Participants will also design instructional materials which take advantage of
calculators and will prepare themselves as leaders for communicating their new
knowledge to colleagues. Each teacher will participate in a six-week summer
session and 6 to 9 days of follow-up activities during each of the three years
of the project. Participants will earn a total of 18 graduate credits which may
be applied toward a Master's degree in the School of Education. Topics to be
studied include functions and graphing for middle school teachers, teaching
problem solving, probability and statistics, research in mathematics education,
and using advanced technology to teach mathematics. The project design also
calls for the development of case histories which will evoke the effects of the
intervention in helping teachers learn to use calculators in teaching
mathematics. Participants will present workshops in their own school districts
and through the Greensboro Area Mathematics and Science Education Center and the
North Carolina Mathematics and Science Education Network. In all, over 1,000
second- wave teachers and several parent groups should be effected by the
project. Cost-sharing by The University of North Carolina at Greensboro and
local school districts accounts for 46% of the NSF budget. Integrating
calculators into the mathematics classroom and documenting the change in teacher
and student behavior as a result of such teacher enhancement is clearly a
worthwhile enterprise.