* 9153840
* Summer Institute Core, Outreach and Multiplier Program for  Genetics Education
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1992,12/31/1997
* James Stewart, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 12/31/1997
* USD 1,267,872.00

This project, in Genetics and Biotechnology, is a four year program that
includes a Summer Institute, held at the University of Wisconsin - Madison, and
a series of local, 1- 2 week, outreach workshops conducted by lead teachers. The
target audience is secondary biology teachers, with strong emphasis on the high
school level. Teachers in rural communities and teachers of minority students
will be specifically targeted. The Summer Institute offers a series of one and
two week workshops, so that participants can choose their areas of interest. 120
participants will be accommodated in the Summer Institutes each year. 10 lead
teachers will be recruited each year, from these participants, and will be
trained to conduct 1-2 week local workshops and to serve as local resource
teachers. Logistical support for these efforts will be provided by a developing
network of regional support centers based at University of Wisconsin System
campuses throughout the state. Significant local cost sharing will be solicited
to support the local outreach efforts. It is anticipated that over 1,000
participants will be served by local outreach workshops. The specific objectives
of the program are: a. to enhance and update teachers' background in genetics
and the biotechnology of genetic engineering, b. to provide effective curriculum
and teaching strategies, c. to facilitate transfer of content and process
restructuring into the classroom, d. to develop science education leadership in
teachers, e. to develop strategies to make science education particularly
relevant to rural populations and minorities. An amount equal to 43% of NSF cost
will be provided as cost share.