* 9153968
* A Natural History of the Senses
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1991,09/30/1995
* Richard Thomas, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 09/30/1995
* USD 798,730.00

A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES is a five-part series to be produced by WETA
fornational PBS broadcast in the 1993-94 season. The series is to be adapted
from the best- selling book of the same title. Its author, Diane Ackerman, will
present the programs and collaborate with the producers throughout. Each program
will focus on a single sense: smell, touch, taste, hearing and vision
respectively. Each will explore: how the world is sensed by animals and humans,
including the evolution of the sense; what is perceived; and how human beings
reconstruct and recreate their sensory worlds, through cuisines and perfumes,
music, sculpture and painting. Shot on location around the world, these
documentary films will incorporate viewpoints from anatomy, physiology and
neurochemistry, experimental and perceptual psychology, cultural anthropology,
literature, art, music and history. Compelling stories and illustrative
vignettes and precise graphic animation will arise from rigorous research, in
collaboration with a board of advisors. By unifying material from science and
the arts and humanities, the series will reach a general audience. Viewers will
be awakened to a new awareness of the range and power of their senses. Companion
materials for schools will extend the series to the formal learning environment
and will motivate further study.