* 9153833
* Teachers, Technology &amp; Environmental Concerns:  Formula for Real Science in the Elementary School
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1992,06/30/1996
* Marilyn Schaffer, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Curtis D. Howard
* 06/30/1996
* USD 514,207.00

This is a three year project designed to build a science culture within
participating schools from Hartford CT, and to promote environmental literacy.
The project will build upon previously funded NSF activities and will provide
continued and expanded support to 15 of the teachers who participated in that
previous program. The current project will extend the program to an additional
78 teachers over the next three years (total: 93 teachers). During the academic
year, project staff will work with teachers and their students in the schools;
during the summer, teachers will participate in a three week workshop. Team
leaders will be selected from among the participants to become resource persons
and peer coaches in their home schools; they will receive leadership training
and extensive support from project staff. Computers and related technology,
including telecommunications, will be used to create a Center for Environmental
Science in each school. This project is appropriate for the Teacher Enhancement
Program because it enhances participants' knowledge of science and effective
teaching methods, identifies and trains selected participants to become lead
teachers within their schools, establishes strong networking ties among
participants and project staff, and targets teachers of predominantly (80% or
greater) minority populations of children. Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately
9% of the amount requested from NSF.