* 9153715
* Critical Issues in Reforming the Preparation of Elementary  Teachers in Mathematics and Science:  A Proposed Conference;Greeley, Colorado; October 1991
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* April Gardner, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* ryan smith
* 01/31/1993
* USD 80,864.00

The University of Northern Colorado will convene a conference on the topic,
"Critical Issues in Reforming the Preparation of Elementary Teachers in
Mathematics and Science." at Greeley, Colorado, in October, 1991. Participants
in the conference will be teams composed of science, mathematics, and education
faculty and administrators from approximately thirty teacher preparation
institutions across the country. A primary goal of the conference will be to
disseminate products and programs being developed through NSF elementary teacher
preparation projects to institutions preparing large numbers of teachers who are
not active in reform or aware of recent developments in the preparation of
elementary teachers in mathematics and science. Institutions will be targeted
that produce large numbers of elementary teachers and are not research oriented
and/or do not grant doctoral degrees. Historically minority institutions and
institutions preparing large numbers of minority teachers will be especially
encouraged to attend and will receive advance notice of the conference. The
program will include invited addresses on pedagogical content knowledge,
constructivism, and new directions in elementary mathematics and science
curriculum. There will be panel sessions in which the panelists will be staff of
major NSF-funded projects and other noted teacher educators and researchers
involved in reform of elementary mathematics and science teacher preparation.
Breakout groups will allow participants to discuss specific courses and programs
with panel members. The University of Northern Colorado is a logical host for
this conference for several reasons: (1) A comprehensive five-year NSF model
project in elementary mathematics and science teacher preparation is in its
fourth year at UNC. (2) UNC is the third-largest producer of first-degree
certified teachers in the U.S. (3) UNC has important contacts to other colleges
and universities preparing large numbers of teachers through its membership in
two important reform groups in teacher education, Project 30 and the Renaissance
Group.