* 9153779
* TEACH-STAT:  Teaching Statistics Grades 1-6 - A Statewide   Implementation Project
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1996
* Susan Friel, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 08/31/1996
* USD 1,517,578.00

This three-year effort of the UNC Mathematics and Science Education Network is
a statewide plan for enhancing teacher education in the area of statistics. Each
of nine sites across the state will be involved. The project focuses on teachers
of grades one through six, and will establish a structure in the state for
encouraging and supporting the teaching of statistics in those grades. The
project includes a series of seminars in statistics education for university and
college faculty; the development of an initial cadre of principals and
elementary school teachers who will participate in professional development
programs and implement plans to teach statistics in their schools; and to spread
the project through the state by preparing cadres of statistics educators
(elementary teachers who have participated in the project) and supporting their
efforts with local school systems. The project includes a research effort, as
well as a strong emphasis on the development of professional materials for
teachers. The project will be a complementary effort to the North Carolina
Statewide Systemic Initiative, which is directed by the North Carolina Alliance
for Mathematics and Science. In the first year, teacher educators from the
regional sites will participate in a planning seminar, and will select local
teams of teachers and principals. Each of the nine sites will select a six-
person teams. A summer institute will be held in 1992 at UNC Chapel Hill for the
teacher members of the teams, and the faculty members from the nine sites.
Principals will attend for part of this time. Implementation and regional
meetings occur in the 1992-93 academic year; during this year each site also
selects 24 new participants. In summer 1993, three-week summer institutes are
held at the regional sites, with 24 teachers at each site, conducted by the
local teams. The inservice materials developed in year one will serve as the
foundation for these summer institutes. In the 93-94 year, regional support and
followup is the major activity, and in the summer of 1994 a special one-week
institute for statistics educators will be implemented. In addition, summer
institutes will be offered regionally in 1994, of two-week and three-week
duration, with local support. Cost sharing is included as 67% of the NSF award.