* 9153756
* Project LEARN (Laboratory Experience in Atmospheric Researchat NCAR)
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1996
* Patrick Kennedy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 01/31/1996
* USD 1,147,180.00

Project LEARN will open a working national laboratory to 40 middle/junior-high
school teachers, giving them first-hand experience in what it is like to do
science. It will invite five-member teacher teams from eight varied urban and
rural districts in California, Colorado, North Carolina, and Texas. One team
member will be a master teacher, and the others will be promising but less
experienced; the project especially targets population groups underrepresented
in scientific professions. The teachers will attend three consecutive summer
workshops at the National Center for Atmosphere Research (NCAR), where they will
do experiments, bolster their understanding of background scientific concepts,
and learn effective hands-on methodologies. With guidance from the principal
investigators, from master teachers, and from NCAR scientists, they will
translate what they learn into classroom activities for their own districts,
with their different curricula and different student populations. Project LEARN
will also provide leadership training, so as to prepare teachers to lead
inservices in their home districts and to catalyze change in district-wide
teaching strategies. As each participant excites colleagues who attend district
inservices and they all change the way they teach, the benefits of Project LEARN
will be greatly multiplied. In the fourth and final year of the project a one-
week workshop will focus on intensive leadership training for giving peer-led
workshops. It will synthesize experiences gained by teachers in the two previous
years as they led such workshops and plan a third inservice for their local
district. The intent is that such inservices can become a regular part of the
districts professional development program. Cost sharing equals 47% of the NSF
award.