* 9153989
* Modeling Understanding to Study Conceptual Change in Learning Physics....
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Dewey Dykstra, Boise State University
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/29/1996
* USD 300,174.00

This project will investigate existing examples of conceptual change over a
range of topics in physics in order to discern different types of conceptual
change and to identify instructional strategies effective at inducing them. The
result will be a taxonomy of conceptual change which associates types of
conceptual change with instructional strategies to facilitate the change
process. These strategies will be developed on the basis of the investigators'
classroom experience and a careful study of current work in student conceptions
and conceptual change, as well as selected examples of conceptual change in the
history of mechanics. The field work will gather information about students'
conceptions through various interview and diagnostic methods as well as
computationally- based protocol analysis, including use of computational
linguistics, term clustering and knowledge representation. This work will
provide information for building conceptual representations which will
explicitly depict particular elements and organizations of students' conceptions
that are critical to the process of conceptual change. The utility of natural
language processing and other computational analyses in extracting information
and the development of conceptual representations will be demonstrated. These
techniques will guide the construction of the conceptual change taxonomy. This
research will have several outcomes: 1) a deeper understanding of the role
conceptions in understanding physics and solving physics problems, demonstrating
that the task of physics instruction is one of changing belief systems and not
merely one of imparting facts and problem- solving skills, 2) a more detailed
analysis of alternative conceptions and the nature of conceptual change and 3) a
taxonomy of conceptual change associated with strategies which seem to induce
particular types of conceptual change that can guide teachers in the classroom.