* 9153967
* THE MAGIC SCHOOL BUS: A CHILDREN'S TELEVISION SCIENCE SERIES
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1996
* Jane Startz, Scholastic Productions Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 01/31/1996
* USD 4,660,647.00

Award-winning Scholastic Productions, Inc. proposes to produce 39 fully
animated, half hour television programs, based on the successful children's
science book series, The Magic School Bus. We are seeking funding for the
initial three seasons (13 episodes per season) which will be produced over a
four year period. Designed as an informal science education series for PBS, it
is targeted primarily for 6-9 year-olds, with special attention given to
reaching girls and minority children. The series has clear science pedagogical
goals: 1) to motivate children to further science study, 2) to present science
facts, concepts and systems, and 3) to inspire positive attitudes towards
science and education for students and teachers. Throughout the production,
audience research and field testing will ensure that the programming is
effectively meeting these goals. The series features a remarkable teacher, Ms.
Frizzle, who takes her class on equally remarkable field trips. While other
teachers may go to a museum, Ms. Frizzle leads her class onto a yellow school
bus that shrinks (along with its students) to the size of a cell to journey
through the human body, rocket into outer space, or travel into the eye of a
hurricane. Thus, the series makes science tangible and relatable for an audience
of children who are still concrete thinkers. We will create a broad outreach
program, utilizing the publishing and distribution resources of Scholastic
Productions' parent company, Scholastic Inc., (the largest publisher of
children's materials in the English-speaking world), and other targeted
organizations. Through viewer guides, series publicity and promotion, magazine
editorials, community and after-school programs, we expect to reach a large and
culturally diverse audience, including minorities frequently not served by PBS.