* 9153962
* NAVIGATION:  A Cultural and Technological Look at Finding   One's Way
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* Peter Richards, Exploratorium
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 01/31/1994
* USD 586,264.00

The Exploratorium proposes to create a multidimensional exhibition on the theme
of navigation. The exhibition proper will contain approximately 20 new
interactive exhibits dealing with topics of human orientation,
wayfinding/exploration, the importance of time in navigation, maps and
navigation traditions. Alongside the exhibits we will display real navigational
artifacts borrowed from other museums. We have identified approximately 40
existing exhibits which, while not in the main show, will receive textual
modification to show their relation to navigational topics. In addition to the
exhibition of artifacts and interactive exhibits, we will present a series of
lectures, theme weekends, and demonstrations of navigational techniques. During
the run of the show we will host a Symposium On The American Encounter wherein
we will hold an open forum of lectures and discussion of historical,
anthropological and social consequences of cultural encounter on the North
American Continent. We will produce both a brochure and a high quality catalog
for this show. In addition we will create written "pathways" of organization of
this museum-wide show to bring to focus different features and approaches to
navigation. Our education departments will play a leading role in creating more
formal programs for our visitors. The physical show will be reproduced in a
travelling version to tour nine venues in the three years following its opening
at the Exploratorium. We will collect the results of our researchers in a
dissemination package to be made available to others in the field.