* 9153823
* Project ATMOSPHERE:  Providing the Nation's Precollege      Teachers of Grades 5-9 with Instructional Resource Materialsand Learning Experiences in the Atmospheric Sciences
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,02/29/2000
* Ira Geer, American Meteorological Society
* Continuing grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 02/29/2000
* USD 3,059,555.00

Project ATMOSPHERE will over a five-year period (a) establish a permanent
national network of precollege Atmospheric Education Resource Agents, (AERAs)
(b) produce scientifically accurate, up-to-date, and pedagogically sound
resource and instructional materials aimed at teachers, and (c) disseminate and
implement these materials. It is part of a national program of the American
Meteorological Society designed to encourage teachers, grades 5-9, to use the
atmospheric environment to heighten interest in and relevancy of science. An
extensive training program followed by annual renewal sessions will produce a
steady- state network of 70 to 80 AERAs. With representation in every state, the
network will build on the strengths of resource agents who come to the project
as recognized master teachers and professional leaders in their home areas. They
will participate in project materials development and will play major roles in
disseminating information and implementation activity. Phase I atmospheric
education will be done at National Weather Service Training Centers (NWSTC)
workshops. Drawing teachers from these; 60 AERAs will receive Phase II training
in year 1 in this project's 2-week workshop. In year 2, 3, 4, and 5 60-80 AERAs
will receive Phase II and Phase III training at 2-week workshops. Workshop sites
are Boulder, CO and Norman, OK in alternative years. In year 3, 4, and 5 there
will be 1-one week follow-up workshops for 55 teachers. A minimum of 2 peer-led
workshops will be delivered by increasing numbers of AERAs each year, beginning
with 24 teachers in year 1 and increasing to 94 teachers by year 3. The teacher
enhancement materials to be developed include 200 reference and resource papers
on atmospheric environment topics, annually-published newsletter/information
packets, and 10 self-contained instructional modules. Dissemination will range
from mailings of materials to the offering of informational sessions by AERAs.
The instructional materials will implemented in workshops arranged and conducted
by AERAs. Approximately 1,000 information and training sessions will take place
with an estimated 20,000 teachers enrolled. The Project Director for this
comprehensive project is Dr. Ira Geer. Cost-sharing equals 75% of the NSF award.