* 9153959
*  SGER: Enabling Wide-Area Network Research in the Science    Classroom
* None,MDR
* 04/15/1991,03/31/1992
* Michael Cole, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 03/31/1992
* USD 31,141.00

This proposal is for exploratory small grant funding for the collation and
summary of telecommunications-in-education research applicable to the use of
large-scale wide-area networks in the science classroom and the prompt
dissemination of that information to the facilitators of state and national
education networks. The purpose of this project is to facilitate future research
in educational telecommunications, and to collate and provide information useful
to the initial phases of state-wide and national telecommunications-in-education
networks. Several states, and several commercial organizations are already
offering or are about to offer from September 1991 or September 1992 access to
large scale telecommunications facilities to schools. Though a considerable
amount of research has been done on individual small scale networks and on small
group components of large-scale networks, this research is neither easily
accessible nor wholly relevant to the large-scale situation. As yet,l we have
very little information on the effects of scaling up from the base of research-
oriented prototype networks. Also, the creation of these new telecommunications
applications and new network communities in education is taking place extremely
quickly. If these developments are to be constructive advances in teaching and
learning strategies it is imperative that these new efforts should be informed
by prior experience and research. In order to establish a baseline of relevant
information in a timely fashion, it is proposed that NSF should fund a limited
research initiative between April 1, 1991 and September 1,l 1991. The initiative
will have three components - the collation of existing research, a demonstration
study of an academic network, and a demonstration study of a global-scale K-12
network.