* 9153834
* Teachers' Learning from Reform:  The Case of Mathematics    Instruction in California
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1997
* Penelope Peterson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Francis M. Fennell
* 07/31/1997
* USD 2,479,130.00

Michigan State University will conduct a four-year study of teachers' learning
from mathematics education reform efforts in California. The study will focus on
four reform elements: tests, texts, professional development and the California
Mathematics Framework. The professional development models to be studied are six
exemplary NSF- funded Teacher Enhancement projects. The study will attempt to
answer such questions as how teachers change and learn in response to current
reform movements, what influences their learning, and how do teachers' personal
and professional biographies affect what they learn. In all 102 elementary
school teachers will be studied, thirty intensively and 72 less intensively. In
addition, a mail/telephone survey will be conducted with 800 California
elementary teachers to investigate more broadly the influences of policy on
teacher thinking and practice, to gather information on the understandings,
ideas and practices of a larger group of elementary teachers, and to contribute
to the development of indicators useful to studying change. The survey will also
allow the PIs to place the teachers whom they had observe in depth in the
context of a representative sample of California teachers. From the study, case
studies and evaluation instruments will be developed which will contribute to
innovations in teacher education, teacher change, and reform. In studying the
change process, this project has great potential for stimulating the
construction, investigation, documentation and refinement of effective
approaches for teacher enhancement. MSU's cost-sharing accounts for 12% of the
NSF budget.