* 9153826
* Exploring the Microcosmos:  Micro-life as a Dynamic LearningTool in Middle and Secondary Classrooms
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,03/31/1996
* Douglas Zook, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Curtis D. Howard
* 03/31/1996
* USD 1,129,126.00

This project, in microbiology, is a three year program that includes 1) Summer
Institutes, held at Boston University, 2) a series of local workshops conducted
by lead teachers, and 3) outreach presentations given by all institute
participants. The program is built upon a highly successful pilot program, using
published materials developed by the program. Emphasis is on hands-on
activities, including all participant and student activities. The target
audience is secondary biology teachers. The Summer Institute offers two-week
workshops for 20 potential lead teachers each year. In addition, each year, 20
lead teachers, selected from a pool of previous participants attend a one-week
institute to prepare them to conduct one-week, local workshops. These workshops
are then presented by teams of two lead teachers during the following year. Lead
teachers also serve as local resource teachers. Logistical support for these
efforts is provided by a developing communications network and by development of
local support centers. Significant local cost sharing will be provided in
support of the local workshops. Over 1000 participants will be served by the one
or two week workshops and another 600 participants will participate in local
outreach efforts of shorter duration. An amount equal to 32.1% of NSF cost will
be provided as cost share.