* 9153502
* A Model Program to Motivate and Educate Women and Minority  High School Students for Careers in Science
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1993
* Rubin Battino, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Arturo Bronson
* 08/31/1993
* USD 97,903.00

In partnership with the Dayton Board of Education and the business community,
Wright State University is building a multi-faceted model program for maximizing
the number of highly motivated and academically competent women and minority
students at Dunbar Magnet High School so that they go on to earn baccalaureate
(and higher) degrees in the natural sciences. Demographically, minority students
constitute 80% of the student body at Dunbar; the students are equally divided
by sex. To attain the goal, several strategies are being included: strengthening
pre-college science and mathematics courses, offering a health-related
scientific professions orientation course, broadening students' science
background by discussing new discoveries, field-trips, demonstrations to
illustrate concepts, giving students hands-on laboratory experience so that the
"do science", workshops for teachers, opportunity for summer research for
students and teachers under the supervision of faculty mentors, encouraging
teachers and selected students to accompany their mentors to professional
meetings, and sensitizing faculty about the educational needs and "culture" of
women and minorities. Since most public high schools in large cities have racial
demographics similar to Dayton's, the project has high potential for
replication.