* 9154022
* New Directions in the Mathematics Preparation of Preservice Elementary/Middle School Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1994
* Wanda Weidemann, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 07/31/1994
* USD 129,146.00

Western Kentucky University seeks funding for a two-year program: New
Directions in the Mathematics Preparation of Preservice Elementary/Middle School
Teachers. The purpose of the project is to assist and prepare college
mathematics faculty members throughout Kentucky to teach elementary and middle
grades preservice teachers. The professional development program will take place
over a period of two summers and the included academic year. For one week each
summer, the participants will be in workshops working with national consultants,
with experienced mathematics educators from the state, and with classroom
teachers including Presidential Award Winners in Mathematics. The focus will be
the implementation of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Curriculum
and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics and the Professional Teaching
Standards, as well as the Call For Change from the Mathematics Association of
America. Throughout the year, the group will meet at least two additional times
with funding for the additional meetings from the Exxon Foundation and support
from two state organizations, The Kentucky Council of Teachers of Mathematics
and the Kentucky Chapter of the Mathematics Association of America. A new state
organization, The Kentucky Mathematics Association of Teachers of Teachers was
organized during the process of formulating the proposal and the group will work
with the PI throughout the project and after funding ends to continue the
faculty development and network. A newsletter will also be published to connect
participants to each other and to give information on state and national issues,
resources and materials, and professional meetings. This project has the
potential of being an exemplary model for mathematics faculty development in a
state or region. Participants will be selected from public and private
institutions, including two-year colleges, in Kentucky and funding for their
travel will be assumed by their individual institutions. Cost-sharing by Western
Kentucky University, by the Exxon Foundation, and by other institutions of
higher education in Kentucky is 51% of the total cost requested from NSF.