* 9154387
* The Initial Academy Curriculum and The First Year Programs
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Jon Thompson, Teachers Academy for Mathematics and Science in Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 12/31/1992
* USD 1,268,400.00

The Academy for Math and Science Teachers in Chicago is part of a school reform
movement which has given parents and community members more power and a greater
stake in their schools. The Academy provides the resources in math and science
teaching, bringing new knowledge, expertise, teaching methodologies, a collegial
environment and even prestige to teachers participating in the academy programs.
This first year of a long range project involves 12 participating elementary
schools, 12 teachers per school for a total of 144 teachers, half of whom will
come from K-3 grade levels and the rest from grades 4-8. The vision of the
Academy founders is that it eventually provide inservice for all teachers in the
city of Chicago. For this first year, the teachers will be involved in Academy
courses during the school year on a schedule of two days every other week for a
period of 16 weeks for a total of 120 contact hours. Academy trained teachers
will substitute for the participating classroom teachers on an ongoing and
regular basis. These Academy teachers will also act as liaisons between the
Academy and the schools for purposes of providing resources and expertise to the
schools and for implementing a network among the teachers and schools. Two week
summer sessions, held both at the Academy and at the Fermi National Accelerator
Laboratory (Fermilab), will further involve the teachers in the curriculum
improvement and instructional methodology necessary for implementation of a more
comprehensive science and mathematics program in the schools. Curricula
materials used both in the school year courses and the summer sessions include
mathematics and science programs previously funded by NSF, such as MathTools,
TIMS, CEPUP and other material. An extensive follow-up segment as well as an
assessment and evaluation of the program is planned. The evaluation will contain
two components: a) a program evaluation of the follow-up segment and b) an
overall formative report on the effectiveness of the total Academy program in
meeting its mission and goals. Excellent cost-sharing is provided through grants
from the Department of Energy, the Department of Education, the Amoco
Foundation, the City of Chicago, the State of Illinois, other private
foundations and federal agencies.