* 9154176
* Manufacturing as a Vehicle to Illustrate Principles of      Science, Mathematics, and Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1993
* Paul Cohen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 07/31/1993
* USD 203,867.00

The objective of this project is to stimulate and assist teachers of future
scientists and engineers in their efforts as instructors and advisors by
introducing them to new developments and illustrating applications of their
disciplines to the production of consumer goods, i.e. manufacturing.
Specifically, the project conducts short courses using the Penn State University
Manufacturing laboratories to assist large numbers of faculty (science,
mathematics, and engineering) from other colleges and universities to learn new
ideas and techniques in their teaching discipline to add vitality to and improve
their undergraduate teaching abilities. The project is designed to accommodate a
large number of participants, and thus will focus both upon the two- and four-
year coalition of the Penn State Commonwealth campuses and minority colleges and
universities associated with Penn State. The association between undergraduate
courses and the basic principles that are used in the manufacture of consumer
products are used as a vehicle so as to stimulate excitement and the recognition
of the relevance of the freshman and sophomore undergraduate science,
mathematics and engineering subject matter. Students in engineering, science and
mathematics in the first two years of college are often taught the basic
principles with the use of abstract models that have little relevance to "real
world" applications. However, manufacturing processes and systems and the
techniques used to evaluate quality often illustrate principles of science,
mathematics and engineering. The conduct of this undergraduate faculty
enhancement project will use manufacturing as a vehicle to illustrate the
relevant application of basic scientific, mathematical and engineering
principles. Illustrations are developed, simulated, and modeled to provide a
firm relationship between the principle and manufacturing application. Through
this procedure the disciplinary capabilities and teaching skills of
undergraduate faculty in science, mathematics and engineering will be enhanced.
Further, the use of manufacturing as a vehicle demonstrates the relevance of the
understanding and application of the basic principles to our country's economic
vitality.