* 9154518
* Elementary Teacher Preparation Survey
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1993
* Gail Young, Consortium For Mathematics & Its Applications Inc
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1993
* USD 25,000.00

The Consortium for Mathematics and Its Applications, Inc. (COMAP) seeks funding
for one year to conduct a study of the mathematical preparation of elementary
teachers in colleges and universities in the country. The study will be
conducted in two parts. The first part, a quantitative study, will survey a
large sample of institutions of higher education to determine the number of
courses required, corresponding course descriptions, and departments offering
the course/s. The second part will be a qualitative survey using a smaller
sample of schools; the data collected will include detailed course descriptions,
tests, texts used, and other resource materials. Anecdotal information on the
relationship and collaboration between mathematics departments and colleges of
education will be obtained in order to have insights on the design and
implementation of all components of elementary mathematics teacher education.
The results of the study will be disseminated to all mathematics department
chairs and to preservice program directors. It will also be publicized through
various professional journals. The findings of this study will help the
profession determine the present status of the mathematics preparation of
elementary teachers and guide future directions and initiatives in mathematics
education. The impact of the project will be very significant to institutions
with elementary mathematics preservice program departments, to professional
organizations, to certification units in state departments of education, and to
funding agencies. The study is supported by the Mathematical Association of
America (MAA) and the American Mathematical Society (AMA). Both of these
organizations will supply membership lists and information on departments and
individuals. The executive directors of the AMS and MAA will endorse the survey
through cover letters sent with questionnaires. In addition, the Exxon
Foundation will support the study with an award of one- half of the costs of the
project.