* 9154539
* Linking Mathematics Education Policy Reports to State       Initiatives for Systemic Change
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1992,12/31/1996
* Jane Armstrong, Education Commission of the States
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 12/31/1996
* USD 458,050.00

Poor U.S. student performance on national and international assessments has
prompted the development of a national goal for "U.S. students to be first in
the world in mathematics and science achievement by the year 2000." Many believe
we can meet this goal only if the entire education system in every state is
restructured to promote higher levels of achievement for all students.
Mathematics has taken a national leadership role in developing consensus on a
clear vision of what curriculum, student assessment and teacher preparation must
look like from kindergarten through college to be successful in improving
mathematical literacy among our youth. The thoughtful work of the mathematics
education community provides significant information on policy and practice
issues related to mathematics education. Likewise, state-sponsored restructuring
initiatives (such as the Re: Learning effort) over the past three to four years
have provided successful strategies for systemic change. However, we have not
yet been successful in linking these two efforts - mathematics education reform
and state efforts in systemic change. While the mathematics education community
was developing consensus on new directions for mathematics education, policy
makers were developing consensus on the role of policy in supporting systemic
change. There is now agreement that success in changing the education system
will be determined by how well state policies support and encourage exemplary
classroom teaching and learning. The mathematics reports provide this vision for
teaching and learning in mathematics. The task, now, is to translate this vision
into supportive state policies which help schools and districts commit to the
systemic changes needed for improved student learning.