* 9154004
* Conference On Research In Collegiate Mathematical Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1991,11/30/1993
* James R. Leitzel, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 11/30/1993
* USD 49,953.00

This is a proposal by the Mathematical Association of America for a conference
to discuss the issues involved in improving the education in mathematics for
undergraduates in colleges and universities. Among the issues to be considered
are: i) effective ways to communicate to college and university faculty the
growing body research in undergraduate mathematics education. ii) effective ways
to stimulate the college and university environment so that the research
findings in i) may be implemented in classrooms. iii) effective ways for faculty
who undertake research in teaching and learning to find support and
encouragement. The results of the conference will be a long range strategic plan
that will be published as a Conference Report by the MAA. The report will be
distributed to the chairs of all mathematical science departments. Furthermore,
articles which summarize the conference will appear in both FOCUS and UME
Trends. Representatives from the various mathematical societies, American
Mathematical Society, Mathematical Association of America and National Council
of Teachers of Mathematics will participate in the conference. Prior to the
conference, background information on the issues will be collected by the staff
of the MAA. The conference will be held in the FAll in Washington, DC.