* 9154059
* Using Automatic Speech Recognition to Improve Reading       Comprehension...
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1992,10/31/1994
* David Mostow, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara J. Hunter
* 10/31/1994
* USD 871,391.00

Deficiency in reading comprehension has become a critical national problem;
workplace illiteracy costs billions of dollars in corporate retraining,
industrial accidents, and reduced competitiveness. Although intelligent tutoring
systems could help, their inability to see or hear students limits their
effectiveness in diagnosing and remediating deficits in comprehension. This
pilot project will test the feasibility of addressing this fundamental
limitation by using a novel interdisciplinary approach made possible by recent
advances in high-speed computing, automated speech processing, reading research,
and artificial intelligence. It will monitor children's oral reading of
elementary science material, using automated recognition of connected speech and
prosodic features (such as hesitation and intonation) to extract information
identified by teachers and reading experts as pedagogically useful. Success will
lay the foundation for follow-on work to exploit this information in interactive
instructional software. The significance of this work includes opening a
powerful new channel between student and computer based on two-way speech
communication, enabling innovative tutorial applications in technical areas
where comprehension is vital. Those affected include millions of children in
grades 1-3, where oral reading is most important. However, the results should
apply to industrial training, adult illiteracy, English as a second language,
and foreign language study.