* 9154801
* Chemistry for Children:  A Program for Elementary and MiddleSchool Teachers in Precollege Chemistry
* EHR,DGE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1995
* Arnold George, Mansfield University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James D. Ellis
* 11/30/1995
* USD 276,044.00

This renewal project will involve 30 elementary and middle school teachers in a
2-year program which focuses on experiences with chemistry at a level
appropriate to teachers who have had little or no background in chemistry.
Teachers will participate in two intensive 3-week summer workshops in chemistry
and science methods, and will receive on-site support from project personnel
during the subsequent academic years. Teachers will also participate in a 3-day
session on leadership and the presentation of inservices to be held during
February of the first year. Project staff will provide on-site support as
participants incorporate what they've learned into their science classes, and as
they present inservices to their colleagues. During the course of the project,
project staff and participants will collaborate on the revision and enhancement
of Chemistry for Children, an activity book of chemistry activities designed for
elementary and middle school children. This leadership project is appropriate
for the Teacher Enhancement Program because of its extensive enhancement of the
science education of elementary and middle school teachers and because of its
plan for participants to provide science inservice for all of the teachers in
their respective schools. Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately 15% of the
amount requested from NSF.