* 9154555
* Engineering Research in U.S. Higher Education:              Characteristics, Trends, and Policy Options
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Robert Morgan, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 09/30/1995
* USD 436,567.00

A primary objective of this study is to develop a detailed understanding of the
nature of engineering research activities carried out in U.S. universities. The
study will characterize the research that U.S. engineering school faculty
members, research staff, and students undertake in order to illuminate key
issues concerning the role of research within engineering education and its
relation to industry and government. To achieve this objective, a classification
scheme will be devised for categorizing engineering school research along
several dimensions which will be applied to analyze engineering school research
over time, comparing and contrasting the situation today with condition 10 and
20 years ago. National surveys will be conducted of engineering faculty and
directors of engineering school research units to obtain information on the
nature and outcomes of engineering school research. Parallel studies will
examine the impacts of engineering school research utilizing structured content
analysis of written outputs and other techniques. Policy options will be
developed for consideration by universities, industry and government at a Policy
Workshop that will be convened to address several key issues concerning
engineering research in U.S. higher education and to provide inputs to the final
project report. 9154555 Morgan A primary objective of this study is to develop a
detailed understanding of the nature of engineering research activities carried
out in U.S. universities. The study will characterize the research that U.S.
engineering school faculty members, research staff, and students undertake in
order to illuminate key issues concerning the role of research within
engineering education and its relation to industry and government. To achieve
this objective, a classification scheme will be devised for categorizing
engineering school research along several dimensions which will be applied to
analyze engineering school research over time, comparing and contrasting the
situation today with condition 10 and 20 years ago. National surveys will be
conducted of engineering faculty and directors of engineering school research
units to obtain information on the nature and outcomes of engineering school
research. Parallel studies will examine the impacts of engineering school
research utilizing structured content analysis of written outputs and other
techniques. Policy options will be developed for consideration by universities,
industry and government at a Policy Workshop that will be convened to address
several key issues concerning engineering research in U.S. higher education and
to provide inputs to the final project report.