* 9154519
* Project Catalyst -  University of San Francisco
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1994
* James Fasching, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 01/31/1994
* USD 261,600.00

CATALYST is a three year faculty development program at the University of Rhode
Island (URI) for high school teachers of science, mathematics, and computer
science. It will: 1. Train 96 high school science, mathematics, and computer
science teachers how to use interactive technologies in the classroom. This
1991-92 academic year component will stress hypermedia, intelligent tutoring
systems, repurposed videodisc, microworlds, coaches, inspectable simulations,
computer animation, and automated data collection and analysis. The teachers
will learn how to: o Teach students how to solve scientific problems using the
heuristic approach of Polya. o Manage CAI and video/digital audio projects
(including writing, producing, implementing, and evaluating them). o Use the
computer to write multimedia programs. o Deal with different learning styles of
students. o Recognize science preconceptions and help students to overcome them
o Evaluate software and interactive products. o Use information networks and
database. o Creating instructional materials with commonly available software
and microcomputers, workstations, and graphing calculators. The teachers will
finish the program's initial phases with projects they design and implement
themselves. 2. Select 32 participants to develop an in-depth project. At least
sixteen will attend URI for a four week workshop during the summers of 1992 and
1993. They will also work at the University for 10 to 20 percent of the work
week during the 1991-92- 93, and 1993-94 academic year. 3. Evaluate how well the
teacher-developed materials works with students. 4. Develop a series of probes
and sensors along with computer software tools to measure such phenomena as
heat, temperature, electromotive force, light oscillations, and sound. The
teachers will use these tools to produce a number of laboratory experiments.
CATALYST relies on resources from several institutions. These include
intelligent problem solving tutors and repurposed videodiscs from URI,
inspectable simulations from Appalachian State University, multimedia from the
Department of Art at San Francisco State University, and microcomputers based
laboratory experiments from Tufts University. There is sharing of information
and materials with a parallel project at the University of San Francisco. Cost
sharing equals 186% of the NSF award.