* 9154840
* INtegrating LABoratory Instruction and Assessment (INLAB)
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1996
* Daniel Shepardson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 05/31/1996
* USD 628,821.00

This proposal provides a plan for improving the quality of laboratory
instruction and assessment techniques in the middle school. More specifically,
the goals of the project are: (a) to improve the quality of laboratory
instruction at the middle school level; (b) to increase the use of practical
assessment techniques in middle school classrooms; and (c) develop leadership
teams to inservice and mentor peers. To accomplish these goals, 30 middle school
teachers in the school system in West Lafayette, Indiana will be involved in
content, pedagogical knowledge based on a laboratory system which sequences
laboratory instruction. The project initially involves 30 teachers that will
receive direct training throughout the three years of project duration. During
year three, the thirty teachers will conduct staff development programs
pyramiding the teacher impact of the project. The pyramiding effect has been
estimated at 10 new teachers impacted per original participant for 300 peer-
trained teachers (30 x 10 = 300). Thus, the project will impact 30 teachers plus
300 peer-trained teachers for a total of 330 teachers over a three-year period.
The ultimate goal of the proposal is to provide a laboratory instructional
system, as well as the training necessary to improve laboratory instructional
practices and teachers attitudes toward laboratory instruction. The system
involves the teachers in three different types of laboratory activities: (1)
Confirmation Laboratory Activities which deal with direct experience with
materials designed to demonstrate or verify principles or concepts that have
been previously discussed and are already part of the teachers experience; (2)
Generalization Laboratory Activities which provide teachers with a wide range of
experiences that can be used to link direct experience with abstractions -
concepts, principles, and theories; and (3) Resolution Laboratory Activities
which engage teachers in problem solving situations that will require them to
resolve problems in the laboratory. These three different types of laboratory
experiences will prepare teachers in ways to sequence laboratory activities in
their classrooms to better achieve conceptual understanding of science by their
students. Cost sharing is equivalent to 6% of the NSF award.