* 9154807
* National Biotechnology Education Conferenc to be held at theUniversity of Wisconsin-Madison in October 1991
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1991,12/31/1992
* Raymond Kessel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 12/31/1992
* USD 55,206.00

The purpose of this program is to conduct a three day conference to develop
guidelines for the pre-college teaching of genetic engineering, and for the
preparation of teachers and the formation of networks and partnerships that
facilitate the introduction of high quality, up-to- date, science education
about genetic engineering. Conference participants will include biology teachers
experienced in teaching genetic engineering; Teacher Enhancement project
personnel who are experienced in this and related areas, and other individuals
experienced in alliances, partnerships and networking in support of science
education programs in biotechnology. The conference will address three main
areas relative to genetic engineering: 1) pre-college academic content,
including basic biology of genetic engineering, technological applications,
social\ethical issues, and economic issues, 2) teacher enhancement, and 3) the
role of alliances, partnerships and networks in implementing new science
education programs. Pre-conference papers will be developed in each of these
three areas so that conference participants can respond to them. Discussion
results will then be used to produce a set of recommended guidelines for future
teacher enhancement programs in the area of genetic engineering. The guidelines,
along with the pre-conference papers, will be incorporated into a Conference
Report that will be made available to all interested individuals. An amount
equal to 13.5% of NSF costs will be provided as cost sharing.