* 9154094
* Event-Based Science:  Earth Science
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Wayne Moyer, Montgomery County Public Schools
* Continuing Grant
* M.Patricia Morse
* 07/31/1996
* USD 1,038,919.00

This project will develop a year-long, event-based science (EBS) curriculum for
heterogeneously grouped, middle school students for use primarily in
departmentalized earth science classes. Nationally disseminated products will
include textbook, teacher resource notebook, and video tape and/or videodisc
support. Five features will set EBS apart from other approaches to science
instruction and curriculum writing. 1) The event focus will make each unit
topical and relevant to early adolescents. It will allow science to become less
compartmentalized. It allows for a natural highlighting of nontraditional roles
filled by women and minorities. 2) The interdisciplinary nature of this even
focus will be enhanced by the collaboration between project writers and
teacher/advisory and consultant panels. Three teacher/advisory panels of
Montgomery County Public School (MCPS) earth science teachers will contribute
content and activity ideas. 3) A team of eighth grade students will tests
materials as they are developed. Particular attention will be paid to interest
reactions of the students. High interest activities will become models for other
activities. 4) EBS will stress alternative assessment techniques and grading
strategies which reward success and downplay failure. 5) EBS will utilize the
news media as one source. 6) EBS will be a national project developed as a
collaborative effort of MCPS, the US Government, and professional and news
agencies. Montgomery County is uniquely positioned to take advantage of the help
available from these agencies.