* 9154194
* Quality Engineering Workshop: Methodologies for Achieving   Quality in Integrated Design/Manufacturing Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/1992,12/31/1993
* John Ramberg, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 12/31/1993
* USD 83,358.00

New quality engineering technologies, that include methodologies for robust
system/product/process design and the incorporation of quality considerations in
the modern integrated engineering design/manufacturing system, are in a rapid
state of development. These methodologies employ engineering/statistical
experiment design, loss functions, quality function deployment and elements of
the controversial Taguchi parameter and tolerance design methods. Based on
modern quality/reliability philosophies and technical communication tools, they
enhance the role of quality engineering to include planning and improvement, in
addition to quality control. They also extend the concept to include the total
life cycle of the system or product. Engineering Colleges lag industry in both
the teaching and researching of these technologies, and most engineering
undergraduate education is essentially limited to the traditional concepts of
quality control. The objective of the Quality Engineering Workshop is to present
these new quality engineering technologies, to provide successful examples of
their application, to illustrate these concepts through laboratory experiments
and computer simulations, and to demonstrate and compare associated computer
software. The workshop should assist faculty to play key roles in the
development of quality engineering courses at their own schools by convincing
them of the importance of expanding traditional quality control courses to
quality engineering, and providing them with materials and strategies for
playing a significant role in the total quality management movement in their
institution.