* 9154436
* Development and Implementation of A Computer-Based Teaching System for Secondary School Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1992
* MCLOWERY ELROD, National Science Center Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 06/30/1992
* USD 1,490,624.00

The National Science Center Foundation (NSCF) is a nonprofit organization whose
goal is to improve performance of U.S. students in mathematics and science by
creating new technological tools for teaching those subjects and implementing
them in our schools. The NSCF's initial objective is to develop a computer-based
teaching system, including courseware, to improve the teaching and learning of
secondary school mathematics from algebra I through calculus. Design of a unique
teaching system called Learning Logic (L2) began in October 1988, functional
specifications were finalized in June 1989, and basic L2 system operating
software and 15 algebra I courseware topics were completed and alpha tested in
June 1990. Development to that juncture was funded by the private sector and a
state of Georgia grant. National Science Foundation funding over three years
will be used to complete and test operating system software and courseware for
algebra I, algebra II, trigonometry, and calculus, to complete courseware design
for geometry, to produce a courseware authoring system, and to deploy L2
nationally. A timeline includes the beta test of fully enhanced operating
software and algebra I alpha test by seven Georgia high schools during 1990-91;
the algebra I and II courseware beta test in 100 schools in 1991-1992;
completion of an authoring system, completion through testing of all mathematics
courseware except geometry, and enlisting 500 schools in 1992-93. The overall
goal of the project is to orient school personnel and students to a prototype
program for urban school improvement with emphasis on developing competence in
science and mathematics.//