* 9154064
* Factors Related to Persistence and Nonpersistence of Women  in Math, Science, and Technology:  A Longitudinal Study
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1994
* Helen Farmer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Iris C. Rotberg
* 08/31/1994
* USD 259,071.00

This study is related to the goal of increasing the number and quality of
American workers in Science and Engineering (S&E) careers, including women and
minorities, inorder to increase national productivity in these areas and our
ability to compete in world markets. A related issue is the underrepresentation
of female and minority students in science and mathematics courses in precollege
education as well as the low entry and retention rates of undergraduate students
in S&E programs in higher education. The purpose of the study is to obtain
longitudinal data that provide an understanding of what has happened in the
formative adolescent years and what has happened to S&E career aspirations in
the intervening years leading to young adulthood. The study has three phases:
(1) The first phase, funded by the National Institute of Education, was carried
out in 1980 when data were collected from 9th and 12th grade students in 2
rural, 2 suburban, and 2 inner city schools. These were randomly selected sites
throughout Illinois. (2) The second phase is the collection and interpretation
of follow-up questionnaire data obtained in 1990. (3) The third phase is to
interview participants who expressed a strong interest in an S&E career in 1980
or are currently in an S&E career. The interview will be designed to provide
information about why some persisted in this interest and others did not.
Working with the Illinois State Board of Education and the Illinois Board of
Higher Education personnel, strategies for increasing interest, participation,
and performance in science and mathematics career will be proposed for
implementation at the high school and college level based on the findings from
this study.