* 9154941
* A Mathematics and Computer Science Project on the Navajo    Reservation -- EARLY ALERT
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1992,08/31/1994
* Joaquin Bustoz, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/1994
* USD 243,471.00

The Arizona State University will initiate a four-week, commuter and
residential, Early Alert Initiative Young Scholars project in Mathematics which
will offer enrichment activities for 60 precollege students entering grade 8.
The first two weeks of the program will take place on the Navajo Reservation.
Participants will be introduced to the experimental nature of mathematics. The
topics of number theory, discrete probability, graph theory, and combinatorics
will be taught and used as experimental material. The students will learn to
write computer programs to implement mathematical routines for use in checking
conjectures. Participants also will learn problem-solving techniques. Problems
will be selected and collected from several sources including the Hungarian
publication, "Matematika Lapok." Various science activities will be correlated
with the mathematical focus. For example, participants will learn about the
mathematics of lenses and will build a four-inch reflector telescope which will
then be used to explore the beautiful night sky above the Navajo Reservation.
Students will spend the last two weeks on the campus of the Arizona State
University, where they will be given the opportunity to meet with science
faculty members and to attend science demonstrations. They also will meet with
personnel from the admissions and financial aid offices.