* 9154557
* Interactive Videodisc Technology and the Assessment of      Safety Awareness of Science Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1993
* Raymond Pecheone, Connecticut State Department of Education
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1993
* USD 49,982.00

The Connecticut State Department of Education will carry out a project, funded
through a SGER grant, which will research the feasibility and validity of using
interactive video as a means of assessing new teachers' knowledge of laboratory
safety. The number of demands and requirements placed on teachers regarding safe
laboratory practice has increased greatly in the last few years. In response to
these increased regulations, beginning teachers often avoid hands-on laboratory
activities due to liability concerns and their lack of confidence in their
ability to carry out the activities safely. The goal of the project is to
develop an instrument which can assess whether a teacher can recognize unsafe
laboratory practice in a real laboratory environment and to strengthen areas in
which the teacher is weak. The project would be part of a new program of
assessment of teacher competency for certification which is under development in
Connecticut. The project will carry out research to determine whether this
interactive mode of assessment provides more authentic, valid, and reliable data
on teacher competency in lab safety than traditional pencil-and-paper
instruments. The interactive video format can capture the ambiance of a real
laboratory situation with its distractions, disturbances, confusion, and
multiple activities, and the interactive video will be able to measure how well
the teacher can cope with this environment in real time. The results of this
assessment will indicate the areas in which a teacher needs additional work, and
support will be provided so that the teacher will ultimately feel knowledgeable,
competent, and confident in carrying out hands-on laboratory experiences. A
group of experienced teachers has participated in identifying the most common
and significant types of safety violations which should be included in the
interactive video materials. Teachers will continue to be involved in the
project in reviewing and field-testing the materials and in a mentorship program
to support beginning teachers in following effective laboratory practices. The
State of Connecticut's cost-sharing is 2.7 times greater than NSF's
contribution.