* 9154860
* Prehistoric Life Exhibits at the Denver Museum of Natural   History....
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Richard Stucky, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 12/31/1995
* USD 967,309.00

In fall of 1995, the Denver Museum of Natural History (DMNH) will open the
Prehistoric Life Exhibits in 17,000 square feet of new exhibition space. The
exhibits will be part of an on-going renaissance in paleontology at DMNH that
includes research, educational programming, teacher training, and collections
management. Visitors will walk through a series of nine life-size, open,
prehistoric habitat dioramas -- "enviroramas"-- representing principally
regional sites that feature critical events in 3.5 billion-year history of life
on Earth. An extension of the Museum's tradition of diorama excellence, the
enviroramas will immerse visitors in a multisensory journey, underscoring the
message that vast amounts of both time and change have occurred since life began
on Earth. Focus area exhibits adjacent to each envirorama will invite visitors
to examine fossil evidence and scientific processes. Layered presentations will
enable visitors to discover, explore, and study according to their level of
interest. Excellent specimens, interpretive exhibitry and hands-on components
will allow visitors to gain awareness of past patterns of environmental change
and to develop literacy about and appreciation for how science and technology
contribute to interpreting the fossil record. A comprehensive evaluation program
will ensure that focus area exhibits are effective and provide visitors with
"new eyes" for viewing the enviroramas. During exhibit construction, visitors
will be able to watch from the viewing area of a state-of-the-art fossil
preparation laboratory, completed in l990, as preparators rearticulate the
skeletons of Diplodocus, Stegosaurus and other fossils. As part of their
Prehistoric Life Exhibits experience, visitors will be able to witness on-going
science activities in the laboratory. The National Science Foundation is
requested to contribute $1 million over three years toward the $5.3 million
Prehistoric Life Exhibits project. The exhibition and associated programming
will be a major cultural and educational resource for the Rocky Mountain region
, potentially reaching a diverse audience of well over a million Museum visitors
and program participants annually.