* 9154414
* Interactive Effects of Salt Stress on Ultraviolet-B Radiation on Halophytic Plant Growth in Field and Controlled Laboratory Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1992,12/31/1993
* Lucy St. Omer, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1993
* USD 12,000.00

Reports of increasing rates of ozone depletion and predictions of the resulting
increased levels of ultraviolet-B radiation at the earth's surface have been
documented. Plant scientists have investigated the effects of increasing UV-B
radiation on crop plants, but the responses in native plants in natural
ecosystems are largely unknown. Meaningful studies of the effects of increasing
UV-B radiation on native plants should include the stresses associated with
their natural environments. Although coastal salt marshes are highly productive,
the very low plant diversity together with high salt concentrations create
habitats which are not very resilient to disturbances. The data for crop plants
indicate wide variation in plant responses, suggesting possible selective
effects that could be very damaging to the delicate balances present in natural
communities. The purpose of this study id to examine the interactive effects of
increasing UV-B radiation and salt stress in holophytic plants of coastal salt
marshes. Specific objectives include investigations of whether increasing UV-B
radiation results in selective effects on species composition and whether these
plants, which are normally exposed to high light intensities, develop protective
mechanisms against higher levels of UV-B radiation.