* 9154406
* Alternative Performance Assessment Systems; An Evaluation ofCost, Technical Quality, Feasibility, and Acceptability
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/1991,02/28/1998
* Stephen Klein, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 02/28/1998
* USD 2,750,576.00

The K-12 mathematics and science "frameworks" now emphasize problem solving
skills and conceptual understanding. This has stimulated the development of
performance tests because they are better measures of these skills than the
multiple choice items relied upon in the past to assess student achievement.
However, information about performance measures is sparse and fragmented. The
proposed project will examine the cost, technical quality feasibility, and
acceptability of alternative assessment systems (i.e., testing programs that
include combinations of measures for making decisions about individuals,
instructional programs, or state and national trends). The project will gather
and analyze data on the performance and other types of measures used by the
California Assessment Project and other such programs. The study will examine
the statistical properties of these measures, the resources required to develop
and use them, and the attitudes of students, teachers, and others to their
inclusion in testing programs. The study also will develop several tasks from
the same "shell." Data on these measures will be used to investigate the
sensitivity of these tasks to the effects of instruction and practice. The
project's final report will discuss the key features and implications of
alternative assessment systems.