* 9154839
* Teacher Inservice Program in Technological Literacy and     Engineering Concepts
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1992,12/31/1995
* Thomas Liao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 12/31/1995
* USD 464,784.00

State University of New York at Stony Brook will conduct a three-year project
to enhance 40 science teachers, 40 technology/engineering teachers, 20
mathematics teachers and 20 teacher-leaders (in the same ratio) to become more
technologically literate and able to implement contextual learning experiences
in their high school mathematics, science and engineering courses. The study of
technological systems and related engineering concepts will provide an approach
to make science and mathematics more meaningful and attractive in high school
education. A tested and published "Principles of Engineering" syllabus for a
one-year course using six relevant monographs of engineering case studies will
be used as the main curriculum materials, supplemented by three video-based
motivational and career exploration instructional packages. A teacher
implementation and resource guide will be developed concurrently with the
project. Teacher participants and leadership teams from sixteen states will be
an integral part in generating, critiquing, testing and refining the guide
edited and produced by the project staff of mathematicians, scientists,
technologists, mathematics and science education specialists from SUNY Stony
Brook; mathematics, science, and technology teachers from schools in New York.
Fifty classroom teachers from New York in the first year , 25 from New York and
25 total from five other states in the second year will in a three-week summer
workshop experience classroom presentations and participate in hands-on
laboratory experiences that broaden their backgrounds in technology/engineering,
applied physics, biology, and chemistry, as well as mathematical topics of
algebra, trigonometry, geometry, and discrete mathematics. Both the university
and school staff members will facilitate these learning activities. Pedagogical
features include the teachers (a) learning how to use cooperative learning
strategies in the "Principles of Engineering" course and (b) developing a
constructivist approach to helping students learn mathematics, science, and
technology. Five two-person leadership teams (one classroom teacher, one
college/university/regional educator consultant) will join the classroom
teachers for the third week of the summer workshop in each of the first two
years, those ten teams joining ten new such teams from ten new states for a one-
week workshop in the third summer to finish the guide and evaluation input. The
regional groups of participant teachers and leadership teams will meet at the
college/university of the consultant on the leadership team to conduct follow-up
activities during the school year. An evaluation will monitor all program
aspects including the effective use of project curriculum materials and
pedagogical techniques in the classroom. SUNY at Stony Brook cost sharing
accounts for 5.4% of the NSF budget contribution.