* 9154112
* Teaching Hands-On Investigative Biology in High School "On AShoestring"
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1995
* Mary Bellamy, National Association of Biology Teachers
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 09/30/1995
* USD 302,124.00

A strong need exists for more inclusion of hands-on investigative science in
the high school curriculum. Current school budgets, however, often lack of money
to purchase adequate materials and equipment for hands-on science. One immediate
remedy for the problem is the production and dissemination of a laboratory
manual of effective hands-on investigative activities that require little or no
money to implement. The National Association of Biology Teachers (NABT) staff
plans to recruit excellent, experienced high school teachers to write and field
test these activities, modifying them as needed for special populations of
students, including the physically disabled, gifted, and disadvantaged. NABT
staff members will oversee all phases of the project, and biologists and science
educators will review materials to assure their quality. The most successful
activities will then be distributed to high school biology teachers throughout
the country through mailings and in-service workshops. The goal of the project
is to increase the teaching of biology as a process rather than as a collection
of facts. The objectives of the project are to enable the teaching of hands-on
investigative biology by (1) providing teachers process-oriented biology. High
school biology teachers and their students will benefit from this project.