* 9154282
* ~92 Summer School for Chemical Engineering Faculty          ~                                                           ~
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1992,06/30/1993
* Ralph Buonopane, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 06/30/1993
* USD 87,770.00

The next Summer School for Chemical Engineering Faculty, jointly sponsored by
the National Science Foundation and Industry is organized by the Chemical
Engineering Division of the American Society for Engineering Education.It will
be held in the Summer of 1992. Attendance by about 250 faculty members is
anticipated, representing nearly every chemical engineering department in the
United States. The purpose of the project sponsored Summer School is to achieve
more effective and realistic chemical engineering education by stimulating an
exchange of ideas and approaches among chemical engineering faculty members and
practicing engineers. Past Summer Schools have fostered major innovations in the
chemical engineering curriculum; the development of new teaching methods and
classroom activities have also been encouraged. The format of the Summer School
includes organized workshops and plenary sessions . Continuous opportunity for
informal discussion among participants also is provided. Eminent engineers from
universities and industry will be involved in the organization and presentation
of the Summer School.The subjects to be covered represent areas of new and
renewed emphasis in chemical engineering education .The Summer School offers the
opportunity to examine and influence the direction of chemical engineering
education in the United States. Chemical engineers who are capable of meeting
modern societal demands and economic needs in areas such as energy, environment,
food, biotechnology, medicine, microelectronics, material resources, and other
areas are needed. The Summer School syllabus is specifically designed to help
meet this urgent need.