* 9155163
* Applications of Basic Science in Industry and Society to    Enhance the 6-12 Science Curriculum
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1994
* Walter Weibrecht, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Haney
* 11/30/1994
* USD 394,026.00

This proposal provides for the enhancement of 42 teachers (21 selected each
year) of grades 6-12. The project provides for 14 teacher teams composed of one
secondary science teacher and two middle school teachers to study the
applications of basic science (theories and concepts) in selected industries and
societal agencies for translation through teacher generated modules into high
school and middle school classrooms. Two senior scientists, a Professor of
Biology and a Professor of Chemistry are paired experienced science teachers and
a teacher educator for two, three-week summer developmental workshops and
academic year seminars. The teachers will translate the curriculum generated in
the summer curriculum development activities into clinics for high school and
middle school teachers in their school districts during the school year. Science
teaching skills will be enhanced through: (1) vertically integrated science
teams in the school system; (2) building teacher-generated curriculum by
modifying outdated curriculum materials; and (3) implementation of greater
attention to basic science in the middle grades prior to high school. Some of
the concepts and themes included in the workshops are DNA, enzymes, marine
biology, energy, water cycle and quality, and the relationship of chemistry to
our environment and daily lives. Cost sharing is equivalent to 45% of the NSF
award.