* 9155215
* Program to Improve the Science Curriculum in Elementary     School (PISCES):  Workshops to Develop Oklahoma Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1996
* Robert Howard, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 05/31/1996
* USD 1,061,824.00

Dr. Robert Howard is the Chairman of the Chemistry Department of the University
of Tulsa, and an active proponent of high quality science instruction in
elementary schools. Dr. Howard has organized and conducted several teacher
enhancement workshops for elementary teachers from the region adjacent to Tulsa,
and he has planned a three-year series of workshops for elementary teachers
across the entire state of Oklahoma. Underprepared teachers will be offered a
five-week workshop experience, during which they will be exposed to exemplary
instructional materials and the most current approaches to inquiry-based
teaching methods. The teachers will develop their own lesson plans based on
these proven instructional materials, and will conduct classes for children in a
practicum setting. The following summer these same teachers will have a more
advanced five-week workshop that will prepare them to act as lead teachers in
their home school districts. The proposed workshops will create a cadre of 150
trained leader teachers across Oklahoma. Each of these teachers will be capable
of catalyzing change in their own schools and school districts. The use of
teachers as trainers and mentors of other teachers is a highly effective means
of effecting broadly-based improvements in science instruction. The cost sharing
by the host institution amounts to 127% of the NSF support.