* 9155296
* Improving Mathematics Teaching in Grades 6-9 through the    Integration of Content, Technology, and Manipulatives
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* Gary Sapp, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* diane spresser
* 08/31/1996
* USD 534,480.00

This is a proposal for a cooperative venture involving the Department of
Mathematics, the School of Education, and six school districts in the
Birmingham, AL area to enhance the mathematics background and pedagogical
repertory of 20 (well- prepared) middle school teachers of mathematics. The
program begins with an intensive five-week workshop in which the participants
will work through topics from pre-algebra, pre- geometry, and probability and
statistics. The use of hands-on materials and appropriate computer software in
teaching will be stressed. There will be four follow-up workshops during the
succeeding academic year, as well as at least two site visits by project faculty
to each participating teacher's classroom. Each participating teacher will
select a "partner"-teacher to whom s/he will be mentor during the academic year
and with whom s/he will share ideas and teaching methodologies from the summer
workshop. The program will be replicated in three successive years: thus, 60
teachers will be impacted directly and an additional 60 teachers will be
impacted through the partnership-mentoring program. All the teachers will become
part of a network ("Mathematics Teachers Helping Teachers"), which will continue
to function with the support of the University after the completion of the
project.