* 9155199
* Colorado Science Teacher Enhancement Program (CO-STEP)
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1998
* James Ellis, BSCS Science Learning
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 11/30/1998
* USD 1,493,955.00

The Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) plans to establish a Trainer-
of-Trainers Center and a state-wide network of six Teacher Development Centers
(TDC) in Colorado. Each center will be a collaborative partnership involving a
university, Cooperative Educational Services, a regional branch of the Colorado
Alliance for Science, and several school districts. The project design, which is
consistent with the Colorado plan for the State Systemic Initiative, has four
major components: 1) the teacher development network, 2) the trainer-of-trainers
program, 3) the master-teacher program, and 4) the school-based teacher
development program. During the 60-month period for which NSF funding is sought,
project staff will build a network to provide teacher development and follow-up
implementation support for 540 master teachers and at least 1,080 additional
classroom teachers of grades 4-6 (48,600 students). Four staff members from each
of the six regional Teacher Development Centers (the Center director, the
project evaluator, a master teacher, and an administrator) will be trained at
the Trainer-of-Trainers Center. Each of these six teams will then develop and
implement plans for the improvement of science education via the regional
Teacher Development Center (TDC) in their respective regions. Each TDC will
offer a series of courses on science and science teaching for the master
teachers from their region. The master teachers will be involved in an
intensive, long-term program to improve their science teaching and that of their
colleagues. Teacher development networks will provide follow- up support to the
master teachers as they implement improvements in their science curriculum and
instruction. This project is appropriate for the Teacher Enhancement Program
because of its systemic plan to enhance in a substantive way the science
teaching of a large number of elementary school teachers throughout the state of
Colorado. Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately 163% of the amount requested
from NSF.