* 9155386
* Empowering Teachers to Enhance Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1992,05/31/1995
* Glen Dirreen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 05/31/1995
* USD 1,502,860.00

This 30 month project, sponsored by the Institute for Chemical Education (ICE)
at Madison, will carry out the following activities: (1) Provide a two year
intensive content and pedagogy summer workshop program for 50 high school
chemistry teachers of minority students in the Los Angeles area. Activities
include a strong follow-up program during the academic year. This program will
be carried out on the campus of Mt. San Antonio College, Walnut, California. (2)
Provide a two year intensive content and pedagogy summer workshop program for 40
middle school teachers selected from a national pool. The program includes
laboratory and laboratory safety techniques, work with computer applications,
study of the connections chemistry makes with other fields and training in
outreach activities. Participants will have the opportunity to work with middle
school students in the UW- Madison ChemCamp program. (3) Provide a two year
intensive summer program for 25 teachers each year to learn how to use chemistry
instrumentation in the classroom. This includes 15 master teachers, selected
from the participants in the earlier instrumentation program, who will be given
advanced training in the instrumentation and be prepared to give peer workshops
in this subject. (4) Provide a one year program for 20 elementary school
teachers to learn chemistry concepts and activities appropriate for the
elementary school level. Associated with this program is the training of college
faculty called ICE affiliates who will learn, through attending those sessions,
how to carry out their own inservice program. The matching funds, contributed
from the University of Wisconsin-Madison, constitutes 13% of the NSF grant.