* 9155452
* The Educational Activity Model System:  A TEAM Approach to  Improving Science Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1994
* Susan Moulton, Massachusetts Biotechnology Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 02/28/1994
* USD 95,870.00

This project is a one year program that will team 48 secondary teachers (grades
7-12), from four Massachusetts communities, with biotechnology scientists
through the auspices of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council and the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Research Park. During a two week summer institute,
24 participants will be introduced to content area in biotechnology and related
basic biology. During a second one week summer institute for 24 participants,
many who have attended a previous biotechnology institute, will be introduced to
some advanced principles of cell and molecular biology including Alzheimer
Disease and AIDS. Hands-on laboratories and interactive teaching tools will be
presented by scientists at their industrial sites. Potential classroom
activities will be presented by educators from the New England Science Center.
Science pedagogy specialists will discuss ideas for classroom activities and
curriculum with the participants. Monthly meetings between the scientists and
participants during the academic year will focus on curriculum concepts and
skill building. Each scientist-teacher team will develop an additional activity
for classroom use. Each activity, along with a brief outline of concepts and
skills involved and a list of industry resources used in development, will be
included in a source book to be shared by participants. Cost sharing equals
120.4% of the NSF award.