* 9155700
* Public Participation in Ornithology: An Introduction to Environmental Research
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1992,07/31/1996
* Richard Bonney, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 07/31/1996
* USD 807,937.00

Ornithology is one of the few scientific disciplines to which amateurs can still
make significant contributions. Whether they observe birds at a feeder, count
birds for a national census, or conduct a simple experiment, their activities
contribute greatly to our knowledge of birds. Furthermore, participants in bird
study programs not only learn about birds, they also become more aware of
environmental problems. The Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology exists to
facilitate such amateur involvement and education. This proposal is aimed at
strengthening our education programs and expanding them to include under-served
audiences in the inner city. We propose to evaluate the extent to which our
radio program, magazine, and Project FeederWatch appeal to various audiences and
how effective these programs are at communicating information about birds and in
stimulating involvement. Based on this evaluation, we will modify our programs,
then evaluate them again. Based on this evaluation, we will modify our programs,
then evaluate them again. We are also proposing a brand-new volunteer-assisted
data gathering program, which we call the National Science Experiment. In
cooperation with other organizations, volunteers will look at the biology of
pigeons in our cities, food preferences of winter birds across the United
States, and the habitat requirements of neotropical migrant tanagers. The
results of these studies will be of interest to both ornithologists and birders;
furthermore, participants in the project will gain first-hand involvement with
the process of science.