* 9155368
* In-School Inservice Institute in Math and Science
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1992,09/30/1994
* Daniel Dolan, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* diane spresser
* 09/30/1994
* USD 428,282.00

Wesleyan University will conduct a two-year project to pilot-test a new teacher
enhancement model: "In-School Inservice Institute in Math and Science". Over 180
high school mathematics and science teachers in twelve Connecticut school
districts will receive three weeks of intensive, on-site inservice and
professional development during the school year by a visiting team of two
university faculty and six Project to Increase Mastery of Mathematics and
Science (PIMMS) master teachers and other expert demonstrators. Participating
teachers will conduct a variety of outreach activities for over 1800 second-wave
teachers, for a total enhanced population of about 2000. Two distinguishing
features of the project are its collegial aspect and its team teaching approach.
A member of the Visiting Team will team up with a participant, with the Visiting
Team member teaching the participant's classes while the participant is
attending seminars and demonstrations or observes a colleague's class. Visitor
and participant will also team-teach classes throughout the school day and will
spend time discussing and reflecting upon the day's activities. Thus, the
Visiting Team should learn as much about secondary mathematics and science
instruction as the high school teachers will learn about mathematics and
science. This in-school, collegial model has potential for success in a variety
of settings. Wesleyan University, PIMMS and school district cost-sharing
accounts for 92% of the NSF budget.