* 9155161
* "Roman City"...
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1992,04/30/1994
* Larry Klein, Unicorn Projects Inc
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 04/30/1994
* USD 392,820.00

"Roman City," fourth in a series of PBS specials based on the acclaimed books of
David Macaulay, is an hour-long film that traces the planning, engineering,
building and habitation of an ancient Roman city at the height of empire. The
program continues the unique Macaulay presentation format of a cinemaquality
animated dramatic story juxtaposed with live- action documentary segments,
hosted by Mr. Macaulay and filmed at actual sites portrayed in the story. Each
film roots its dominant structures and technology firmly within the thought and
culture of its historical period. The dual presentation style has enabled the
previous Macaulay specials to capture a wide range of viewers from young
children all the way up to older adults. "Roman City," as well as the previous
award-winning Macaulay specials--"Castle," "Cathedral" and "Pyramid"--is
specifically aimed at enhancing the scientific, technical and humanistic
understanding of both young people and adults outside of the formal educational
environment. All indication from the previous programs suggests that this goal
has been widely achieved. There is a natural curiosity about other cultures,
about things technical and how they interrelate with human needs and
aspirations, and we believe our unique format satisfies that curiosity in an
entertaining, informative and educational manner. The ancient Romans achieved
breakthroughs in planning and the delivery of those elements deemed necessary
for the functioning of an increasingly world. Aqueducts, sewers, roads, bridges,
amphitheaters and public buildings, even public lavatories, all speak to the
technical mastery of the ancient Romans. And if their social aims were not
always as "advanced" as their scientific and technological sophistication, then
that, too, provides a modern object lesson on the critical and mutually
dependent interrelationship of science and civilization.