* 9155744
* Improving the Impact and Relevance of Introductory Science  Courses: as a Learning Partner.
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/28/1999
* USD 1,520,988.00

Much research evidence suggests that students become disenchanted with science
because their science classes overemphasize microscopic models of phenomena and
formal methods of analysis and also fail to integrate everyday and scientific
reasoning. This project will develop and evaluate a new approach to science
teaching and learning that is rigorous as well as pragmatic, useful, and
engaging for students. We will focus on improving introductory science courses
so that they attract and retain students and meet the needs of society and the
demands of the workplace. Specifically, we will identify goals for science
courses that are both rigorous and useful, develop assessments that both educate
students and inform teachers, investigate classroom partnerships between
teachers, students, and computers that are both efficient and effective, and
conduct longitudinal case studies of participation and persistence in science
that are both interactive and retrospective. Building on our recent research on
teaching and learning, we will seek to provide a new, more substantial research
base for science education reform. We will refine our proposed solutions by
conducting in-depth studies of students in small groups. We will then test these
solutions in middle school classes taught by a project team member. Finally, we
will study students longitudinally from the eighth grade through high school to
determine the effect of our approach and related interventions on persistence
and participation in science courses and careers. By comparing the beliefs and
decisions of students who tend not to participate in elective science courses to
those of students who aspire to be scientists, we will be able to provide a much
richer understanding of persistence and participation than has been provided by
other investigations.