* 9155251
* UPDATE:  University Physics Departments and Alliance for             Teacher Enhancement
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1993,01/31/1997
* Klaus Schultz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 01/31/1997
* USD 1,245,715.00

Four campuses of the University of Massachusetts system (Amherst, Dartmouth,
Lowell, and Boston) have designed a regional network to support the high school
physics teachers in the area. Each campus will offer a three-week commuter
workshop, at which 24 teachers will learn about contemporary research topics in
physics and strategies for incorporating this new content knowledge into their
classroom instruction. The most experienced teachers at these workshops will be
invited to attend a week-long residential institute devoted to developing new
classroom activities based on the research topics presented. These activities
will be disseminated to all school districts in the region, and through the
Massachusetts Statewide Systemic Initiative, Project PALMS. Each campus will
also establish a permanent teachers resource center within its physics
department. The centers will offer teachers the loan of equipment for classroom
use, and will provide ongoing help in the form of workshops, network meetings,
newsletters, and interactions with members of the research faculty. Partnerships
such as this between research universities and secondary schools have
significant potential for long-term improvement of science education. The
regional scale of this partnership is exceptional and increases further the
opportunity for widespread permanent improvement. Cost sharing on this project
represents 22% of the NSF contribution.