* 9155431
* The Language of Patterns:  An Interactive Exhibit of Modern Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/1992,09/30/1995
* Rodica Simion, Maryland Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 09/30/1995
* USD 843,641.00

Mathematics can be exciting. It can be fun. The modern world surrounds us with
examples of its beauty. Too often, however, these examples go unnoticed or
unexplored. This is one reason so few young Americans think of mathematics as a
potential career path: they do not realize how much mathematics is a part of
their lives, or how much they use it -- often without knowing it| The Maryland
Science Center and the mathematics faculty of the George Washington University
have teamed up to create The Language of Patterns, a mathematics exhibit that
examines mathematics in modern life. Through engaging interactive exhibit
stations, The Language of Patterns invites visitors of all ages to discover the
intricacy and wonder of modern mathematics. Eschewing highly technical
terminology, the exhibit focuses instead on fun and exploration. Mounted by the
Maryland Science Center in its Baltimore facility and in a traveling version
that will be available to science and technology museums across the county, this
exhibit represents a unique collaboration between academic and museum exhibition
design experts. More important, The Language of Patterns is an opportunity for
visitors to rethink their relationship with modern mathematics, one of man's
most significant -- and misunderstood -- achievements.