* 9155256
* Operation Toolbox:  A Program in Environmental and          Behavioral Biology for Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1995
* Martin Hetherington, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Emma L. Walton
* 10/31/1995
* USD 478,094.00

The purpose of this three year program is to provide teacher enhancement in the
subject areas of Environmental and Behavioral Biology. Each year, twenty-four
junior high school and high school biology teachers will receive instruction at
the Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) of Michigan State University. Instruction
will cover recent developments in environmental sustainability, agroecological
practices, and the place of microbes in the environment. Lead teachers from
previous workshops will be included as part of the teaching faculty. Teams of
middle school and high school teachers from the same district will be encouraged
to apply. The summer workshop can be applied toward a Masters of Biology
Teaching Degree. Instruction will consist of lecture\discussion, guest speakers,
and appropriate laboratory and field experiences. In addition, participants will
be shown ways of integrating economic, ethical, and political factors pertaining
to environmental use into their curricula. Teacher teams will develop laboratory
or field experiences that will be shared with all other participants.
Participants will be required to develop a Unit plan based upon a Conceptual
Change Model. Based on their summer and classroom experience, participants will
provide three days of inservice workshops to peer teachers. The total cost share
of this program is 8.1% of NSF cost.