* 9155221
* Iowa Chautauqua:  A Regional Effort to Achieve More         Appropriate Science for Students in Grades Four through Nine
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1994
* Robert Yager, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 12/31/1994
* USD 716,191.00

Dr. Robert Yager of the University of Iowa has developed a teacher enhancement
program ("Iowa Chautauqua") for middle school teachers across the state. This
program provides teachers with a three-week workshop experience in the Science-
Technology-Society (STS) approach to science instruction. The STS approach
stresses the societal impacts and issues of natural, technological, and
anthropocentric activities. Examples of STS issues would include drought,
agriculture, hydroelectric power generation. Teachers will have instruction on
how to identify STS issues that are local concerns and are likely to engage
students in meaningful inquiry. Teachers will develop the ability to enable
student investigations by facilitating data gathering, analysis, and design of
alternative social action. These social actions can be pursued as out-of-school
efforts to address real community issues. The Iowa Chautauqua will reach 300
Iowa middle school science teachers in ten different areas during a two year
period. Scientists from industry and from science faculty at Iowa universities
and community colleges are involved as science resources. Dr. Yager's project
leadership team has assembled an impressive array of information sources from
which students and teachers may derive data for their investigations. This
teacher enhancement project will help teachers and students to develop as
independent investigators with an awareness of the relationships between science
and society. Cost sharing on this project represents 53% of the NSF
contribution.