* 9155927
* Modernizing the Introductory Astronomy Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1992,11/30/1994
* Laurence Marschall, Gettysburg College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1994
* USD 238,560.00

Astronomy is the first and only experience in science for many college students.
Yet laboratories in introductory astronomy have long suffered because of the
difficulty of doing "experiments" with the faint light from the heavens. They
are rarely experiential or "hands-on", relying instead on analysis of
photographs and data tables provided ahead of time. The available laboratory
material today also exemplifies techniques that are increasingly out-of-date and
unrepresentative of what astronomers really do. Students rightly regard much of
the lab as make-work, rarely reinforcing the concepts presented in class.A
series of new exercises are being developed for the introductory lab that
addresses these problems. Some will be "hands-on exercises" centered around
observations with CCD cameras on small telescopes, of the kind available to many
schools. Other exercises will be simulations of observations, which can be
extremely realistic, since much astronomical observation is done using computers
as front ends for various types of telescopes. Standardized software tools are
being developed for all the labs, and data taking and analysis are being
integrated with existing spreadsheet programs. The finished labs will consist of
software, writeups, and teachers' guides, as well as technical manuals and will
be made available to other institutions.The new exercises give students in the
course a more satisfying and realistic experience in astronomy, and provide
impetus for revitalizing the introductory astronomy labs in similar courses in
other colleges and universities.