* 9155338
* School Based Elementary Science Restructuring Program
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,08/31/2000
* Hubert Dyasi, Community School District #6, New York City School System
* Continuing grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 08/31/2000
* USD 3,291,176.00

Community School District 6 in New York has a total enrollment of 23,000
students in grades kindergarten through 8th grade. This district extends across
Manhattan from 135th St. to 220th St., and has an 85% Hispanic student
population, of which 40% have limited English abilities. Almost 95% of the
students qualify for the free lunch program. Mr. Robert Werner, Science
Coordinator of the district, has proposed a comprehensive five-year plan for
training the district's teachers in a recently adopted hands on inquiry-based
science curriculum for the elementary grades. One lead teacher per grade per
school has already received some training by district science coordinators. This
project would greatly accelerate and expand the training effort, and would
establish a leadership team in each school composed of three lead teachers, the
Principal, and the Science Assistant Principal. The Workshop Center of CCNY and
EDC would provide training for the lead teachers, principals, and assistant
principals. The lead teachers would be released from their classrooms for three
periods per week, in order to provide training to the other teachers in their
school. The proposed teacher enhancement project will have significant impact on
a school district with enormous need. A total of 180 teachers will receive
training directly in workshop settings, and the remaining 600 will have frequent
in-class coaching and mentoring by their lead teacher colleagues. The plan to
provide training to school administrators will assure a long-term change in the
attitudes of school officials toward science instruction. The school district
has demonstrated its commitment to exemplary science education in the past, and
has made firm commitments for future contributions. Cost sharing by the school
district represents 124% of the NSF contribution.