* 9155193
* A Community College Enhancement Program for Teachers of     Science.  (ACCEPTS)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1992,07/31/1994
* Patricia Basili, Prince George's Community College
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 07/31/1994
* USD 150,649.00

Dr. Vera Zdravkovich is a professor of chemistry at Prince George's Community
College in Largo, Maryland. She has spearheaded summer institutes for elementary
teachers in the past, and she now proposes to expand these efforts
significantly. Dr. Zdravkovich has initiated collaborations among four of
Maryland's community colleges, with the purpose of forming a network of science
faculty members interested in improving pre-college science education. Eleven
faculty members from Cecil Community College, Anne Arundel Community College,
and Hagerstown Junior College will attend workshops together to become familiar
with exemplary instructional materials and approaches to elementary science
education. These science faculty members will serve an internship at the 1992
summer teachers institute at Prince George's Community College. Additional
workshops held during the 1992-93 academic year will add 28 science faculty
members to the cadre of trained scientists, who will then plan and implement
teacher enhancement institutes at their host institutions. Community colleges
are strategically positioned for significant impact on pre-college science
education. Interactions among their education and science faculties can catalyze
important opportunities that have not emerged from research universities. The
proposed collaborations among Maryland's community colleges has the potential
for substantial impact, and can serve as a model for other states. Cost sharing
on this project amounts to 132% of the NSF contribution.