* 9155924
* Final Development of a New Approach to Introductory         Materials Science
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1993
* Charles Graham, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/1993
* USD 29,205.00

This project supports a workshop aimed at the familiarization of teachers of
introductory courses in materials science and engineering with a new approach
developed over the past four years at the University of Pennsylvania. The goals
are to stimulate these teachers to experiment with this approach and to give
input into the text developed for the new course, which is approaching the stage
of final revision. The course is aimed at first- or second-year undergraduates
in any engineering discipline, including materials science, and at non-
engineering students with advanced high-school-level preparation in physics,
chemistry, and calculus. The innovation consists in placing all the topics
covered in the now-traditional type of introductory course into a familiar
context for students encountering the subject for the first time. This is done
by using the bicycle and the Walkman as the paradigms for, in effect, two giant
case studies. The use of these contexts enables the student to comprehend the
subject in a unified way in a one-semester course and to be able to apply it to
engineering situations. It has also stimulated more of them to pursue the
subject at a higher level than was the case with the traditional-type of course.
The potential impact of this new approach is a significant increase in the
number of engineering students able to apply the basic principles of materials
science and engineering in their own disciplines, as well as some increase in
the number of uncommitted students attracted to engineering as a major.