* 9155365
* Project Weather Watch
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1994
* Dennis Weiss, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 01/31/1994
* USD 48,105.00

Dr. Martin Marin is the Dean of the School of Education at City University of
New York, and he has designed an innovative program for introducing atmospheric
science and weather-prediction technology into the elementary and middle school
curriculum in Community School Districts 5, 10, 11, and 25 of New York City. The
City's instructional program for grades 5 and 8 already includes weather as a
content topic, and Dr. Marin's project will significantly enhance the teaching
and learning of this subject. Dr. Marin has established close ties among the
University's department of Atmospheric Sciences and the national network of
satellite-derived weather data. A cadre of 12 science teachers from the four
districts will receive two weeks of intensive training in atmospheric sciences,
satellite weather data, computer-based telecommunications and analysis of
weather data. The teachers and atmospheric scientists will spend a year
designing instructional strategies for classroom use and a curriculum for
training teachers in the content and delivery of inquiry-driven weather units.
Weather is a content topic that lends itself well to urban school districts.
With the right instructional strategies, weather can be a springboard to
teaching inquiry skills, data analysis, computer applications, and a wide
variety of problem-solving strategies. The proposed planning effort has the
potential for wide impact on the New York City science curriculum, and on
instructional programs in many other large cities.