* 9155341
* Documenting and Understanding Young Children's Science      Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1997
* Ted Chittenden, Educational Testing Service
* Standard Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 12/31/1997
* USD 747,463.00

Students learn scientific concepts and acquire science process skills in
different sequences and at different rates. Highly effective teaching requires
an awareness of where a child is in the process of concept and skill
development. Dr. Ted Chittenden of the Educational Testing Service proposes an
effort that combines research with teacher enhancement. Dr. Chittenden and a
cadre of experienced kindergarten and primary school teachers will research two
important questions: 1) Can systematic documentation of student speech, writing,
and artwork add significantly to teacher effectiveness in science teaching? 2)
What training, materials, and institutional supports are needed to realize this
added effectiveness? In-class research by the teachers and project leaders will
lead to the development of prototypical protocols and materials for training
teachers to use documentation in their teaching practices. The Educational
Testing Service will develop these prototypes into marketable tools for teacher
enhancement to be disseminated in partnership with a publisher. The proposed
research has the potential to establish an important new tool for science
teaching in early childhood classrooms. The teacher enhancement materials that
will emerge from this research could have wide impact on teachers and schools.
This project is supported jointly by the Teacher Enhancement Program and the
Research in Teaching and Learning Program. The Educational Testing Service is
cost sharing on this project by underwriting the costs of developing the
prototype materials into marketable products.