* 9155281
* Mission To Planet Earth:  Scenario Development for          Challenger Learning Centers...
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1992,01/31/1995
* Richard Methia, Challenger Center for Space Science Education
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 01/31/1995
* USD 343,021.00

The Challenger Center for Space Science Education located in Alexandria,
Virginia, a nonprofit organization with a mission to increase the number of
youth interested in science and space, is requesting $303,170 over two years
from the National Science Foundation (NSF) to develop a new scenario for its
Challenger Learning Centers. Located in science centers. museums and schools
around the country. Learning Centers house equipment and educational programming
for hands-on training during a simulated mission. Scenarios use mathematics,
science and problem-solving skills to provide participants with simulated
experiences of working in a space laboratory and a "Mission control" laboratory.
Challenger Center requests assistance and partnership from NSF to develop, field
test, implement and evaluate a new scenario on the environment, "Mission to
Planet Earth" scenario. This project will involve collaboration of expert
scientists, educators, Challenger staff, and science museum professionals.
Annually more than 180,000 students and between 10,000 and 15,000 adults will
participate in the scenario at Learning Centers, using space as a format for
learning about environmental issues. Challenger is working on the preliminary
planning stage between June and December 1991. Two years of funding are
requested from NSF beginning in January 1992.