* 9155307
* The Delaware Teacher Enhancement Partnership:  A Model for  Implementing the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics(NCTM) Standards
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1992,02/29/1996
* Clifford Sloyer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 02/29/1996
* USD 1,107,555.00

The University of Delaware will conduct a four-year project to enhance 230
mathematics teachers and administrators of grades 7 through 9 in making
mathematical connections, in problem solving, and in reasoning and communicating
about mathematics. The focus of participants' mathematical experiences will be
situation-centered mathematics tasks conducted in a technologically rich
learning environment. Teacher involvement will use the teacher-as-learner and
teacher-as-researcher models. Teacher participants will be expected to attend at
least two three-week summer workshops, with administrators attending at least
one day per summer of these workshops to understand the spirit of the models
being used. Mathematics content focus will be on combinatorics and probability
(1991 pilot), functions and statistics (1992), geometry and discrete mathematics
(1993), summarizing, organizing into Standards curricula for grades 7 through 9,
and leadership training (1994), and leadership and dissemination (1995). During
the school year, weekly two- hour after school meetings will be held in each
district where the previous summer workshop participants will coach their
colleagues, new lessons will be piloted, and curricula planned. In addition,
monthly three-hour workshops will be held where project staff will extend and
clarify summer material. Lastly, project staff will visit schools twice per
week. The project includes a collaborative learning component for administrators
where they will consider basic leadership tasks needed to facilitate change. The
project will also involve substantial collaboration with 8 of Delaware's 16
public school districts. Thorough dissemination of the program's features and
implementation strategies for replicating the project will be undertaken in the
remaining 8 districts and the 3 vocational-technical districts in Delaware. The
project is endorsed by the Delaware State Systemic Initiatives Project 21.
University of Delaware and school district cost-sharing accounts for 37% of the
NSF budget. The project is well-planned, employing methodology suggested by
current research in the teaching and learning of mathematics, and is systemic in
nature. It addresses the many facets of the educational system needed to insure
change in the classroom.