* 9155170
* Enhancement of Minority Student Achievement in the Science  Classroom
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,08/31/1996
* John Anderson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 08/31/1996
* USD 487,647.00

This proposal provides for the enhancement of minority student achievement in
the science classroom. It is a continuation of the summer and academic year
portion of the Institute for Multicultural Science Education for two years,
rotating a cycle of 30 new teachers and 30 returning teachers each summer.
Science teachers from the Madison and Milwaukee school districts will meet in
Madison with Institute staff and faculty for four weeks during the summer to
develop instruction in three areas that are predicted to enhance the science
classroom environment for minority students. The Institute is designed to foster
changes in teachers' attitudes (toward minorities, role of teachers,
organization of classroom), and empower the teachers to develop the skills
necessary to put those attitudes into practice. The three areas in which
teachers will work are: (1) developing greater understanding of the strengths
and needs of minority students; and investigating the applicability of (2) the
cooperative learning approach and (3) the problem solving approach to enrichment
of multicultural science classrooms. Throughout the Institute, teachers will
themselves learn in the cooperative learning/problem solving mode, with
continuing attention to the needs of minority students. The major task will be
to develop new instructional units for teaching their science classes the
following year utilizing those modes. Cost sharing is equivalent to 52% of the
NSF award.