* 9155988
* The UCLA Science Challenge
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Orville Chapman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1995
* USD 354,000.00

Physical science majors at UCLA have deceased monotonically for 20 years. The
UCLA Science Challenge has accepted as its mission four goals: 1) retain current
science majors, 2) recruit new science majors, 3) attract minority students to
science, and 4) improve student attitudes toward science. UCLA serves an
unusually diverse student body chosen from the top 12.5% of California high
school graduates. Every student enters qualified to major in science. The six
departments that comprise the UCLA Science Challenge, Astronomy, Atmospheric
Science, Chemistry and Biochemistry, Earth and Space Science, Mathematics, and
Physics, taught approximately 6000 undergraduate students in lower-division
courses last year. More than 20% of these students are Black or Hispanic. We
have the student contact; we have an awesome opportunity. We have focused on
lower-division courses and laboratories, and we have experimented with methods.
We find that interactive, computer- based materials provide the most effective
and the most popular laboratory instruction. Interactive seminars and discussion
sessions, which have students at a computer terminal, have proved exceptionally
effective in teaching. Computationally intensive demonstration programs created
at UCLA have generated excitement in lectures. We are now converting these
demonstration programs to interactive student programs. Using these experiences,
we developed and implemented three new prototype courses in Astronomy,
Atmospheric Science, and Chemistry using interactive program modules. Student
response exceeded our wildest hopes. Cognitive Psychology evaluates our teaching
effectiveness and assesses student attitudes. We now are now radically
overhauling our lower-division science based on the creation of 11 new courses
and 18 new interdisciplinary laboratory modules.