* 9155345
* A Teacher Training Program in Biology:  The Science,        Techniques and Ethics of Molecular Biology
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1992,11/30/1995
* Kathleen O'Sullivan, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Curtis D. Howard
* 11/30/1995
* USD 986,875.00

The purpose of this two year program is 1) to continue a previous teacher
enhancement program for high school biology teachers in the areas of molecular
biology and biotechnology, and 2) to begin development of a cadre of teams of
lead teachers (two per team) capable of providing in-service training to other
teachers in their local areas. The program will provide 168 teachers with 1) A
laboratory-based, two-week workshop which will be held at one of four campuses
of the California State University System, 2) a symposium on related ethical and
social issues, 3) a follow-up meeting focused on the evaluation of supplementary
curricular materials for the regular, honors, and advanced placement courses in
biology, and 4) outreach support, via a mobile van and via scientist-educator
partnerships. The two-week laboratory-based workshop will provide theory and
methods in molecular biology, including transformation of bacteria and gene
splicing. The workshop will also address strategies for the implementation of
this material into the high school classroom. During a three day symposium, the
ethical and social issues related to these techniques will be addressed. In the
second year of the program, 12 teams of twenty-four former participants will be
selected (team members chosen from the same local areas) and trained at San
Francisco State University to lead local on-site workshops. The lead teacher
training workshop will provide additional in-depth training in molecular
biology, coupled with guidance in effective presentation to fellow teachers.
Furthermore, it will provide guidance in 1) establishing local support for
education projects in their communities, 2) the generation of industry support,
and 3) obtaining grant funds. Cost sharing represents 90.0% of the NSF award.