* 9155298
* Restructuring Elementary School Science
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1992,11/30/1997
* Robert Gibbs, Eastern Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 11/30/1997
* USD 1,144,799.00

This 5-year, district-wide leadership project is a cooperative effort of
Eastern Washington University (EWU) and the Spokane School District No. 81 (SD
81), and involves an extensive program of science education for elementary
school teachers to support the district's plan to dramatically restructure the
elementary school science curriculum. Each of the 36 district schools and
approximately 10 participating private elementary schools will form a school-
wide implementation team including the principal, two lead teachers, and members
of the school's instructional team. The 92 lead teachers will participate in a
4-week summer institute, follow-up meetings during the academic year, and an
additional 2-week institute during a subsequent summer. In addition to serving
as resource teachers and members of their school's implementation team, lead
teachers will assist project staff in developing and presenting short courses
and workshops to support implementation of the science curriculum. A number of
different levels and types of short courses will be provided for the
approximately 760 classroom teachers, to suit different levels of teacher
interest and commitment. This project is appropriate for the Teacher Enhancement
Program because of its systemic plan to enhance in a substantive way the science
teaching of all K-6 teachers in the Spokane school system. The cost-sharing
amount is approximately 76% of the amount requested from NSF.