* 9155206
* Encouraging High School Student Research in Biology Through Teacher - Scientist Partnerships
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1992,02/28/1999
* Mary Bellamy, National Association of Biology Teachers
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 02/28/1999
* USD 516,786.00

This project is a five year program that will develop twelve field tested,
open-ended research projects that can be used by biology teachers as
investigative science projects with first year biology students. The research
projects will be developed by biology teachers working with laboratory
scientists at the North Carolina Research Triangle Park and in the Washington,
D.C. area. The National Association of Biology Teachers will coordinate the
project. Twelve teams of two teachers will be paired with a scientist from a
university or industry and work in their laboratory for three weeks during the
summer of 1993. During this time the team will work with the researcher to
develop a simple, low cost, open-ended research project that can be used in
their classroom. The teachers will gain hands-on experience with the procedures
in the laboratory of the scientist and then field test the experiment with their
own students during the following academic year and modify it as needed. A
special education teacher will work with the NABT staff to modify the projects
for students with special needs, and the projects will then be field tested
nationwide. Input from the nationwide testing will then be used to modify the
projects further. They will then be compiled into a monograph which will be made
available to biology teachers nationwide. Project results will be disseminated
through inservice workshops at national and state science teacher conventions
and in local school districts. Cost sharing equals 16.8% of the NSF award.