* 9156165
* Symposium: Science as a Way of Knowing: Biodiversity; to be held December 27-30, 1992 in Vancouver, B.C.
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1992,09/30/1993
* Barbara Thorne, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 09/30/1993
* USD 22,424.00

A symposium will be held as part of the annual meeting of the American Society
of Zoologists in Vancouver, B.C., December 27- 30, 1992, on the topic of
Biodiversity, and the proceedings to be published can be used to develop
curricula in biodiversity for entry-level courses in colleges and universities.
The Science As A Way Of Knowing (SAAWOK) series is targeted to those who teach
first-year biology courses in colleges and universities and is sponsored by the
Education Committee of ASZ. Goals of SAAWOK are to encourage teachers to: 1)
emphasize the concepts of biology in entry-level courses, 2) relate how
scientific procedures lead to a better understanding of the natural world and to
the solution of many important human problems, and 3) present biology as a
relevant human discipline. The specific aims of this SAAWOK symposium are: 1)
presenting a symposium on a timely topic, Biodiversity, 2) providing hands-on
curricular materials on Biodiversity including symposium proceedings, overheads
and slides, and essays to the participating teachers, and 3) disseminating these
materials on a worldwide basis. Participants will include ASZ registrants as
well as college, university and high school teachers from the Northwest U.S. and
Canada who will be invited to register at a reduced fee. Materials will be
preprinted and distributed at the symposium and the symposium proceedings will
be published in the American Zoologist.