* 9156105
* Electrical Interactions and the Structure of Matter:        Qualitative Reasoning in an Electricity and Magnetism Course
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1992,07/31/1996
* Bruce Sherwood, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/1996
* USD 215,708.00

A fundamentally new course on electricity and magnetism is being developed. The
goal of the course is to teach students a unified approach to reasoning
qualitatively about a wide variety of electrical and magnetic interactions. The
students then use this approach in the process of solving both qualitative and
quantitative problems. The qualitative work is based on the physics of the basic
Coulomb interaction and of the atomic structure of matter. This is done
initially without the use of secondary concepts such as electric field, electric
potential, and Kirchhoff's rules. There is a heavy emphasis on teaching students
how to construct rigorous, qualitative explanations of physical phenomena,
including how to construct and use good diagrams as tools for both reasoning and
explaining. Experimental work is central to the course, but does not require
special laboratory sessions. Students work collaboratively in the lecture hall
on desktop experiments in electrostatics and DC circuits, and on the unified
analysis of these experiments, including circuits, in terms of the basic Coulomb
interaction and of the atomic structure of matter. The fundamental physical
understanding that results from this qualitative work is the foundation for the
more traditional and more quantitative material that forms the remainder of the
course. Instructional materials are being created and refined, and are being
used evaluate in detail the effect of instruction on the reasoning and problem-
solving processes of students.