* 9156179
* Physics and the 3 Rs: Recruit, Restructure and Retain. A    Laboratory Oriented, Introductory Physics Course by Guided  Inquiry to Attract & Retain Women and Minority Students
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1992,12/31/1995
* Gerald Meisner, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Program Director
* 12/31/1995
* USD 299,767.00

The Physics Department of UNCG and the Department of Mathematics and Computer
Science of Bennett College are testing an integrated two semester introductory
physics course for science majors. The course serves either as preparation for,
or as a replacement of the traditional survey course. The project is a
cooperative venture between a predominantly white state university of 11,000 and
a private college of 600 African American women. The project is evaluating the
effects of a decidedly different approach to the traditional two semester
introductory physics course on women, minority and 'second tier' students. The
attraction of the students to the course, the knowledge of physics gained and
retained during the course, and the retention rate of the students in the course
are all being measured. In addition, the future success in courses in the
physical sciences and mathematics will be monitored. The tenet behind the
proposed course comes from recent research in physics education, observations
collected by the PIs over many years of teaching introductory courses, recent
work done by the PI in Project PIEDMONT, documented evidence describing the low
entry rate and high attrition rate of women and non-Asian minorities in physical
sciences, and the demographic studies which profile the necessity of increasing
the numbers of these populations in the areas of science, mathematics and
engineering. Students in the proposed course are examining fewer subject areas
in greater depth than students in the usual survey course, and are doing so in
ways which are pedagogically more sound and intellectually more exciting. The
four-credit hour per semester course is being taught entirely in a laboratory
setting for two hours per day, three days a week. The students are developing a
firm foundation of concrete experiences through a method of guided inquiry, and
are being exposed to the use of modern data acquisition and analysis tools
through a microcomputer based laboratory component.