* 9156081
* A Multidisciplinary Approach to Improving Understanding of  Science and Technology for Non-Engineering Students
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1994
* Norman Smith, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/1994
* USD 53,716.00

Two new first year courses for non-science, non-engineering students will be
developed. The courses will examine, in a clear and practical way, important
technologies which affect everyday life. The technologies studied will
illustrate the application of science and mathematics to real world problems and
will show how the engineering method is applied to develop and continually
improve each example of technology. This partially quantitative study of
different technologies will be interesting to non-engineering students and will
greatly increase their technological literacy and insight to a level which
cannot come from the most rigorous mathematics or science courses. Subject
matter in the courses will change over time and will deal with topics of current
national or local interest such as Energy and Society, Electricity Supply,
Modern Communications, and Family Housing. Engineering, Arts, Humanities, and
Social Science faculty will participate together in the courses. Much of the
teaching will be done by Engineers, but each topic will be set in a social and
historical context. Field trips and laboratory projects will be incorporated as
much as possible. Achievement of the project objective will be measured by a
comparison of the attitudes, activities, and achievements of students who have
or have not taken the courses. The project is intended to provide a model for
other institutions interested in improving the scientific and technological
literacy of their non-science and non-engineering students.