* 9156142
* Integrating the Electronic Desktop into the Natural Science and Mathematics Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1992,01/31/1995
* Gary Novak, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/1995
* USD 250,000.00

Sciences CurriculumThis project's strategy is to develop curricula and a non-
traditional approach to teaching and learning of science/math for students who
are: science and math majors, education majors, and general education students.
The goals are to increase retention of majors, prepare capable teachers and
increase the scientific and technical literacy of citizens. Courses will be
offered in a highly visual, user- friendly, computer-based learning environment
CSLA's NeXT computer lab of 25 color workstations. Language barriers for the
highly diverse , multi-ethnic population of CSLA are less of a problem in an
interactive environment utilizing side-by- side pictures, animations, videos,
sounds, graphs, words and numbers. Also, techniques, concepts and demonstrations
which are too expensive, dangerous or which do not lend themselves to
traditional modes of instruction are taught. Faculty from Biology, Chemistry,
Geology and Physics will modify introductory courses including Science
Orientation, Intro Biology, Intro Chemistry, Quantitative Analysis,
Environmental Geology, General Physics, and Astronomy. These curricular changes
will involve 100 math, science and engineering undergraduate majors, 100
education majors, and 150 general education students annually. This project also
seeks to inspire and instruct other faculty about the intuitive, appealing and
quickly mastered electronic desktop techniques. Evaluation will be by external
review and through comparison of student performance using traditional versus
electronic desktop techniques. Results will be disseminated through publication,
professional presentations, and regional workshops.