* 9156200
* Global Ecology and the Preparation of Elementary Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1992,05/31/1995
* Joel Glassman, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/1995
* USD 90,747.00

To address the need to reform science education in the schools, a new course is
being developed for future elementary school teachers that will internationalize
the curriculum and demonstrate the impact of science on society. The objectives
of the course are to 1) increase students' knowledge of environmental and social
sciences, especially global issues, 2) increase students' enthusiasm to teach
about science by underscoring its relevance to society and social issues, and 3)
enhance the capacity of future elementary teachers to teach about the
environment, global issues and their relationship. The course in global ecology
will be required for all elementary education majors and will be a prerequisite
for science and social studies methods courses. It combines science and social
science perspectives and is to be taught jointly by biology and political
science faculty members. A special feature of this course will be the
development of field experiences at St. Louis institutions with a special
interest in ecological issues, such as the Missouri Botanical Garden, the St.
Louis Zoo and the St. Louis Science Center. Alternate exercises are being
developed to help teachers adapt the curriculum to local facilities and
conditions. A curriculum/implementation guide is being developed that will be
presented at a national conference and a local in-service conference.