* 9156079
* Incorporating Object-Oriented Concepts in the Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1992,10/31/1993
* Frank Friedman, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 10/31/1993
* USD 75,000.00

This project is aimed at a comprehensive redesign of the three- course
introductory computer science sequence for undergraduate computer and
information science majors. The course sequence wasexamined in the light of the
new ACM/IEEE report "Computing Curricula '91" to ascertain how best to revise
the courses to bring them closer to recommended curricula in the report. Some of
the fundamental and recurring concepts identified in the ACM/IEEE report, such
as complexity of large programs, levels of abstraction, the concept of binding,
abstract data types, evolution of requirements, and the importance of software
reuse, are not adequately represented in the current curriculum. The project
introduces these concepts through the introduction of object-oriented theory,
software engineering concepts, and object-oriented programming and design in the
introductory curriculum. It is believed that the object- oriented approach will
prove more effective in introducing the fundamental and recurring concepts
identified above. The objective of the proposed revision is to bring the
introductory computer science curriculum more in line with the current state-of-
the-art of software development technology. The project will provide the
students with access to class libraries, thus enabling them to develop
moderately large and realistic projects using contemporary application
development environments. The aim is to better prepare the students for advanced
undergraduate courses, graduate studies, and the competitive job market. The
changes are consistent with the sample course descriptions in the report
"Computing Curricula '91", hence it is believed that the results should be
generalizable to a large number of computer science departments.