* 9156238
* Computing Across the Basic Sciences
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1995
* Jack Wilson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/1995
* USD 320,421.00

Rensselaer is developing a series of cross-disciplinary activities at the
science/computer interface for use in the basic science courses at Rensselaer
and other universities. These materials will allow the introductory courses in
mathematics, physics, chemistry, computer science, engineering, and
earth/environmental science to reinforce one another through shared topics and
activities. The materials will also have the effect of encouraging the
instructors of the introductory courses to work more closely together than has,
in the past, been traditional at most universities. The materials to be
developed will include text materials, computer based problem-solving materials,
simulations, microcomputer based laboratory activities, and video materials.
These materials for topics relating to nonlinear phenomena are being developed
as a first step toward full implementation and as a demonstration of the
feasibility of this approach. The project centers on use of these workstations
in university level freshman and sophomore courses. It rests on a major
university initiative: the 4500 undergraduates have unlimited access to 500
state-of-the-art scientific workstations. Of these, over 320 are earmarked for
the exclusive use in freshman and sophomore courses. Rensselaer is preparing to
educate students in the basic sciences at the science/computer interface. The
structures of existing courses are being modified in order to allow students to
confront developing interface technologies. These include nonlinear modeling,
scientific computation, statistics, geometric modeling, and algorithm issues,
each from a multidisciplinary vantage point. Nonlinear modeling has been
selected as the initial project.