* 9156112
* Development of a set of "Closed Laboratories" for an        Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1992,06/30/1996
* William Wulf, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 06/30/1996
* USD 669,548.00

The objective of this project is to support the development, evaluation, and
export of a new curriculum and supporting materials focused around the practice
of computing, especially in the first two years. The thrust of the new
curriculum is based upon a core sequence of closed laboratories. Lecture
materials and content will be supportive of the laboratories rather than the
other way around. As a discipline, Computer Science has seen many dramatic
changes in its brief history. Through new textbooks and an evolving curriculum,
the content of undergraduate Computer Science education has for the most part
kept pace with these changes. But the pedagogy has hardly changed. It emphasizes
individual skill in writing short programs in a dead language, from scratch.
This emphasis is the antithesis of that needed by a contemporary computing
professional. This project develops a practice-centered undergraduate Computer
Science curriculum, and specifically develops a collection of laboratory
materials that support this approach. Central to the approach is an increased
degree of rigor in all courses, coupled with the early introduction and
subsequent use of modern software development methods and tools.The expectation
is that this pedagogical shift will have the highest leverage for improving
Computer Science education.