* 9156123
* Environmental Chemistry Curriculum Development for a Large  Introductory Course
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1992,02/29/1996
* Susan Kegley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 02/29/1996
* USD 209,505.00

Students in the freshman chemistry laboratory will be exposed to a variety of
chemical principles in the context of environmental chemistry. The goals of the
program are three: 1) to interest students in science early in their academic
careers, particularly women and minority students; 2) to expose students to
real-life issues that chemists face; and 3) to increase both the scientific
literacy and the writing skills of all students who participate. The program is
module-based, where each module focuses on a specific question that the students
must answer about a site of environmental interest. The questions are related to
the analysis of drinking water quality, lead deposition near freeways, and toxic
waste sites. A "discovery" method of teaching the course will be employed, in
which the students will be presented with a question and then must propose
answers themselves instead of being presented with a solution. Teamwork and
discussion in the area of decisionmaking will also be emphasized. After deciding
how they will answer the central question, the students will visit the sites,
take samples, and bring them back to the laboratory for testing. A variety of
sophisticated techniques will be utilized, including ion chromatography, atomic
absorption spectrometry, and gas chromatography. The students will hand in
written reports on their work instead of the usual "fill-in- the-blanks" type of
form used in many freshman chemistry labs. The final module will consist of
independent projects, with the topic chosen by the student. The projects will
require the student to use his or her knowledge of sampling, site assessment,
laboratory techniques, and writing skills to study an environmental problem and
present the results of that study to the rest of the class in a poster session
during the final laboratory period. An Advisory Committee and symposium on its
findings and products will accompany the project.