* 9157423
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Calculations of     Quantum Dynamical Processes in Gasses and Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,06/30/1996
* Frank J. Webster, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 06/30/1996
* USD 158,431.00

With this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Webster will calculate the dynamics and reactions of
isolated molecules and perform simulations of solvation and vibrational
relaxation in molecular liquids. A newly developed quantum molecular dynamics
algorithm for the real-time simulation of quantum dynamics in condensed matter
will be used to model the transient bleach recovery of the absorption of excess
electrons in molecular liquids. The techniques will be extended to many-body
quantum dynamics in order to accurately describe vibrational relaxation and
vibration-rotation and vibration-vibration energy transfer in neat liquids and
in mixtures. Environmental perturbations on electronic structure will be
incorporated into the quantum molecular dynamics algorithm either through
parameterization of environmental effects or through electronic calculations
performed in parallel with dynamics runs. This hybrid scheme will describe the
dynamics responsible for electronic relaxation, electronic dephasing and line
widths, and the chemistry of radicals and open shell species in solution. %%%
This Presidential Young Investigator award will support the research of Dr.
Frank J. O. Webster in the area of molecular dynamics. These simulations of
molecular dynamics in solutions will lead to a better understanding of chemical
reactions, nonlinear transport, and photoselective chemistry in solution.