* 9157667
* Presidential Young Investigator Award: City Structure and Regional Change in Europe
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1998
* Alexander Murphy, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 02/28/1998
* USD 268,711.00

This award provides support for Dr. Alexander Murphy through the National
Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Program. The objective of
this program is to provide research support for some of the nation's most
outstanding and promising young science and engineering faculty members. The
awards are intended to improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to
respond to the demand for highly qualified scientists and engineers for academic
and industrial research and teaching. This award will allow Dr. Murphy to
continue his research in political geography on evolving regional structures and
ideologies in the Europe and other parts of the globe. He plans to pay special
attention to development of critical locales within the European Community,
starting with Brussels, a city that has played a central role in the integration
of Western Europe and that likely will undergo dramatic transformation in the
next decades. In addition to studying the role and relationships of specific
places within dynamically redefined regions, the investigator also will examine
the concentration of power within central institutions that exert great
influence within regions, and he will explore the implications of such
concentrations on human use and misuse of the natural environment. Studies of
regional structures and water allocation in the Pacific Northwest of the U.S.
will be followed by analyses of water use and pollution in along the Scheldt
River of north central Europe, thereby enhancing understandings of the
environmental impacts of regional restructuring.