* 9157535
* Presidential Young Investigator Award: Molecular Behavior   in Complex Fluid Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1996
* Dor Ben-Amotz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 12/31/1996
* USD 296,827.00

Professor Dor Ben-Amotz is supported by a grant from the Experimental Physical
Chemistry Program for studies of the behavior of molecules in complex fluid
materials. The goal of these studies is to gain an understanding of the
structure and dynamics in these systems at the microscopic level. The research
is in three parts: (1) Raman and time-resolved fluorescence/phosphorescence
depolarization studies of the changes in the vibration and rotation of molecules
under turbulent flow, (2) studies of surface-adsorbed molecules at solid-liquid
interfaces at high pressures by the same techniques, and (3) development of
molecular probes for in situ optical measurements of temperature, pressure,
viscosity in inhomogeneous fluids. %%% The key questions to be adressed in the
research supported by this Presidential Young Investigator Award are: To what
extent do turbulent structures persist at the molecular scale? Is the
distribution of local solvent cage densities significantly affected by turbulent
flow? An understanding of fluid behavior under turbulent flow has important
implications in lubrication and drag reduction technologies. Raman spectroscopy
will be used to fingerprint chemical changes on surfaces of fluids in contact
with high surface area metal powders. A long term goal is the development of new
strategies for catalysis, synthesis, separation, and analysis of complex fluid
materials.