* 9157371
* PYI:  Loop Transformations and Scheduling Strategies for    Parallelization Software
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1991,01/31/1998
* Rajiv Gupta, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 01/31/1998
* USD 276,059.00

A framework for studying the interactions among loop transformation and
scheduling strategies and a parallelization tool that allows experimentation
with alternative parallelization strategies will be developed. The tool will
accept architectural information to assist in the application of transformations
and selection of schedules. The results obtained from studying these
interactions will be applied in the development of an integrated approach to
loop transformation and scheduling. In this approach the loop parallelization
process will be composed of three major phases. The first phase, the parallelism
detection phase, will perform dependency analysis to identify loops that can be
executed in parallel. In addition, it will perform transformations, such as
renaming, to convert sequential loops into parallel loops. The second phase, the
parallelism scheduling phase, will select an appropriate scheduling strategy.
The goal here will be to choose a strategy that involves minimal run-time
scheduling overhead and results in schedules that provide good load balancing
and high processor utilization. The final phase, the parallelism enhancement
phase, will transform the loops to increase the efficiency with which
parallelism is exploited. The transformations that exploit architectural
characteristics will be applied to reduce synchronization and communication
overhead. Any decisions to utilize special hardware features will be made in
this phase. Decisions of activities performed in the later phases will be based
upon the decisions made in the earlier phases. An integrated strategy will allow
convenient application of transformations after schedules have been generated.
It will also ensure that the scheduling strategy does not undo the effects of
transformations that had been applied.