* 9157717
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Study of the        Mechanism of Solid State Reactions and Their Controlling    Factors
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1991,12/31/1996
* Chong Zheng, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Komornicki
* 12/31/1996
* USD 153,000.00

With this Presidential Young Investigator award from the Theoretical and
Computational Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Zheng will utilize
newly developed computer simulation technology to study the mechanism of solid
state reactions. Three issues will be addressed: (1) What is the solid structure
with global minimum free energy given a certain stoichiometric ratio of
reactants? (2) Given a structure, what is the typical kinetic barrier in a solid
reaction from the reactants to the products? (3) What is the microscopic
mechanism of a solid state reaction? The Monte Carlo algorithm or molecular
dynamics method combined with a simulated annealing optimization scheme will be
used to search for the global or local free energy minimum. The kinetic barrier
will be computed by means of the free energy perturbation method of McCammon.
The reaction activation free energy will be calculated classically, or quantum
mechanically with the Feynman path integral technique. %%% In this project
theoretical and computational methods will be used to predict the products of
solid state reactions, the magnitudes of the barriers to such reactions and the
mechanisms by which these reactions occur. The results are expected to be useful
in guiding the synthesis of novel materials.