* 9157002
* Presidential Young Investigator/Development of Chiral,      Self-Replicating Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1996
* Scott Rychnovsky, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 12/31/1996
* USD 297,600.00

Self-reproduction is a central feature of living systems but is almost
unprecedented in simple chemical systems. A promising system to be studied to
initiate the development of such capacity in a chemical system is the reaction
of an achiral alpha-heteroaldehyde with a dialkylzinc reagent. Dialkylzinc
addition to aldehydes is normally a very slow reaction but can be catalyzed by
the zinc alkoxides produced in the reaction and thus these systems show
autocatalytic behavior. Recent studies showed that the ethylzinc salt of
(R)-1-phenylpropanol (70%ee) catalyzes the addition of diethylzinc to
benzaldehyde, producing (R)-1-phenylpropanol (17%ee). In this system the chiral
catalyst generates its own enantiomer from achiral starting materials as it must
to reproduce itself, but the reaction's low enantioselectivity leads to mainly a
racemic mixture; much better enantioselective catalysts have been developed for
the addition of diethylzinc to benzaldehyde. They all incorporate a second
coordination site in the alkoxide, usually a nitrogen. The goal of this work is
to design a system where an achiral aldehyde substrate leads to a chiral
alkoxide which is an efficient, enantioselective catalyst for its own formation.
One of the most remarkable features of the aminoalcohol catalyst systems is that
they show a positive nonlinear effect. The monomeric alkoxides are the active
catalysts, but they will dimerize in solution to give inactive dimers. The
racemic dimer which is the most stable, is in effect removed from the catalytic
system, thus increasing the enantioselectivity. Monomeric and dimeric structures
of the catalysts will be designed and modeled to produce a positive nonlinear
effect by this mechanism. A successful reaction system will produce a chiral
alkoxide with increasing enantiomeric excess as the reaction proceeds. Dr. Scott
Rychnovsky is being given the Presidential Young Investigator Award from the
Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program to support his research to develop chiral,
self-replicating molecules. This work has the potential to revolutionize how the
complex chiral molecules will be synthesized in the future and completely change
the nature of the strategic plans that are developed by the chemist in attacking
new structures.