* 9157920
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1991,02/28/1998
* Jay Gore, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 02/28/1998
* USD 304,900.00

National energy policy must address the greenhouse effect due to CO2 and the
continuing threat to world peace caused partly by dependence on foreign oil.
Effective use of environmentally benign alternate fuels should be on the
national agenda. This PYI Award will enable Professor Gore and his group to
contribute more effectively to the efforts now underway to reconcile energy
needs, environmental safety and world peace. In the first two years of the PYI
award, Professor Gore will concentrate on exploring the advantages of
nonpremixed combustion in porous ceramic matrices, recirculating ceramic fibers
and particles. Porosity, fiber thickness and strength requirements will be
defined and communicated to material scientists. In the third and the fourth
year, experimental and theoretical research concerning the basic flame structure
and radiative transfer with directional scattering in a participating reacting
medium will be undertaken. In the final year of the award, optimum fiber loading
for preventing flame quenching and excessive radiation blockage in different
furnace configurations will be studied. Proposals for matching support and
transfer of technology to practical scales will be developed throughout the
grant period. The experimental research approach will involve optical
measurements of heat transfer and combustion properties using infrared imaging
and multidirectional scattering spectroscopy. Theoretical approach will involve
transient solutions of reacting flow and radiation properties. In addition to
the development of an environmentally attractive strategic technology, the
research is expected to result in much needed property data for high temperature
ceramics and advance the understanding in two relatively unexplored areas: (1)
highly nonadiabatic combustion, (2) radiative transport in participating media
with directional scattering.