* 9157411
* Presidential Young Investigator Award/Research in           Bioinorganic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1991,12/31/1993
* H. Holden Thorp, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1993
* USD 125,000.00

Nucleic acid biophysics and DNA-small molecule interactions will be investigated
by constructing monolayer electrodes with pendant DNA intercalators such as
ethidium and exposing these surfaces to aqueous solutions of nucleic acid. The
specific aims are: 1) to assemble and characterize monolayer electrodes with
pendant functionalities known to bind DNA, 2) to study the binding of DNA to
these electrodes and the biophysics of the bound nucleic acid, 3) to study the
interactions of exogenous metallointercalators with the bound DNA, and 4) to
investigate the energetics of DNA cleavage by bound drugs such as bleomycin. In
a separate but related project use will be made of the diverse, new technology
of polymer-modified electrodes to construct model metalloenzymes. In these
systems, the electron relay will be provided by the electrode, and the protein
environment will be simulated by the polymer film. %%% Dr. H. Holden Thorp of
North Carolina State University is supported as a Presidential Young
Investigator by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
Program. Dr. Thorp's project is in the area of bioinorganic chemistry and has
the key goals of improving our understanding of the interactions of metal
complexes with DNA and modeling the structure and function of redox
metalloenzymes. Extensive application of recent advances in the preparation of
chemically modified electrodes will be made.