* 9157368
* PYI:  Database support for scientific data.
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1991,08/31/1998
* Yannis Ioannidis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/1998
* USD 312,500.00

Optimization of complex queries in future database systems is a major focus of
this work. The applicability of randomized algorithms for query optimization is
investigated for several types of database systems, e.g., relational, object-
oriented, and parallel systems. Emphasis is placed on identifying the abstract
characteristics of cost functions and data models that determine the
effectiveness of such algorithms. Of special concern is also the propagation of
errors in parameters that affect the query optimizer's decisions. This research
leads to developing techniques for query optimization in future systems where
current technology is inadequate. Another focus of this work is the study of
specialized database systems for managing data from scientific experiments. The
emphasis is on graphical user interfaces and semantic heterogeneity.
Collaborating scientists from many disciplines provide guidelines for the
goalsof this effort based on the needs of their laboratories. This research
develops tools that enables such scientists to use database technology
effectively for their experiments. Although this work is driven by the specific
needs of scientific databases, its results can be applied to solve many similar
problems faced by next generation database systems in general.