* 9158040
* PYI:  Monte-Carlo Simulations of Rough Surface Scattering   Using Finite Element and Finite Difference Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1997
* Chi Chan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 07/31/1997
* USD 309,194.00

The fundamental understanding of wave scattering by random rough surface is
important in a variety of engineering and scientific applications. In radio
oceanography, for example, radar returns from the sea surface are used to probe
ocean wave characteristics. In solid state physics, the theory ofrough surface
scattering is used to study quantum scattering of atoms from crystal surfaces.
Monte Carlo simulations of random rough surfaces are customarily done with the
integral equation and the extended boundary condition methods. We haverecently
applied the partial differential equation techniques of finite differences and
finite elements in the frequency domain to the problem of one- dimensional rough
surface scattering. The attractiveness of these methods is the banded nature of
the resulting matrix equation. On the other hand, when these techniques are
applied in the time domain, the need of inverting large matrices can be
eliminated. In this project, frequency- and time- domain finite difference and
finite element techniques will be developed for the statistical analysis of 1-D
and 2-D random rough surfaces. Parallel computation algorithms using these
techniques and the inverse problem of determining the surface statistics from
the scattering responses using neural network techniques will also be
investigated.