* 9158182
* PYI:  Evolutionary History of Double Fertilization and the  Endosperm
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1991,09/30/1996
* William Friedman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jereatha Coleman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 182,226.00

The evolutionary history of double fertilization and endosperm, two of the most
important reproductive features associated with the origin and success of
flowering plants will be examined. The developmental fate of the second
fertilization in the genus Ephedra, a non-flowering seed plant and a basal
member of the most closely related extant group of plants (Gnetales) to the
angiosperms, will be studied. The ultimate goal of this work is to determine
whether the second fertilization product in Ephedra exhibits endosperm-like
qualities that would support a new hypothesis for a pre-flowering plant origin
of endosperm. Evidential support for this hypothesis would fundamentally alter
our current concepts of the evolutionary history and origins of flowering
plants. A second set of studies will examine mate choice in non- flowering seed
plants. Although more than fifty percent of flowering plant species exhibit some
type of genetic incompatibility mechanism that prevents the fertilization of
ovules by pollen from closely related individuals, evidence for similar
incompatibility systems among non-flowering seed plants, is rare. Initial
studies using Douglas fir have, for the first time, documented pre-zygotic
response to pollen quality outside of flowering plants. Planned studies will
examine the competitive effects of mixed genetic loads of pollen (and female
response to the genetic constitution of pollen) in loblolly pine, a major
forestry crop in the southeastern US.