* 9158022
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Electro-optic      Anisotropic Waveguides with Optical Nonlinearities.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1991,01/31/1998
* Theresa Maldonado, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 01/31/1998
* USD 312,495.00

The plan of the PI is to establish a research program in the analysis, design,
and experimental evaluation of electro-optic anisotropic (biaxial) waveguide
devices, such as laser modulators. Specific aspects of this program will be 1)
developing analysis - techniques based on derived theory of the PI, 2) designing
new devices using these techniques, and 3) fabricating and characterizing these
devices. Previous work of the PI, based on exact electromagnetic theory with no
simplifying assumptions, provides new insight into the nature of propagating
hybrid modes in these structures. This theory will be extended to quantify
analytically how the electro-optic effect can be utilized to control cutoff and
waveguiding as a function of applied voltage and wavelength. Furthermore, the
knowledge gained on biaxial waveguides will be applied to optimize phase-
matching conditions and coherence lengths for efficient second harmonic
generation in waveguides. LiNbO3 and GaAs are commonly used materials which
possess both electro-optic (induced anisotropy) and second harmonic generation
properties. This research will result in analysis techniques, not presently
available, to design and evaluate practical waveguides with anisotropy and
second order optical effects at different voltage levels, applied voltage
directions, and wavelengths. The experimental program will be initiated with a
look at GaAs waveguides.