* 9158473
* PYI:  Real-Time AI, Cooperative Problem Solving, and        Intelligent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1991,07/31/1998
* Edmund Durfee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 07/31/1998
* USD 257,500.00

This is the first year base amount funding of a five-year PYI continuing award.
This PYI will continue his research on distributed artificial intelligence (AI)
with an emphasis on building intelligent computing systems for dynamic,
multiagent applications. The research uses blackboard systems and other
integrating architectures that allow an agent's perception, reasoning,
communication, and motor components to collectively control an agent's behavior.
The PI is also pursuing work in real-time artificial intelligence. He is working
on developing preliminary theories of real-time reasoning that account for both
meeting deadlines and for negotiating to change deadlines. This work on
techniques for negotiating ties into his additional research interest in
uncovering the general principles underlying coordination between intelligent
agents. The goal is to build interdisciplinary theories of coordination, drawing
on concepts from management science and operations research as well as AI, and
to embody these theories in practical mechanisms for coordinating multiple
intelligent computing systems. The near term plan is to develop a core of
interdisciplinary concepts using a hierarchy of behavioral specifications as a
common representation, with the long-term objective of developing fundamental
theories of a science of coordination. The researcher is also interested in
applying techniques for coordinating AI systems to problems in human-human and
human- computer interactions.