* 9158499
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Millimeter-Wave     Integrated Antennas and Receivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1991,08/31/1998
* Gabriel Rebeiz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Magdy F. Iskander
* 08/31/1998
* USD 314,026.00

The traditional application areas of millimeter-wave radiation are in the fields
of radio-astronomy, remote sensing, plasma diagnostics, and imaging through dust
and fog in military situations. It is the purpose of my Presidential Young
Investigator research effort to develop low-cost millimeter-wave integrated
antennas, receivers and transmitting systems. This research will open the doors
to many civilian application areas such as collision avoidance systems, landing
systems, small portable communication systems, etc. Providing high performance
and less expensive receivers will also enhance the radio-astronomical and
remote- sensing application areas. The proposed research plan is as follows: l)
Develop 100-500 GHz low-noise planar receivers using high- efficiency integrated
horn antennas and Schottky- diodes. Also, use newly-developed 90 GHz low-noise
amplifiers with a planar antenna and a CPW (coplanar-waveguide) matching network
to result in a low-noise receiver with gain. 2) Generate efficiently 100-1000
GHz radiation from solid-state sources such as planar varactors and transistors
coupled to antennas. Different circuit configurations that allow phase-locking
and frequency sweeping will be investigated. The output can be used as local
oscillator in a receiver set-up or as a transmitter for short-range radar
applications.