* 9160680
* Holographic Coatings for Telescopes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1992,09/30/1992
* Tin Aye, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1992
* USD 49,988.00

During the past year, Physical Optics Corporation (POC) has been successful in
fabricating holographic rugate structures for the UV, visible, and very near IR
regions of the spectrum. These holographic mirrors demonstrated laser damage
thresholds which were 5 times better than the best dielectric multilayer
coatings, with reflectivities in excess of 99.9%. This research project proposes
to extend this holographic rugate technology to the region from 1 um to 3um. The
holographic recording process for the IR region should also yield ultra high
damage thresholds and be easily scalable to very large optics. The holographic
processes employed use low temperature deposition methods and an integration of
holographic coatings with gratings. These gratings can be used as beam samplers
to output couplers. The potential for a simple fabrication process, low
absorption characteristics of the recording medium, and a demonstrated radiation
harness make POC'S coating process an ideal new technology for civilian and
military applications. POC's approach will greatly reduce structural weight,
thermal load and cost compared to existing coating technologies since it can be
applied to light-weigh substrates such as graphic-epoxy, mylar, aluminum, and
ultra-thin glass. Moreover, initial experimental results have demonstrated that
the coating has no degrassing problem.