* 9160939
* Isotope Ratio and Trace Elemental Imaging of Minerals by    Secondary Ion Mass Spectometry
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1992,09/30/1992
* Ronald Fleming, Charles Evans & Associates
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1992
* USD 49,987.00

This is a proposal to develop secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) based
imaging isotope ratio techniques for isotopic microanalysis of mineral deposits.
This capability will be combined with SIMS based trace element microanalysis.
The petrogenesis of ore deposits often involves an aqueous solution by which the
ore-bearing components are transported. These hydrothermal solutions also
transport sulfur. Different aqueous processes give rise to different 34S/32S
isotope fractionations. The 34S/32S ratios can provide important indications of
the sulfur origin, and by extension, the origin of economically important
metals. Isotope ratio and trace element imaging show the interrelationships of
different mineral generations. These generations often coexist within a single
mineral grain. The PIs have demonstrated that imaging SIMS can successfully
identify the location of trace gold levels ("invisible" gold) in pyrite rims,
and that isotope ratio imaging of meteoritic materials highly enriched in
deuterium is possible. However, extension to 34S/32S isotope ratio imaging
requires further innovation and many careful measurements. In Phase II, these
imaging techniques will be extended to microanalytical age dating and
microanalytical trace element petrogenesis.