* 9160461
* Combustion Synthesis of Fullerenes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1992,09/30/1992
* John Wright, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1992
* USD 50,000.00

Fullerenes, a new form of carbon with structures similar to those of a soccer
ball, were first produced in late 1990. Because of their unique properties, many
promising applications have been suggested; however, no matter how interesting
their properties, development of the potential of fullerenes requires that large
quantities be available at a relatively low price. Although the currently
conventional carbon-arc production method is simple to build and run at the
laboratory scale, it is an inherently small-scale batch process, difficult to
scale up, energy intensive, and very expensive. TDA is therefore pursuing a
combustion synthesis process as an approach to produce large quantities of low-
cost fullerenes. Combustion processes are continuous, easy to scale up, allow
fine control of time-temperature history (important for optimization of product
yield), have low capital costs, and use inexpensive hyrocarbon fuels as raw
materials. TDA has successfully isolated fullerenes from combustion soot and has
developed thermodynamic models to predict the dependence of product yield on
operating conditions which will be utilized in the experimental program to be
carried out. In the first phase of this program, TDA will investigate the
effects of temperature, pressure, equivalence ratio, and input fuel composition
in order to optimize the yield of fullerenes, and will use these data to analyze
design and economics for the combustion route to fullerenes. Although fullerenes
have been available for less than a year, many applications of this unique class
of materials have been suggested. For these applications, a low-cost source of
large quantities of product are required. Combustion processes are a preferred
route due to relatively low energy requirements and their amenability to
scaleup. Major interest in this program has been expressed by chemical
manufacturers.