* 9160294
* Photobleachable Host-Guest Thin Films for Optical Waveguides
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1992,09/30/1992
* Bret Halpern, Jet Process Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1992
* USD 50,000.00

Optical integrated circuits will be at the heart of future high speed fiber
optic communications. These circuits require thin film optical components such
as waveguides, couplers, and multiplexers. However, at present there exists no
technique for fabrication of thin film components that is simple, fast,
versatile, reliable and inexpensive. The most basic optical component is the
thin film passive waveguide, in which channels of different index of refraction,
patterned in a thin film, serve to conduct lightwaves. A straightforward low -
cost technique for making waveguides would have wide applicability to hybrid
optical integrated circuits, since other optical components could be generated
with the same technology. In Phase I we demonstrate a novel waveguide
fabrication method. We will use thin films of SiNx, Si0x, and SiCx that have
been photosensitized by incorporation of bleachable organic dyes. These films
will be masked and exposed to radiation; the resulting waveguide structures will
be tested and evaluated. Bleaching of embedded dyes has been used to pattern
polymer films. The innovative element in our process is the use of hard "glass"
host-guest films, made by Jet Vapor Deposition. JVD allows room temperature
deposition of dye-doped glass films on existing silicon based microelectronic
circuits. JVD also has advantages in speed, flexibility and cost over sol-gel,
CVD and high vacuum sputtering approaches. Successful completion of this project
will advance the development of hybrid integrated optical circuits for fiber
optic communications.