* 9160381
* Crosslinked Enzyme Crystals as Catalysts in Organic         Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1992,09/30/1992
* Manuel Navia, Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1992
* USD 49,556.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is in the general
area of chemical synthesis in the subfield of chemical catalysis. Enzyme
catalyzed processes offer significant advantages over traditional chemical
methods in organic syntheses, including superior efficiency, stereoselectivity,
and specificity. However, soluble and conventionally immobilized enzymes are
often inactive under typical laboratory or manufacturing conditions, which may
include high temperatures, extremes of pH, near- anhydrous organic solvents, and
mixed aqueous-organic solvents. Enzyme crystals, cross-linked using a
bifunctional reagent such as glutaraldehyde, constitute a novel form of enzyme
immobilization. Such cross-linked enzyme crystals (CLECs) are superior to
conventionally immobilized enzymes in many respects. For example, the crystal
lattice interactions, supplemented by chemical cross- links, provide the
individual enzyme molecules within a CLEC with an enhanced stability that
enables CLECs to function in harsh environments (such as elevated temperatures
and organic solvents) that would not otherwise be compatible with catalytic
activity. These features make CLECs valuable as stereospecific catalytic
reagents. In this Phase I study, CLECs of pig liver esterase (PLE) and pig
pancreatic lipase (PPL) will be investigated to demonstrate the practical
feasibility of CLECs as laboratory catalysis in organic syntheses. Esterase and
lipase enzymes were chosen for their superior catalytic characteristics compared
with current chemical methods for stereospecific hydrolysis and reduction.