* 9160346
* Synthesis of New Photoreagents for Photochemical            Immobilization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1992,09/30/1992
* Richard Amos, SurModics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1992
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is in the
general area of polymer modification in the subfield of organic synthesis. The
selection of a polymer for use in a biomedical application is based upon the
physical characteristics of the polymer such as strength and flexibility and
upon the biocompatibility of the material with tissue. Often compromises must be
made between these two conflicting requirements. The ideal solution to this
problem is to enable the selection of the polymer based solely on the physical
properties and then provide a tenacious surface coating which imparts the
required biocompatibility properties. The coating reagent must be capable of
covalent bonding to a variety of polymer surfaces and imparting the desired
surface properties. This project will focus on the synthesis of new
photoreactive groups having improved photocoupling capabilities including
wavelength of activation and reactivity toward less reactive polymer surfaces.
These new reagents will be incorporated into coating molecules to assess their
ability to surface modify the polymer. Two representative coating systems will
be investigated, one intended to impart a lubricous surface and the other to
generate a nonthrombogenic coating. A variety of polymer substrates will be
utilized and these reagents will be used to coat devices provided by customers.