* 9160718
* Low Viscosity Perfluorinated Smectic C Hosts for Use in FastSpatial Light Modulators
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1992,09/30/1992
* Michael Wand, Displaytech Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1992
* USD 49,906.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is in the
general area of chemical synthesis in the subfield of ferroelectricity. The long
range scientific goals of this research are to increase understanding of the
correlation of molecular structure with physical properties of tilted liquid
crystal phases, and to test strategies for design of new materials.
Specifically, the work is aimed at inventing new low viscosity and low
birefringence smectic C Hosts for use with high polarization ferroelectric
liquid crystal (FLC) dopants. Such low viscosity smectic C hosts, in combination
with the proper chiral FLC dopants, would have application in flat panel
displays and spatial light modulators (SLMs) requiring the fastest rise times.
Ferroelectric (chiral) smectic C* liquid crystals have been shown to exhibit
high speed, multistate electro-optic and display device applications,
particularly when incorporated into the surface stabilized ferroelectric liquid
crystal (SSFLC) light valve. Flat panel displays based upon the SSFLC device
concept have many potential advantages. However, due to the high birefringence
and relatively slow speed of existing materials, SSFLC light valves prove
problematical in some important applications. Both of these problems--high
birefringence and slow switching speed--are addressed by the creation of a new
class of perfluorinated FLC hosts.