
* 0071338
* 'The Nonlinear Dynamical Foundations of Transition State Theory in Systems with Three or More Degrees-of-Freedom'
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,08/28/2000
* Stephen Wiggins,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2001
* USD 70,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0071338 Mathematical Sciences: The Nonlinear Dynamical
Foundations of Transition State Theory in Systems with Three or More Degrees of
Freedom

Abstract

0071338 Wiggins



This research project is concerned with understanding the nonlinear dynamical
foundations of transition state theory in systems with three or more degrees of
freedom. While there has been much progress along these lines for two degree-of-
freedom systems, there has been little progress of a similar nature for systems
with three or more degrees-of-freedom. The geometrical point of view of
dynamical systems theory offers a framework for discovering the types of higher
dimensional phase space structures that govern reaction rates and energy flow in
molecules. We will apply this approach to several problems: three dimensional
Rydberg atoms in crossed electric and magnetic fields, the London-Eyring-
Polanti-Sato potential, rotation-vibration interaction in formaldehyde, and a
study of energy flow through resonances in carbonyl sulphide (OCS). In each case
we will show that there are higher dimensional phase space structures that act
as a "transition state." Indeed, it may even be possible to generalize the very
useful idea of a periodic orbit dividing surface to systems with three or more
degrees of freedom. Our research will also focus on developing computational
approaches to realize these geometric structures in these specific problems. We
will also develop a wavelet-based frequency map analysis tool for studying
energy flow in resonances. This work will be carried out in collaboration with
chemists and physicists, as well as computational scientists.

This project investigates fundamental questions concerning chemical reactions.
The underlying mathematical questions involve the nonlinear dynamical
foundations of transition state theory in systems with three or more degrees of
freedom. This is the fundamental theory that allows predictions concerning
chemical reaction dynamics. While there is a fairly complete understanding of
this theory for simple, low dimensional, systems, there is as yet no analogous
theoretical framework for more physically realistic high dimensional systems.
Such a theory will involve mathematical description of surfaces in dimensions
larger than four and will require development of computational tools for
realizing and visualizing such surfaces. This will result in a detailed
understanding of the dynamics of how molecules break up and of how atoms combine
to form molecules. The research is interdisciplinary, involving the
collaboration of chemists, physicists, and computational scientists.


