
* 0071744
* Asymptotic Methods in Financial Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,07/31/2000
* Jean-Pierre Fouque,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2003
* USD 114,896.00

Title: Asymptotic Methods in Financial Mathematics (NSF-DMS-0071744 revised
5/23/00)

Principal Investigator/Project Director: Jean-Pierre Fouque

Technical Description: Pricing and hedging derivatives in financial markets
with fast mean-reverting stochastic volatility lead to singular perturbations of
parabolic partial differential equations such as Black-Scholes equation in the
case of stock markets. This research consists in developing the mathematical
tools necessary to implement this new methodology in various situations such as
American and exotic options in equity markets or term-structures of interest
rates in fixed income markets. The first step in this method requires an
identification of the time scales present in the hidden stochastic volatility
processes. This has been done for S&P500 by using variograms and spectral
analysis methods. Other tools and markets will be investigated The second step
consists in modeling the evolution of the price process by means of stochastic
differential equations with volatility coefficients driven by additional general
ergodic processes running on faster time-scales. Risk-neutral probabilities are
parameterized by market prices of volatility risk. In the Markovian case,
derivative prices are obtained as solutions of partial differential equations,
which are singular perturbations of the corresponding classical constant
volatility equations. Asymptotic expansions are performed. The zero-order terms
correspond to classical constant volatility situations. The first-order terms
are shown to depend only on current prices and they are computed either
explicitly or through the resolution of a partial differential equation. The
case of American options leads to singular perturbations of free-boundary value
problems that will be studied in detail. The hedging problem will be treated by
a martingale decomposition approach also used in non-Markovian cases or infinite
dimensional situations arising in fixed income markets. The next step consists
in the calibration of the few parameters revealed in the first correction
obtained in the expansion. This is done by using observed derivative prices in
liquid markets and used for pricing other exotic derivatives. This new
methodology to handle incomplete stochastic volatility markets gives rise to
model independent pricing and hedging formulas easy to calibrate and to compute.
Its mathematical analysis, the heart of this proposal, touches various fields of
applied mathematics and leads to far reaching new tools and results. Non-
Technical Description: This project addresses problems in financial mathematics
of pricing and hedging derivative securities in an environment of uncertain and
changing market volatility. These risk management problems are important to
investors from large trading institutions to pension funds and to regulators of
financial markets and economic activity such as the federal reserve. It is
widely recognized that the simplicity of the famous Black-Scholes model which
relates derivative prices to current stock prices and quantifies risk through a
constant volatility parameter is no longer sufficient to capture modern market
phenomena, especially since the 1987 crash. This research consists in the
investigation of a new method for modeling, analysis and estimation that
exploits the random nature and fast intrinsic time scale of the volatility.
These observed volatility properties are used to derive corrections to the
classical constant volatility formulas. These corrections reveal important
groupings of market parameters, which otherwise are not obvious, and it turns
out that estimation of these composites from market data is extremely efficient
and stable. Much attention will be devoted to the more mathematically involved
cases of American options, which can be exercised at any time before maturity,
or other increasingly popular exotic options, which depend on the history of the
underlying asset. New and original methods, based on the fundamental concept of
martingale in probability theory, are developed to handle complex fixed income
markets, for which the understanding of the time evolution of yield curves of
interest rates is a real challenge. The goal of this research is to produce
sophisticated mathematical results, which can be efficiently implemented and
used by practitioners in quantitative finance.
