
* 0071877
* International Workshop: Methods for Macromolecular Modeling
* DMS,Molecular Biophysics, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
* 07/15/2000,07/14/2000
* Tamar Schlick,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 20,000.00

Schlick 0071877 The investigator and her colleagues organize a multidisciplinary
workshop on methods for macromolecular modeling. The aim is to bring together
both developers of computational tools for biomolecular simulations and those
biological and chemical scientists who use computer modeling to study
macromolecular problems. The workshop highlights recent advances in simulation
techniques, most notably in the areas of conformational sampling, fast
electrostatics, molecular dynamics integration, and quantum-mechanical
calculations, that are having significant impact on structural biology. It
surveys developments in algorithmic approaches, hierarchical spatial
representations, and improved computing platforms that continue to enhance the
reliability of macromolecular simulations and increase their applicability and
relevance to biomolecular research. The topics highlighted are: (1) new methods
for long-term molecular dynamics simulations; (2) conformational sampling:
equilibrium and nonequilibrium processes; (3) multiscale modeling; (4)
quantum/classical mechanics; (5) fast electrostatics; and (6) applications to
enzyme catalysis, DNA modeling, and DNA/protein systems. The workshop is held at
the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences at New York University on October
12-14 and co-sponsored by SIAM (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics),
as part of SIAM's new Activity Group in the Life Sciences, as well as by
National Science Foundation programs in Applied Mathematics, Computational
Mathematics, Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, and Molecular Biophysics.
Computational methods are increasingly being recognized as valuable tools for
the study of biomolecular structure and function. The interdisciplinary nature
of biomolecular computational approaches is largely driven by the many important
practical applications in the field, such as drug design, biomedical
engineering, and food chemistry. The workshop program provides a timely and
unique opportunity for close interaction and scientific exchange among
biomolecular researchers, computer scientists, and applied mathematicians. In
the era of integrative science, such synergy kindles new ideas and helps educate
young scientists for cross-disciplinary research at the interface of
computational science and biology. The meeting brings researchers abreast of
current developments in algorithms and computational methods. It also highlights
critical problems in structural biology and new application areas, and it
fosters interdisciplinary collaborations. The results of the workshop are
disseminated through the collected scientific articles by the invited speakers,
which will be published in Springer Verlag's Lecture Notes series in
Computational Science and Engineering (LNCSE). These tangible records, in
addition to a carefully designed program, are expected to serve the community by
educating junior scientists at disciplinary interfaces, stimulating new ideas in
computational techniques for macromolecular modeling, and identifying key areas
for future research.
