
* 0072438
* Analysis and Computation of Shape Sensitivities for Elliptic Interface Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/01/2000,07/24/2000
* Lisa Stanley,MT,Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 72,832.00

ABSTRACT.

DMS-0072438 Lisa G. Stanley Department of Mathematics Univeristy of Montana

Engineers, mathematicians and other scientists who use mathematical models to
describe physical systems often need to answer the question: ``How does the
system response change as system parameters change?'' For example, how does the
airflow around an airplane wing change as the shape of the wing changes, and how
does this affect drag? Sensitivity analysis seeks to answer such questions. The
sensitivity provides quantitative information which can be useful as a
mathematical tool to gain insight into the behavior of a system. This proposal
deals with the analysis and design of computational methods for approximating
sensitivities for a very specific class of problems. The research focuses on
shape sensitivity calculations for interface problems. These problems arise in
the analysis of a variety of physical systems such as groundwater flow through
different types of sediment as well as manufacturing processes such as die
casting problems and alloy solifidification problems. In die casting, for
example, there is an interface between the solidifying part and the mold itself.
When analyzing such a process, the mold and the part may be considered as one
composite material, and in order to optimize the casting process, the designer
needs to determine the sensitivity of the temperature throughout the composite
material to small changes in the thickness of the respective component
materials. Since the mold and the manufactured part consist of different
materials which have different heat conductivity properties, the mathematical
equation governing the cooling process has a solution which lacks smoothness at
the interface. For these types of problems, computing the sensitivity requires a
different, and more clever, approximation scheme than that which is typically
used to determine the temperature. The current research attempts to analyze and
exploit the mathematical structure of these problems and to modify existing
numerical methods in order to develop a computational algorithm which is
accurate, efficient and reasonable to implement. Estimates regarding inclusion
of such techniques in the design of rocket engines show that design cycle time
could be reduced from one year to one month. Results of this magnitude make the
development of such computational tools critical for the national interest both
in cost savings during the design stage and in remaining on the forefront of new
technology.

This project investigates the use of domain decomposition techniques for the
development of accurate and efficient computational algorithms for shape
sensitivity calculations. Specifically, the work involves the implementation of
Continuous Sensitivity Equation Methods (C-SEMs) in order to derive infinite
dimensional sensitivity equations which usually take the form of partial
differential equations. The research focuses on elliptic interface problems
containing parameters which determine the spatial location or the shape of the
interface. The resulting shape sensitivities exhibit discontinuities across the
interface. Efficient computational algorithms for this class of problems rely on
two essential components. The first is the mathematical analysis needed to
establish fundamental properties such as existence, uniqueness and regularity.
The second component is the clever choice of a numerical method which is
suitable for solving the equations. The theoretical analysis guides the
construction of a computational method which exploits the problem structure.
Specifically, an iterative, nonoverlapping domain decomposition algorithm is
used to accurately capture discontinuities in the sensitivity variable.


