
* 0072415
* Groups and Singularities in Quantum Control and Nonlinear Design
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/31/2000
* Viswanath Ramakrishna,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 60,999.00

0072415 Ramakrishna

The project aims to develop i) numerically inexpensive methods for state
preparation in quantum control; and ii) control laws for nonlinear systems in
the presence of singularities, and techniques for singular exterior differential
systems. Several extant and future technologies call for the control of quantum
systems - semiconductor heterostructures, spectroscopy, atomic lasers, quantum
information processing, control of molecular dynamics, to name a few. Many of
these problems can, after judicious modeling and optimization, be recast as the
problem of preparing desired unitary generators, via an external control acting
on a quantum system. This leads quickly to the problem of path planning for
systems with drift on Lie groups, via controls that are constrained. Path
planning for systems with drift, with few and constrained inputs, has not
hitherto been studied. The only other alternatives for the control of quantum
systems are computationally expensive optimization, and tracking which relies
heavily on intuition. In this project the role of intuition and optimization
will be limited to reformulating a given physical objective as state preparation
for a quantum system. The latter problem will be attacked by developing
structured factorization of unitary matrices, the structure being determined by
the constraints. The resulting control design will be compared with other
techniques such as inversion and optimal control. Applications to lasing without
inversion, molecular control, quantum computing and information will be then
carried out. Related issues, such as tractable descriptions of reachable sets of
quantum systems, will also be studied. The second part of the project stems from
the fact that the extant non-linear control schemes are rarely directly
applicable in singular situations such as a varying rank decoupling matrix and a
change in relative degree. Tools from singularity theory, the theory of
foliations, nonsmooth analysis and Lie groups will be developed to address this
problem. A key feature will be the use of differential forms instead of vector
fields for studying such issues. This should also have payoffs for singular
exterior differential systems. Applications to techniques such as the method of
intermediate integrals for partial differential equations and equations that
change type will be studied from this vantage point. It is worth remarking that
both components of the project call for similar mathematics.

Successful completion of this project should yield benefits for several current
and future technologies. For instance, the fabrication of a quantum computer
calls for solutions to precisely the type of problems being studied in the
project. Similarly, obtaining a snapshot of chemical reactions at the molecular
level also requires the control of quantum processes. Active control of quantum
phenomena would also lead to the control of chemical reactions via tuned lasers.
This should enhance product specificity in chemical reactions, thereby
minimizing the presence of products that are not desired. The control of quantum
phenomena is still in its infancy. The project aims to move it along further by
linking it concretely to traditional control theory. Conversely, the results of
the project should shed light on the control of macroworld systems. This will
also have benefits for traditional technologies such as robotics, consumer
electronics and electrical networks, since the underlying mathematics is quite
similar. From a didactic point of view, the project's contribution will be to
show to undergraduates and graduate students alike that advanced mathematics is
not an arid field, but is in fact a lively process with palpable connections to
real life situations. This should enhance the likelihood of students, especially
from under represented groups, to pursue higher education in mathematics,
science and technology.
