
* 0072629
* A Computational Framework for Reduced Feedback Control Design for Spatially Distributed Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2000,07/31/2000
* Belinda Batten,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 76,200.00

0072629 King

This goal of this project is to develop a framework that can be used to design
spatially distributed control systems. Specifically, the outcome of this project
is to provide a methodology to optimally place sensors and actuators and to
construct practical reduced order controllers. The approach is based on a unique
combination of computational mathematics and distributed parameter control
theory. The framework is based on an integral representation of the optimal
feedback control that arises from the solution of the infinite dimensional
control problem. Computation of the kernel of the integral (feedback functional
gain) may be accomplished by solving a numerical approximation of the infinite
dimensional algebraic Riccati equation. However, this approach is intractable
for even the two dimensional heat equation on a fairly coarse grid. The approach
proposed herein is based on the use of computational methods to directly solve
Chandrasekhar partial integro-differential equations for functional gains.
Recent results on the smoothness and support of these functional gains can then
be exploited to optimally place sensors and actuators. Moreover, initial studies
show how the gains can also be used to design robust low- order compensators.

The motivation for this work comes from the need to have efficient, practical
controllers for complicated physical systems. The focus of the proposal is the
development of an approach that is applicable to a wide variety of areas ranging
from materials processing to flow control. In applications from such areas,
there are several issues of primary importance that must be addressed. Among
these are where to place sensors to obtain accurate measurements to be used by
the controller, what to measure, where to place actuators (which implement the
control), and how to design the controller so that the system is controller in
real-time. Typically, the issues with respect to sensors and actuators are
solved through engineering intuition. However, the mathematical framework that
we propose gives specific answers to these questions. Moreover, it provides
motivation for real-time control which is nearly optimal (in the sense that the
design comes from the solution to a mathematical optimization problem) and is
robust, which means that it is effective in the presence of disturbances, or
dynamics which may have been neglected in designing the controller. The
potential benefits of this work are enormous. It would be applicable to
complicated (and varied) problems such as stabilizing vibrations arising from
shuttle docking at the space station, reduction of drag in aerospace vehicles,
and optimal control of semiconductor manufacturing. It would provide a
systematic approach to reduced order controller design, eliminating much of the
guesswork that currently takes place.
