
* 0072816
* Variational Problems Associated with Models for Both Orthodox and Unorthodox Materials
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,02/12/2002
* Victor Mizel,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 81,652.00

0072816 Mizel

The goal of the part of the present proposal involving unorthodox materials is
to develop an understanding of step structure and step motion in the limit of
small step free energy for crystals with surface defects consisting of monatomic
height steps separated by terraces. Such defects are fundamental structures
since steps--as sinks and sources for atoms-- influence mass transport at
surfaces and therefore influence fundamental multidimensional surface processes
such as nucleation and growth, facet formation and thermal roughening in
crystals and their applications. Consequently these defects have been studied
since the 1950's and fairly successful macroscopic models to describe behavior
in most materials have been developed. These models express the energy of an
isothermally wandering step as the integral of the (generally orientation
dependent) step energy per unit length. However in the limit of vanishing step
free energy, new physics [e.g. higher-order elastic interactions and step-to-
step interactions] enters the picture. These higher-order effects can lead to
the spontaneous development of highly periodic step structures. Such novel step
morphologies are members of an increasingly important class of self- organizing
systems: systems that spontaneously form atomic scale periodic patterns. A
recent (1997) pathbreaking experiment on Boron- doped Silicon in which the
isothermal wanderings in question, contrary to the simple models cited, are
periodic and increase with a decrease of the steady state temperature in an
interval presents a significant challenge to the development of appropriate
macroscopic models for this branch of crystal theory. It reveals that there is a
major gap in the current technical understanding of defects in crystals of this
nature, since detailed analysis of the dynamics of these fluctuating step edges
is incompatible with current theories of step energetics. Resolving this issue
is important for near term attainment of non-routine applications involving
crystals with small step free energy, since it has direct impact on
understanding the atomic-scale structures they develop. In turn, this
understanding is needed for the development of materials with uniformly closely
spaced and nearly congruent self-organized [quantum dot] defects--such self-
organizing materials being crucial to the development of monochromatic lasers
and quantum wires, for example, as device scales shrink. The goal of that part
of the present proposal involving orthodox materials is focussed on clarifying
an as yet unresolved issue in the theory of nonlinearly elastic materials.
Equilibria for such materials subjected to specified boundary displacements
correspond to deformations which minimize a stored energy integral whose
integrand associates to each deformation a nonnegative real valued function.
Such stored energy integrands are subject to various constraints in order to
correctly represent possible physical materials. In the last decade a previously
unnoticed issue has been raised. Namely in view of a little known one-
dimensional variational phenomenon (originally established in 1926) that for
certain variational integrands the minimizing functions can differ depending on
the smoothness of the class of deformations under consideration -- even though
the smoother class of functions is dense in the larger class. In fact there can
be a nonzero difference between the infima of the integrals associated with such
classes [Lavrentiev's gap phenomenon]. A corresponding gap between classes of
continuous deformations in three dimensional nonlinear elasticity would imply
that the global equilibrium deformation in the larger class would be energy
minimizing and more singular than the energy minimizing global deformation in
the smaller class--whereby structures devised on the basis of the less singular
deformations could develop flaws [fractures], contrary to the evidence provided
by calculations based on standard methods.

To summarize, the PI proposes in the case of the unorthodox type of crystalline
material exemplified by Boron doped Silicon to devise variational models that
will shed light on the entirely nonstandard physical behavior of such materials.
Such models will involve devising what are known as Landau-de Gennes type order
parameter terms for the free energy of such materials to reflect the
particularly delicate atomic interactions governing the nanatomic structure of
such crystals. On the other hand, in the case of orthodox materials the PI
intends to clarify whether in the well-established theory of nonlinear
elasticity there can occur materials which for certain classes of boundary
conditions can exhibit an energy gap between the minimum energy on one class of
continuous smooth deformations and the minimum energy on a smaller class. The
occurrence of such an energy gap could lead to cases in which structures devised
on the basis of computations associated with the smaller class could develop
flaws because the actual energy minimizing deformation is more singular than the
computations suggest.
