
* 0072612
* A Theoretical Study of Climate Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Climate & Large-Scale Dynamics
* 09/01/2000,09/01/2000
* Shouhong Wang,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2003
* USD 95,656.00

Wang 0072612 The investigator studies the structure, its robustness and
stability, and the transitions of large scale geophysical fluid flows, to arrive
at a better understanding of the prediction and predictability of these flows
relevant to the typical sources of low frequency variabilities in climate. The
work studies specific topics in two areas: 1) theoretical issues of the
primitive equations, and 2) the presence, sensitivity and robustness of
interannual variability characteristics to changes in model parameters in the
underlying physical space. In Area 1, the investigator studies the primitive
equations of large scale ocean/atmosphere flows. Specific problems include
stability and bifurcation issues of the primitive equations and related simpler
models, especially in connection to climate low frequency variabilities. The
main objectives in Area 2 are to classify typical large scale atmosphere/ocean
circulation flow patterns associated with boundary layer phenomena, and to study
their structural bifurcations. Part of the work in this area is based on a new
geometric theory developed recently by the investigator and T. Ma. The
investigator uses a combination of physical modelling, asymptotic methods,
rigorous mathematical theory, and large scale computing to yield new insights
into physical phenomena. The work involves specific collaborations with
atmosphere/ocean scientists. The primary goal of this project is to document,
through careful theoretical studies, the presence of regular interannual and
interdecadal variability in the ocean basins adjacent to the North American
continent, to verify the robustness of this variability's characteristics to
changes in model parameters, and to help explain its physical mechanisms. The
thorough understanding of this variability is of the essence in determining the
climate system's predictability and prediction on subcontinental and smaller
spatial scales, for time scales that equal and exceed a few years. The
associated phenomena include the double-gyre wind-driven ocean circulation and
the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon, which dominates inter-annual
climate variability over much of the Pacific Ocean, and hence the world. The
studies could lead to improved predictions of weather, climate, and
environmental phenomena.
