
* 0072247
* Mathematical Problems Arising in Aircraft Modeling
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/03/2000
* Marianna Shubov,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 92,000.00

0072247 Shubov

The primary goal of this proposal is to develop the spectral, asymptotic, and
stability analysis for three increasingly more complete and complicated models
of an aircraft wing in a surrounding airflow. The first two of these models
(1-dimensional and 2-dimensional respectively) have been developed in the Flight
Systems Research Center (FSRC) at UCLA in collaboration with NASA Dryden Flight
Research Center, Edwards, CA. The designing of the 3-dimensional model is in
progress. Among the wing models existing in the extensive modern literature on
aeroelasticity, the aforementioned ones are most physically complete. In
November 1999, the 1-dimensional model was tested in a series of four flight
experiments at Edwards Airforce Base, CA. The experimental results are in
excellent agreement with the theoretical predictions of the model at least for
low - energy aeroelastic modes. Currently, the collaboration is supported by NSF
Grant DMS-9972748 (Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences). This
grant provides the support for a one year visit (Fall 1999 - Spring 2000) of the
principal investigator to the Center in order to study in depth the engineering
and physical principles of aircraft wing modeling and to continue work on the
joint project with the researchers of the Center. During recent years, the
investigator's research has been focused on two main directions: (a) spectral
and asymptotic analysis of non-self-adjoint operators in a Hilbert space,
operators which are the dynamics generators of hyperbolic equations and systems
containing damping terms and subject to dissipative boundary conditions; (b)
applications of the results of this analysis to the control of distributed
parameter systems governed by those equations and systems. The series of results
and methods, developed in this research, has now culminated in the work on the
aforementioned 1-dimensional model of a vibrating aircraft wing. Substantial
progress has been made: the PI was able to obtain first in the literature
explicit asymptotic formulas for the high-frequency aeroelastic modes and mode
shapes. The objectives of this project include: (a) obtaining space-time domain
representations for the solutions of the 1- dimensional model; (b) obtaining
spectral asymptotics and representations for the solutions of most recent
2-dimensional model; (c) applying asymptotic and spectral results to the flutter
suppression problem; (d) participating in the designing of a 3-dimensional model
of a wing and extending the above analysis to this model.

The present project can be considered as a theoretical part of the broad wing
modeling project conducted by the researchers at the aforementioned Centers. The
ultimate goal of the entire project is to give specific practical
recommendations to aircraft industry engineers working on flutter suppression in
aircraft wings and tails. Flutter is a dynamic instability occurring in an
aircraft in flight at a specific speed which is called a flutter speed. Damage
inflicted by flutter results in significant cost to the aircraft industry. The
objective of this project is to carry out a rigorous mathematical analysis of
the aircraft wing model and to apply the results of this analysis to the problem
of flutter control. It has been recognized in the engineering community that the
results of such an analysis can provide new insights which are not available
from experiments or from numerical simulations. In addition to the above
technical objectives of the project, the principal investigator is planning to
develop a new graduate program on mathematical methods in aircraft engineering
for both mathematics and engineering students.
