
* 0072369
* Geometry and Algebra of Nonlinear Control Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2000,04/12/2002
* Matthias Kawski,AZ,Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2004
* USD 101,481.00

0072369 Kawski

This project builds on the formalism of chronological algebras to study the
geometric foundations of nonlinear control systems. Geometrically, the
chronological product encodes the interaction of the components of controlled
nonlinear dynamics. Algebraically it is the fundamental structure that underlies
effective series expansion and formal solution algorithms. Areas of special
focus are interconnections of systems, and systems that exhibit full nonlinear
dependence on the control. In either case, specific objectives are to develop
normal forms and to find effective series (or product) representations (using
tools from algebraic combinatorics). Possible applications include algorithms
for path planning, feedback stabilization, optimal control and even numerical
integration. A complementary second thread develops interactive visualization
tools for research (simulation and experimentation) and for communication. This
research is motivated and driven by the desire to understand the fundamental,
common principles that govern the interactions of dynamical systems on any
scale, from molecular levels to astronomical dimensions. The diversity of
possible outcomes is a consequence of nonlinear effects that permeate our
environment: When combining two subsystems, the result is generally different
from just the sum of the parts.

This research focuses on further developing the algebra which captures such
nonlinear interaction, where the effect of a+b is more than just the sum of the
effects of a and b. The chronological algebra provides the formal language to
model such interactions where even the order in which pieces are put together
matters, where a*b is generally different from b*a. The control perspective is
distinguished from the basic study of dynamical systems as it aims beyond just
descriptive understanding: The objective of control theory is to exploit the
subtle nature of the interactions in order to shape complex systems -- often via
only minute interference with how the parts interact. While this mathematical
research applies to virtually any kind of dynamical system, including even
social, medical and financial environments, this project will focus on
mechanical systems (like large satellites with several moving parts) in efforts
to demonstrate the general principles. An important component of this project is
the development of interactive visualization tools. These are used for research,
and for communicating the geometry of the nonlinear interactions, to demonstrate
how the profound understanding of the fundamental mathematical structures leads
to effective means of controlling complex systems. This visualization effort
also provides a rich environment for undergraduate students to connect with
advanced theoretical research. It may prove to be an effective means to expand
the pipeline bringing new talents into mathematical research.
