
* 0072958
* Microscopic Process and Macroscopic Behavior of Material: Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2000,07/24/2000
* Bo Li,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2003
* USD 75,743.00

Dear Dr. Pang,

Attached is the plain file of an abstract of my proposal in the requested
format. Please let me know if you think that further revision is needed.

Best regards, Bo Li
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proposal number: DMS-0072958. Principal investigator: Bo Li, Univ. of Maryland,
College Park. Title of proposal: Microscopic Process and Macroscopic Behavior of
Material: Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis

Proposal Abstract

This project concerns the modeling, simulation, and analysis of a variety of
microscopic processes and macroscopic behaviors of materials that in common
involve phase transitions, multiple components and multiple scales, and moving
interfaces. They include the epitaxial growth of semiconductor thin films,
microstructural evolution of elastically stressed solids, and macroscopic
properties of martensitic microstructures. The proposer will first continue and
extend his work initiated during his participation in a DARPA/NSF VIP project to
develop and improve continuum models for the epitaxial growth of thin films. In
particular, he will carefully examine the effect of edge diffusion and kink
convection as well as that of crystalline asymmetry and anisotropy to the thin
film morphology and growth scaling laws. He will then develop hybrid numerical
techniques that incorporate finite element methods and multigrid algorithms into
level set formulations to simulate the three-dimensional evolution of stressed
microstructures. He will finally expand his previous research to further
investigate complex martensitic microstructures with an emphasis on the effect
of applied stress to their formation, evolution, and stability.

The design of innovative, intelligent, and high quality materials such as those
to be studied in this project is essential to the advance of modern
technologies. The success in such design demands greatly a deep understanding of
the fundamental principles and basic mechanisms of the underlying physical
processes and material behaviors. It is therefore the goal of this research to
systematically develop rational scientific concepts and novel research
techniques to accomplish such an understanding. The fulfillment of such a goal
will potentially provide experimentalists with detailed information on
controllable physical data, making possible the development of new and improved
materials for applications in many modern technologies and industrials ranging
from communication to aerospace to medicine. Highlighted by its nature of
scientific integrity, on the other hand, this project will naturally foster and
promote an interdisciplinary research that involves materials science, physics,
applied mathematics, and high-performance computing.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


