
* 0072194
* Some Mesoscale Issues for Applied Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,08/20/2001
* David Kinderlehrer,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 197,745.00

Mesoscale is a term intended to convey an intermediate level description of a
physical system. Its function is to capture the interactions of the system at
finer scales with interactions or influences from larger coarser scales, and the
mesoscale level itself. Such systems, active across disparate length and time
scales, are inherently metastable. This feature is often revealed by hysteretic
behavior or by a reluctance to evolve quickly to equilibrium. The focus in this
proposal is on several prototypes of these systems that occur in materials
sceince. One is the role of interfaces, or grain boundaries, in determining or
limiting the behavior of polycrystalline materials. The energy and mobility of
grain boundaries depends on crystallography and geometry, according to
established thermodynamic principles. Innovative new ways to determine these
functions explicitly for important materials are the objective of the Mesoscale
Interface Mapping Project. This involves developing automated microscopy to
harvest large amounts of data from samples and then formulating and solving a
complex inverse problem. One way to approach determination of mobility consists
in the development of large scale simulations of grain boundary evolution. The
second focus is the coarse grained descriptions of mesoscale systems, the
functional analytic limit processes in the microstructure of solids or the
averaging to distribution functions in systems with stochastic behavior. The new
methods allow study of situations where kinetics arise directly in terms of
thermodynamic state functions and naturally carry with them an appropriate
topology. The issue of metastability has been under investigation in this
context. There is now the opportunity to improve understanding, for example, of
microstructural evolution in shape-memory materials and diffusion mediated
transport in certain liquid crystal systems and in protein motors. This will
include diagnostics for these systems.

The challenge of the mesoscale in materials science is to understand how it
constrains finer scale systems (at the molecular scale) and determines larger
scale systems (at the scale of entire devices). This is accomplished through
coarse graining procedures. For example, many technologically useful materials
are polycrystalline, or granular, in nature. The aluminum skin of an aircraft
and the copper or copper-aluminum interconnects in computer chips are but two
examples at vastly different size scales of such granular materials. It is
widely understood that many aspects of these materials depend on the interfaces
they contain, or their grain boundaries. Properties of grain boundaries
determine the reliability as well as the mechanical strength. This project will
exploit the exciting opportunities and challenges for mathematical science in
this field and beyond. Specifically, coarse graining methods will be developed
in order to better understand phenomena that occur in protein motors and in
liquid crystals. A related problem of coarse graining arises when information is
to be extracted from the immense amounts of data that can be produced with
simulations of complex systems, such as polycrystalline materials. This problem
of coarse graining at an information scale rather than a physical scale will
also be addressed in this project.
