
* 0072553
* Mathematical Descriptions of Anisotropic Fluids and Optical Pulse Propagation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/23/2000
* M Forest,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2002
* USD 70,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072553 Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical
Descriptions of Anisotropic Fluids and Optical Pulse Propagation

Abstract

0072553 Forest



The research project on anisotropic fluids investigates critical mathematical
problems arising in the flow of macromolecular fluids such as liquid crystal
polymers. We analyze the tensorial partial differential equations that describe
the flows of macromolecules to construct orientation patterns and determine
their stability. These analyses yield information about flow-induced phase
transitions and models for orientation patterns routinely observed in
experiments and manufacturing processes. The research project on optical pulse
propagation employs methods of integrable systems in the analysis of pulse
propagation in nonlinear optical fibers. The governing model equations are
perturbations of scalar or coupled nonlinear Schrodinger equations with small
dispersion. The research extends previous results on scalar equations to
systems, studies new instability phenomena that arise from the coupling,
constructs explicit solutions that serve as models for pulse propagation, and
predicts the onset and fate of pulse degradation as a function of fiber
properties and of pulse shape and power.

The proposed research focuses on mathematical issues central to two important
technologies: high-performance materials and optical fiber communications. Many
super-strong materials are produced from liquids comprised of large molecules
whose shape and dynamics constrain manufacturing processes and are responsible
for material properties. This research develops mathematical models for the
interaction of flow and microstructure, applies these models to explain observed
patterns and their relation to material properties, and analyzes other phenomena
that affect processing behavior and properties of materials. Long-haul optical
fiber communications systems are well-described by special nonlinear
differential equations that are amenable to analysis with recently-developed
mathematical methods. Observations show that light pulses in optical fibers
degrade through ripples that emerge on the pulse, and this phenomenon is also
seen in computer simulations. This project develops rigorous mathematical
understanding of why ripples form and an explicit algorithm that predicts pulse
degradation given the properties of the fiber and the input pulse. This tool
will be useful to design optimal pulse shapes for given optical fibers.




