
* 0072388
* Singular Control of Diffusion Processes and its Applications to the Models of Economic Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,07/27/2000
* Michael Taksar,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2003
* USD 90,000.00

ABSTRACT

SINGULAR CONTROL OF DIFFUSION PROCESSES AND ITS APPLICATIONS TO THE MODELS OF
ECONOMIC DYNAMICS

The proposed research lies within the area of optimal stochastic control. It
deals with optimal control of diffusion processes by means of singular with
respect to time functionals. This type of control naturally appears in the
problems in which there is no natural restriction on the rates of control and as
a result the optimal control rate is infinite. The optimal policy in these types
of problems is to reflect the process from an a priori unknown boundary. Such
type of action also arises in problems with additive control, as an
approximation for a "bang-bang" optimal policy. The proposed research consists
of developing the theory of the related Partial Differential Equations with
gradient constraints, studying optimal reflecting barriers and optimal policies
in one dimensional and multidimensional cases. Applications include stochastic
control models of flexible manufacturing systems as well as dividend
optimization and multidimensional portfolio optimization models. It is also
intended to consider application of the singular stochastic control theory to
optimization problems in insurance. We will also study stochastic control models
of large economies and analysis of the relationship between the general
framework of the no arbitrage asset pricing in mathematical finance and the
equilibrium paths in those models.

In addition to developing new stochastic control and stochastic processes
theory, the applications of this research would include devising better models
for optimization of the manufacturing processes and outputs. In addition our
research would also result in developing new optimization models in mathematical
finance and insurance. While perceived by many nonspecialists as a tool for
making a fast profit, mathematical finance in fact is a "technology" for risk
reduction. In this regard its merge with insurance is only too natural. The
issues of controlling the risk as well as insurance aspects of the financial
risk has loomed large recently in both financial markets as well as in the
insurance industry. The importance of optimization in devise of the policies
employed by insurance and financial institutions is hard to overestimate.
Exposure to unnecessary economic and financial risks and failure to employ the
optimal procedures may have serious economic and social impacts. Our research
deals with development of mathematical models of optimal risk control techniques
for financial and insurance corporations. This will also enable one to get a
better insight into the nature of the optimal risk reduction techniques a
publicly traded financial corporation should adhere to, as well as the optimal
dividend distribution policy it should follow.


