
* 0072008
* Derivation and Simulation in Radiative Transfer Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2000,07/24/2000
* Guillaume Bal,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2002
* USD 66,500.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0072008 Mathematical Sciences: Derivation and
Simulation in Radiative Transfer Theory

Abstract

0072008 Bal



This project studies the propagation of high frequency waves in highly
heterogeneous media. Radiative transport theory provides an accurate macroscopic
description of the microscopic interactions between the propagating waves and
the rapidly-fluctuating underlying medium. The objectives of the research are
threefold. First, extend radiative transport theory to include boundary
conditions and surface and volume wave interaction. Second, solve the volume and
surface equations numerically using a Monte Carlo method based on a
probabilistic representation of radiative transfer with polarization. Finally,
assess the domain of validity of radiative transfer by setting up suitable
inverse problems that allow determination of statistical parameters
characterizing the underlying medium from boundary measurements.

A major recent success of radiative transport theory is the modeling of the
propagation of seismic waves in the earth's crust. Numerical study of seismic
wave propagation over hundreds of kilometers remains prohibitive with a
microscopic model, but simulations are now accessible using radiative transfer
theory and suitable statistical methods. Results promise to yield better
understanding and prediction of earthquakes. Another application of radiative
transport and its diffusion approximation is near-infrared spectroscopy. This
novel method is increasingly used in medical imaging for monitoring properties
of human tissues. Numerical simulation of forward and inverse transport problems
remains an active field of research. The project provides the mathematical and
numerical analysis to address these issues.
