
* 0073770
* Stochastic Programming by Monte Carlo Simulation Methods
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/01/2000
* Alexander Shapiro,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/2003
* USD 94,887.00

Many stochastic programming problems can be formulated as problems of
optimization of an expected value function. Quite often the corresponding
expected value function cannot be computed exactly and should be approximated,
say by Monte Carlo methods. In fact, in many interesting examples, Monte Carlo
simulation is the only reasonable way of estimating the expected value function.
It turns out that if the underline probability distribution is discrete and the
approximating problems are piecewise linear and convex, then with probability
approaching one exponentially fast, with increase of the sample size, an optimal
solution of the Monte Carlo approximation problem provides an exact optimal
solution of the expected value problem. This gives a theoretical justification
for the following approach to a numerical solution of such problems. Construct
and solve a Monte Carlo approximation problem based on a relatively small
sample. Repeat this procedure several times and validate calculated solutions
until a stopping criterion is satisfied. The goal of this project is to develop
this method. The method is ideally suited for parallel computations and some
preliminary experiments showed good results.



Optimization of real world systems almost always involves randomness which can
come in various conceptual forms such as uncertainty, lack of information,
natural variability of the data, etc. One may think, for example, about
optimizing a manufacturing process when the demand for produced goods is
uncertain. It turns out that solving stochastic optimization problems involving
randomness is much more difficult than solving deterministic problems, both
conceptually and numerically. However, there is obvious practical need for
developing a methodology for dealing with stochastic problems and in recent
years this was a very active area of scientific research. This proposal is aimed
at developing numerical techniques for solving a particular class of stochastic
problems. If successful, it will allow numerical solutions of considerably
larger problems, which in turn may result in bigger variety of applications.

Alexander Shapiro , Tel. 404-8946544; Fax: 404-8942301, E-mail :
ashapiro@isye.gatech.edu http://www.isye.gatech.edu/~ashapiro ISyE, Georgia
Tech, Atlanta, GA 30332-0205


