
* 0073785
* Computational Methods to determine Epistatic Effects
* DMS,EUKARYOTIC GENETICS, POPULATION DYNAMICS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2000,09/13/2000
* Philip Hanlon,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 210,980.00

Hanlon

0073785

The investigator designs effective algorithms to identify

epistatic effects that contribute to a complex quantitative

phenotype. The algorithms apply to datasets that, for each

individual in a sample, identifies alleles at a fixed set of

markers along with the value of the quanitative trait. The

algorithms seek an optimum fit for the phenotype as a sum of

epistatic effects. The approach is to perform repeated searches

for an optimum fit in the space of all possible combinations of

effects. The search utilizes random walk hill-climbing

techniques. These hill-climbs are adaptive in the sense that

certain parameters, which control the choice of steps in the

random walks, evolve based on the outcomes of previous walks.

It is widely accepted that the genetic components of most

interesting quantitative traits (eg. blood pressure, height)

involve interactions between many genes. So, computational

methods to infer the genetic basis of quantitative traits must

include an analysis of epistatic effects, i.e., instances where

the choice of allele at two or more genetic markers influences

the value of the quantitative trait in ways that are different

from the sum of the effects of the individual alleles. In this

project the investigator develops computational methods to

identify these epistatic effects by a process of doing repeated

searches through the space of possible effects looking for ones

that explain a significant amount of the variation of the trait.

These searches are self-educating in the sense that later

searches learn from earlier searches. As the number of searches

increases, the adaptive mechanism focuses the search on

particularly strong epistatic effects.




