
* 0073077
* Nonlinear Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2000,08/02/2000
* Jonathan Goodman,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 97,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0073077 Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Waves

Abstract

0073077 Goodman



This work consists of several projects in applied and computational mathematics.
One project focuses on anisotropic adaptive finite element methods. It has been
demonstrated that anisotropic refinement leads to more efficient computations in
thin layers, such as boundary layers. These methods will be extended to three
dimensional problems and encoded in general-purpose software. Another project
involves mathematical techniques for understanding the value of stock options
and other derivative securities. We will examine how more desirable,
sophisticated pricing models differ from those in use today. If the extra
sources of uncertainty introduced in multi-factor models are not too large, we
can estimate their effect on pricing and hedging strategies using perturbation
methods rather than the large scale computation that they seem to require. A
third project concerns numerical methods for solving stochastic differential
equations. The goal is to develop a method as accurate as Milstein's method that
does not require sampling repeated Ito integrals or explicitly evaluating
derivatives of noise coefficients.

Computation of quantities of practical interest, such as stresses in structures,
fluid or heat flows, etc., are often limited by computer memory and speed, so
techniques that reduce computational cost have immediate practical application.
One part of this project concerns development of a more efficient finite-element
algorithm, a central tool of engineering computation. Currently, adaptive
computations automatically determine the resolution appropriate to a region, so
that the computation will not waste high resolution where it is not needed (e.g.
far from the source of a stress). Anisotropic refinement, the topic of this
work, goes one step further, seeking directions in which high resolution is not
needed (e.g. parallel to a long crack). A second part of this project focuses on
mathematical methods used in the banking industry. The finance industry has been
transformed by computers, communications, and instant access to information. A
liquidity revolution has occurred through use of sophisticated quantitative
methods. Investors, businesses and bankers can now understand risk much better,
and, through derivative instruments and markets, sell the risk to those who wish
to assume it. The New York financial community has an edge on other foreign
banking centers through the use of more sophisticated quantitative market
models, which pose analytical and computational challenges for finance
professionals and applied mathematicians. This project examines ways to make
complicated financial models amenable to analysis.


