
* 0073841
* Collaborative Proposal: Focused Research Group on Fundamental Problems in the Dynamics of Thin Viscous Films and Fluid Interfaces
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics
* 09/01/2000,06/18/2002
* Michael Shearer,NC,North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2003
* USD 155,012.00

0073841 Shearer

A combined experimental, analytical, and computational study of fundamental
problems in the dynamics of thin viscous films and fluid interfaces is proposed.
The recent discovery of stable undercompressive waves in driven films has
created the opportunity for a unique collaboration between experiments and
mathematical theory. This research program will include related studies of
solid-liquid-vapor interfaces, moving contact lines, and surface tension
effects. Analytical and computational studies will be integrated with a series
of experiments that includes a search for undercompressive waves in a spin
coating geometry, motion of contact lines near room- temperature critical
points, and high- speed video imaging of the dynamics of singularity formation
in finite- time rupture of fluid interfaces. Mathematical analysis will include
models for film rupture, stability of driven contact lines, and numerical
analysis of schemes for computing these problems.

Liquid films and moving contact lines arise in problems ranging from industrial
design of paints and microchip fabrication to medical applications including
contact lenses and the lining of the lung. All of these problems involve
interactions across widely different length-scales in which the physical laws
are not clearly understood. This is a collaboration between researchers from the
Mathematics (Bertozzi, Witelski) and Physics (Behringer) Departments at Duke
University and the Mathematics Department at North Carolina State University
(Shearer). This effort combines mathematical modeling, analysis, and numerical
simulation with new laboratory experiments to study fundamental problems in
driven films and moving contact lines. Computational and mathematical models
will direct the design of experiments investigating new phenomena in spin
coating processes and dewetting films. The program will involve undergraduates,
graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and visiting scientists from other
institutions. This research will foster curriculum developments in the
Departments of Mathematics, Physics and the Center for Nonlinear and Complex
Systems at Duke University.
