
* 0075722
* Investigations in Interior Point Methods and Convex Programming
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 08/01/2000,07/26/2000
* Osman Guler,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 140,000.00

Abstract

The goal of this project is to develop algorithms and tools for interior point
methods. The investigator will continue his ongoing research into interior point
methods with the aim of advancing several outstanding topics in semidefinite
programming (SDP) and related problems. A better understanding of neighborhoods
and paths is needed in SDP, and in programming over a symmetric cone in general.
This is necessary in order to develop more efficient algorithms in terms of
faster asymptotic convergence and numerical stability. The investigator intends
to develop effective mathematical tools to deal with these issues. Programming
over homogeneous cones and hyperbolic cones are likely to become the next
emerging fields in interior point methods, and there is a need to develop
efficient, long-step interior algorithms for such problems. Eventually, interior
point methods will need to deal with even more complicated industrial
applications which must be solved efficiently. The project will involve all of
these areas of interior point methods; efficient algorithms will be devised in
all cases, and the needed mathematical tools will be developed. The project also
has two other goals. The first is an extension of duality theory beyond its
traditional convexity, and the second one is the development of faster proximal
point algorithms for convex programming.

Interior point methods have been successful in solving many large scale
industrial problems in industry: in civil and electrical engineering,
management, communication networks, finance, and others. Further applicability
of these methods depends on a better understanding of their behavior and
continuous development of appropriate software. This project aims to search for
efficient algorithms and improved mathematical tools so that large scale
optimization problems arising from diverse industrial disciplines can be
efficiently solved.














