
* 0078420
* Temporal Processing in the Auditory System: A Nonlinear Dynamics Approach with Theory and Experiment
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2001,11/02/2005
* John Rinzel,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2006
* USD 101,589.00

Rinzel 0078420 The neural computation by the mammalian auditory system to
localize low frequency sound sources relies on processing in the brain stem.
Neurons and circuits there, in the medial superior olive (MSO), have specialized
biophysical properties for processing and preserving precise timings. These
neurons have distinctive firing properties. When a steady stimulus is presented
they fire only once, at stimulus onset; many other types of neurons would behave
tonically, firing throughout the stimulus presentation. This property of
phasicness is believed crucial for the MSO cell's role in precise temporal
processing. In contrast, tonic cells are assumed to be less capable of tracking
rapidly changing signals. The MSO cells have a special potassium current, IK-LT,
that underlies their phasic behavior. The investigator and his colleagues
systematically study how the temporal processing ability of a neuron changes as
the neuron is transformed from phasic to tonic mode, say by gradually adjusting
the strength of IK-LT (using pharmacological blockers and electronic methods of
re-introducing the blocked current). When a cell is in phasic mode does it track
a time-varying signal better, or does it perform better coincidence detection,
than when it is in tonic mode? The research combines both experimental and
theoretical approaches. The experiments involve electrical recording from
individual MSO neurons while stimulating them with periodic and other time-
varying signals. Various quantitative criteria are applied to assess the quality
of temporal processing. From the theoretical side, biophysically-based
mathematical models are developed that mimic the MSO neurons, including a term
for IK-LT. The model's performance for temporal processing is evaluated just
like the real cells. In addition, concepts from nonlinear dynamical systems are
applied in order to reveal and understand the underlying mathematical structure.
This mathematical understanding will shed light on the significance of
phasicness in other neural systems where the mechanism might not involve IK-LT.
This project also explores the influence of randomness on the temporal
processing abilities. Some randomness is intrinsic to the auditory nervous
system, and it is believed to be functionally important. Without sources of
variability, these nonlinear neuronal systems tend to phase-lock too well,
impairing a system's ability to perform discrimination tasks. The investigator
therefore also assesses the effects of randomness on the temporal processing
power of phasic and tonic cells and on the theoretical models. This work seeks
to test whether the commonly accepted notion, that phasicness enhances temporal
processing power, passes a set of quantitative criteria and, if so, to develop a
theoretical foundation that supports the notion and that extends to other neural
and possibly some chemical and physical systems as well. A related subproject is
to develop computational models that help explain the dynamic effects seen
experimentally as interaural phase (or amplitude or frequency) is varied
dynamically. A deeper understanding of some surprising effects, as seen in the
auditory mid-brain, should contribute to developing a theory for how motion of
sound sources is analyzed in the brain. It is believed that some neural
computations involve cellular and circuit properties that enable encoding and
decoding based on precise timing of action potentials. Sound localization in the
auditory system offers a compelling example. It serves as the case study for
this research, that seeks a more qualitative characterization of cellular
properties that correlate with precise temporal processing. Many cells in the
auditory brain stem contribute to the system's ability to detect coincidence of
interaural signals. These neurons have distinctive firing properties. When a
steady stimulus is presented they fire only once, at stimulus onset, while
neurons of many other types will continue to fire until the stimulus is turned
off. This property of phasicness is believed crucial for precise temporal
processing. In contrast, tonic cells are assumed to be less capable of tracking
rapidly changing signals. The biophysical basis, a special potassium current,
IK-LT, appears to underlie phasicness in the brain stem neurons. This project
systematically addresses how the temporal processing ability of a neuron changes
as the neuron is transformed from phasic to tonic mode, say by gradually
adjusting the strength of IK-LT. When a cell is in phasic mode does it track a
time-varying signal better, or does it perform better coincidence detection,
than when it is in tonic mode? The research combines both experimental and
theoretical approaches. The experiments involve electrical recording from
individual neurons in vitro while stimulating them with periodic and other time-
varying signals, including random components. From the theoretical side,
biophysically-based mathematical models are developed that mimic the neurons,
including a term for IK-LT. Various measures are applied to the computer and
cellular models to assess reliability and precision of processing. In addition,
concepts from nonlinear dynamical systems are applied in order to reveal and
understand the underlying mathematical structure. This understanding will enable
us to generalize about the significance of phasicness to other neural systems
where the mechanism might not involve IK-LT. A related subproject is to develop
computational models that help explain the dynamic effects seen experimentally
as interaural phase (or amplitude or frequency) is varied dynamically. A deeper
understanding of these surprising effects, as seen in the auditory mid-brain,
should contribute to developing a theory for how motion of sound sources is
analyzed in the brain. This project is supported by the Applied Mathematics and
Computational Mathematics programs and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities in MPS and by the Computational Neuroscience program in BIO.
