
* 0078250
* Mathematical Approaches to Epidemiological Studies of the Emergence, Re-Emergence and Persistence of Infectious Diseases
* DMS,POPULATION DYNAMICS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2000,08/28/2000
* Michael Li,MS,Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2004
* USD 105,000.00

Li 0078250 The investigator develops mathematical models to investigate several
important epidemiological and ecological factors for the emergence, re-emergence
and persistence of infectious diseases. The project has three goals: (1) to
develop a new mathematical framework in epidemiological modeling that links the
human population to its environment, (2) to introduce and develop a new
mathematical approach to the analysis of epidemic models, (3) to stimulate
mathematical development of more effective analytical and numerical tools for
resolving important computational issues arising from the model analysis. The
work is carried out along two main themes: Theme I. Develop a mathematical
framework in epidemiological modeling using network models that takes into
account the full cycle of a disease in nature and encompasses three
interconnected key elements: human hosts, intermediate hosts and disease
vectors, and environment. Theme II. Develop an approach to the analysis of
epidemic models using the method of singular perturbation to further our
understanding of several key biological issues such as robust mechanisms for
cyclic temporal patterns in disease incidence and the short-term evolution of
disease pathogenicity. Computational issues arising from the large scale systems
in network models and from the multiple time scales that are inherent in disease
transmission processes are also investigated. The global spread of infectious
diseases and the emergence of drug-resistant disease agents are causes for alarm
at the end of the 20th century. As the world population continues to explode,
the world economies continue to become globalized, individual interactions and
international travel continues to increase, and the environment around the globe
continues to be devastated, the effective control and prevention of the global
spread of infectious diseases is destined to be one of the grand challenges
facing mankind in the new millennium. Essential to our success in meeting this
challenge is a renewed effort in epidemiological studies, a better understanding
of the transmission and spread mechanisms of various diseases, and more
effective disease control and prevention measures based on these studies and the
new understanding. While the nature and scale of the problems at hand inevitably
limit the effectiveness of experimental approaches, mathematical modeling has
proven to be a valuable approach and an indispensable tool for understanding the
problems, for testing hypotheses, and for predicting effective measures of
control and prevention. It is expected that results from the project can advance
our understanding of the basic ecological and epidemiological mechanisms for the
emergence, re-emergence and persistence of infectious diseases and their
associated temporal patterns, and improve the present theoretical basis for
effective disease control and prevention strategies.


