
* 0102587
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Studies of Short-Ranged Spin Glasses
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 08/15/2001,06/06/2005
* Charles Newman,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 302,005.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0102587

Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative Research: Mathematical Studies of Short-
Ranged Spin Glasses

Abstract DMS-0102587 Newman

The work under this grant addresses the mathematical foundations of the theory
of disordered magnets known as spin glasses. Although there exist proposed
solutions of idealized (and unrealistic) spin glass models, the principal
investigators' interests center on answering fundamental statistical mechanical
questions that bear on the behavior of real laboratory spin glasses. These
questions, many of which remain controversial despite two decades of intensive
study, include the nature of ordering in the equilibrium spin glass phase,
understanding anomalous behavior, such as slow relaxation and aging arising from
nonequilibrium dynamics, and proving the presence or absence of a phase
transition in finite dimensions. The methods used and concepts introduced should
be relevant not only for spin glasses but also for other disordered systems,
many of which remain poorly understood. Moreover, the generality of the
principal investigators' approach to dynamics should yield progress in certain
aspects of nonequilibrium dynamics in both homogeneous and disordered systems.

Our deep physical and mathematical understanding of ordered systems in the solid
and liquid state --- for example, crystals, ferromagnets, superconductors,
liquid crystals, and many others --- has been both of fundamental scientific
importance and has spurred profound technological change throughout the second
half of the last century. However, there exist many systems, both familiar and
unfamiliar, in which randomness or disorder plays a key role, and in which our
mathematical and physical understanding remains comparatively primitive. One
familiar example is ordinary window glass, where the atoms or molecules are
"stuck" in random locations (as opposed to a regular crystalline array as would
be found, for example, in ice). Spin glasses are disordered magnetic systems
which are thought to be prototypes for this kind of macroscopic "frozen-in"
disorder. Disordered systems in general present both fundamental scientific
challenges and at the same time hold great promise for applications. The latter
includes not only the possibility of new materials and devices but also the
creation of new algorithms and applications to the biological and other
sciences. Progress in understanding these systems is therefore greatly
desirable. Spin glasses may be more amenable to mathematical analysis than other
materials in this class. Nevertheless, little fundamental progress has been made
even here. The principal investigators' work is aimed at resolving basic
mathematical and physical issues concerning these materials and at providing a
general theoretical approach for a wide variety of disordered systems.


