
* 0102356
* Computation of Nearly Singular Integrals with Applications to Fluid Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,08/02/2001
* J. Thomas Beale,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2005
* USD 165,499.00

0102356 Beale

The proposed work is concerned with the development of improved methods for
computing singular or nearly singular integrals, and with applications to
numerical methods for simulating fluid flow with moving boundaries. In many
scientific problems, quantities of interest can be written in terms of integrals
such as a double layer potential on a boundary. When such an integral is
evaluated near the boundary, usual quadrature rules are inaccurate because of
large derivatives in the integrand. It is desirable to calculate such values in
a way that is simple and efficient, without requiring a special choice of
quadrature points. The present approach uses regularization of the singularity
and a standard quadrature rule, followed by local corrections derived from
asymptotic analysis. This technique will be used to design an alternate version
of the immersed boundary method of C. Peskin, a computational method which has
been used to model various biological processes. In this method viscous,
incompressible fluid is influenced by a membrane or interface which exerts a
force on the fluid. In two dimensions, the force can be expressed in terms of
nearly singular integrals to which the proposed approach can be applied. It is
hoped that this modification will extend the usefulness of the immersed boundary
method in realistic applications. Application may also be made to methods for
computing flow with moving boundaries separating different fluids. The technique
for nearly singular integrals will be extended to surface integrals in three-
space, generalizing work already done for marker points on surfaces. Related
work will concern interfaces in inviscid, potential flow using improved
regularizations of boundary integrals.

Many scientific processes involve moving boundaries, for example, the boundary
of a drop of one fluid moving through another, or a membrane in living tissue.
Numerical models of such processes encounter special difficulties, since it is
simplest to compute quantities at a set of points which are regularly spaced and
unchanging. There are presently several numerical approaches which avoid
changing fundamentally the way the region is approximated at each new time. In
some cases important quantities can be written as integrals over boundaries.
These integrals arise as solutions of differential equations and are usually
singular, or nearly singular; that is, large values appear, representing the
strong interaction of nearby points, as in the inverse square law of gravity.
Special techniques are needed to calculate such integrals accurately and
efficiently. This proposal is concerned with the development and application of
methods of this type. The use of integral representations to modify the design
of existing methods for computing fluid motion with moving boundaries might
improve the ability of these numerical methods to make reliable predictions.
