
* 0102496
* Nonsmooth analysis on smooth manifolds and its applications in control and optimization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,09/05/2002
* Yuri Ledyaev,MI,Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

DMS 0102496 PIs: Ledyaev, Treiman, and Zhu

PROJECT ABSTRACT



The main objectives of this project are to develop nonsmooth analysis for
semicontinuous functions and multivalued mappings on smooth manifolds and to
apply these new analytical techniques to a variety of optimization and control
problems. Examples of nonsmooth (nondifferentiable) functions on manifolds are
provided by the maximum eigenvalue of a symmetric matrix on the manifold of
symmetric matrices, the Riemannian metric and Riemannian distance functions on
Riemannian manifold, control Lyapunov functions for stabilization of control
systems on manifolds and optimal value functions for optimal control problems.
The major directions for research are the following: (i)
subdifferential(infinitesimal) calculus for nonsmooth functions on smooth
manifolds; (ii) applications of subdifferential calculus to optimization
problems on smooth manifolds; (iii) applications of subdifferential calculus to
the study of invariance of closed sets and monotonicity of semicontinuous
functions with respect to solutions of differential inclusions on manifolds;
(iv) applications of these results to the study of generalized solutions to
Hamilton-Jacobi equations on manifolds; (v) applications to the derivation of
optimality conditions for general nonsmooth control problems on manifolds; (vi)
applications of subdifferential calculus for constructing discontinuous optimal
and stabilizing feedback controls using nonsmooth optimal value and control
Lyapunov functions; (vii) the study of interior point methods in semistable and
semidefinite programmings via discontinuous feedback techniques and the study of
generalized gradient flows on manifolds.

Design of high-performance feedback controls for nonlinear systems whose
mathematical models include manifolds is an active research area oriented to
automotive, aerospace, and naval applications. It has been recognized that, in
general, control tasks (such as stabilization or robust optimal control) for
these systems cannot be performed using traditional continuous feedback and
require discontinuous feedback. Since existing mathematical tools (differential
inclusion theory) have proved inadequate for analysis of discontinuous feedback
performance, this research project is aimed at developing new analytical tools
and techniques for such analysis. But feedback control is not the only one
research field which will benefit from these new analytical tools. Other fields
of application for these research results include numerical and theoretical
optimization, in particular, a development of robust numerical methods for new
semistable and semidefinite optimization problems, and generalized solutions of
partial differential equations on manifolds .
