
* 0103998
* Differential Equations resulting from the interaction of Gravity with other Force Fields, and Shock-Waves in General Relativity
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
* 08/01/2001,08/18/2004
* Joel Smoller,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 260,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103998

Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations resulting from the interaction of
Gravity with other Force Fields, and Shock Waves in General Relativity

Abstract DMS-0103998 Smoller

This project is concerned with mathematical problems involving gravity, as
described by Einsteins theory of general relativity, on two different scales:
(A) elementary particles, whereby gravity is coupled to other fundamental forces
(e.g., nuclear forces), and quantum mechanical effects are taken into account,
via the Dirac Equation; and (B) astrophysics, in particular, shock-wave
explosions in the universe. In Part A, we study the behavior of elementary
particles (fermions) in a rotating black-hole geometry. We also study the decay
and stability of solutions of the Teukolsky equation (which applies to
gravitational waves, electromagnetic waves, etc.), in a rotating black-hole
background geometry. In Part B, we investigate a new cosmological model,
different from the Big-Bang model. The model, which agrees with astronomical
observations, is based on shock waves that can occur beyond the Hubble length.
We will also investigate the validity of the Hawking-Penrose singularity theorem
for situations involving interacting shock waves. Finally, we will study the
dynamics of a star collapsing to a black hole, modeled as an initial-value
problem for the Einstein-Euler equations, with certain constraints on the
initial data. This study will also help us learn more about the constraint
equations that all initial data for the Einstein equations must satisfy.

This project is concerned with mathematical problems involving gravity, as
described by Einsteins theory of general relativity, on two different scales:
(A) elementary particles, whereby gravity is coupled to other fundamental forces
(e.g., nuclear forces), and quantum mechanical effects are taken into account,
and (B) astrophysics; in particular, shock-wave explosions in the universe. In
Part A, we study the behavior of an elementary particle (electron, proton, etc.)
near a black hole. We also study the stability of electromagnetic and
gravitational waves near a black hole. In Part B, we explore a new model for
cosmology, different from the usual Big Bang scenario, which is based on a
shock-wave explosion. We will also study the collapse of a massive star to a
black hole.
