
* 0103856
* Mathematical Aspects of Frontal Polymerization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,04/30/2003
* Vladimir Volpert,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 163,479.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0103856 PI: Volpert, Vladimir Institution:
Northwestern University Program: Applied Mathematics Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis

Title: Mathematical Aspects of Frontal Polymerization

The research project is devoted to theoretical investigations of frontal
polymerization (FP) processes, in which a localized reaction zone propagates
into a monomer converting it into a polymer. The project addresses both modeling
of specific FP processes and the study of more general mathematical problems
motivated by these modeling efforts. Specific modeling topics include the study
of initiation of FP waves, their linear and nonlinear stability and fluid
dynamical behavior. Asymptotic approaches are used to determine the structure of
the polymerization wave and the composition of the product, as well as such
experimentally measurable characteristics of the wave as its propagation
velocity as a function of the kinetic and thermophysical parameters of the
problem and the initial conditions. Topics of a more general mathematical nature
are concerned with threshold phenomena in reaction diffusion systems, existence
of time-periodic traveling waves of monotone parabolic systems, new kinds of
integro-differential equations describing polymerization kinetics, and new forms
of solutions of reaction diffusion systems, the so-called quasi-traveling wave
solutions, the characteristics of which, including the propagation speed, vary
slowly in time.

The importance of the proposed studies of frontal polymerization is twofold.
First, it is a method to produce polymers which have become an integral part of
human life. It bears strong similarities with another technological process
occurring in a frontal regime, namely, self-propagating high-temperature
synthesis which uses combustion waves to synthesize desired inorganic materials.
Unlike the frontal polymerization process, the self-propagating high-temperature
synthesis process is well-studied and is known to enjoy certain advantages over
conventional technology, in which the mixture is placed in a furnace. These
include (i) shorter synthesis times, (ii) less expense, since the internal
chemical energy of the reactants is used rather than the external energy of the
furnace, (iii) the use of simpler equipment, and (iv) purer products, since the
high-temperature wave burns off volatile impurities. Similar benefits can be
expected in polymer synthesis. Specifically, energy costs and waste solvent
production can be reduced and unique materials obtained. However, before any
advantages can be achieved and the frontal polymerization process becomes a
competitive technology, a better understanding of the factors that affect
frontal polymerization is necessary. Second, studies of specific models of
frontal polymerization pose questions of a more general mathematical nature that
are related to the behavior of solutions of general
reaction/diffusion/convection systems. The study of these more general problems
contributes to the understanding of specific frontal polymerization problems.

Date: June 18, 2001
