
* 0103907
* Mathematical modeling and analysis of high precision sensors for polymer characterization
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2001,04/22/2003
* Gilberto Schleiniger,DE,University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 120,870.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0103907 PI: Schleiniger, Gilberto Institution:
University of Delaware Program: Applied Mathematics Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis

Title: GOALI: Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of High Precision Sensors for
Polymer Characterization

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
project will address the mathematical modeling and analysis of piezoelectric
transducers for polymer characterization. The principal investigator and a
graduate student will work in cooperation with a researcher at DuPont to develop
mathematical models and corresponding analytical and numerical tools to describe
the response of thickness-shear mode resonators to contact with inhomogeneous
viscoelastic media, a critical step in developing piezoelectric based
transducers into operational chemical sensors. DuPont will participate in the
development of the models by providing access to experimental facilities, data
and involvement of the graduate student at the industrial site. The mathematical
modeling is based on boundary-value problems for the linear and nonlinear
systems of partial differential equations governing the physical processes at
work in the sensor. Both perturbation and numerical methods will be used to
obtain results, simplify the problem when appropriate, and to gain insight into
special limiting cases.

The design of low-cost, high performance sensing systems is of great interest
both to research and commercial applications. Examples of areas that can benefit
from such systems are processing waste material from mining and other industries
which are of environmental concern, coating (e.g. in the automotive industry as
well as in medical applications), packaging (e.g. food, medical) and pollution
control sensors. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) research project will address the mathematical modeling and analysis of
sensors for polymer characterization. The DuPont company will collaborate with
the principal investigator and a graduate student to develop models for the
improvement of these sensors. The project will benefit from this collaboration,
including an industrial training opportunity for the mathematics graduate
student.

Date: June 4, 2001
