
* 0104205
* Analytical and Numerical Studies of Direct and Inverse Problems for Parabolic Initial-Boundary Value Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2001,08/20/2001
* Lester Caudill, Jr.,VA,University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 74,724.00

This project focuses on the study of direct and inverse problems for parabolic
partial differential equations. The PI will utilize both analytical and
numerical methods to address a number of challenging questions related to two
important problems in domain identification. The first problem involves the
detection and identification of an inhomogeneity inside an otherwise known
domain. The second problem involves determination of an unknown portion of the
boundary of a domain. In each case, information is provided in the form of
overly posed boundary values on a portion of the boundary of the domain.
Specific attention will be focused on the development of realistic models for
cracks and inclusions inside a thermally conductive body, theoretical and
numerical questions related to the inverse problem of crack and inclusion
detection from thermal data, the development of stable and reliable algorithms
for the determination of an unknown portion of the boundary of a domain from
thermal data, and the investigation of a number of issues related to the
mathematical modeling of corrosion.

When studying physical objects or processes, many properties cannot be measured
directly, either because it is impractical to do so, or because unwanted damage
to the object would result. Well-known examples include the detection of tumors
inside the human body, the detection of oil reservoirs or mineral deposits deep
underground, and the detection of hidden damage inside an object such as an
aircraft wing or fuselage. The field of inverse problems focuses on determining
or estimating these non-measurable properties by measuring other properties,
then using a mathematical model (usually a partial differential equation) to
connect these measurements to the desired properties. This project investigates
the use of thermal methods to determine properties of the inside of objects
without damaging them. A portion of the outer surface is heated, then the
temperature on the surface is measured over a period of time. The relationship
between the measured temperature and the structure of the inside of the object
can be modeled mathematically. This project focuses on the analysis of this
mathematical model, and on the development of a practical algorithm which will
permit the extraction of information about the interior of the object from these
temperature measurements. This analysis will provide a theoretical foundation to
develop stable and reliable algorithms for use in a wide variety of important
applications, including the analysis of corrosion damage inside aircraft wings
and fuselages, the inspection of newly manufactured objects for interior cracks
or voids (quality control), and in medical diagnostics.
