
* 0104305
* Control problems for systems of strongly coupled partial differential equations with variable coefficients.
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2001,09/02/2004
* Irena Lasiecka,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 475,527.00

In recent years, the emerging technology of smart materials and structures has
brought to the fore of scientific investigation the pressing need to control,
optimize, and stabilize dynamical 'interactive' structures, whose components'
behavior is governed by partial differential equations (PDEs). A canonical
illustrative example of keen national interest is the noise reduction problem in
an acoustic chamber (aircraft's or rotorcraft's cockpit or cabin, etc). This
couples the oscillatory behavior of the unwanted acoustic pressure (noise field)
within the chamber with the elastic vibrations of a flexible wall of the
chamber, possibly reinforced by sandwiched layers, and possibly accounting for
thermo-elastic effects. Pairwise sets of piezo-electric patches bonded on the
flexible wall, once suitably wired, develop an elastic moment that is meant to
dampen out the noise in the acoustic chamber. Mathematically, the acoustic
pressure is modeled by a second order scalar hyperbolic equation (wave
equation), while the flexible wall is modeled by a plate-like Kirchhoff equation
with or without structural damping. In the first case, the plate has a parabolic
behavior, in the second a hyperbolic behavior, resulting therefore in either
hyperbolic/parabolic coupling, or in hyperbolic/hyperbolic coupling of the
overall structure. Two additional key, novel, distinguishing features of the
present project are: (i) first, the linear or non-linear PDEs describing the
coupled structure have variable coefficients in space, which is always the case
when the properties of the medium depend from point to point; (ii) and,
moreover, the flexible wall may be curved (rather than flat), and thus modeled
by a shell (rather than a plate). Accordingly, differential geometric methods
are then proposed in the control theoretic analysis of the overall coupled
structure, to cope with these two serious difficulties. The goal is to optimally
control - according to a pre-assigned optimality criterion - and asymptotically
stabilize the coupled structure. The methodology of this project consists in
first establishing a mathematical theory, to be followed next by a numerical
analysis thereof, to yield effective and computable algorithms.

Recent Federal research has convincingly demonstrated smart materials/structures
to be a laboratory reality. This is also confirmed by a Workshop Report for the
National Science Foundation entitled: "Rebuilding and enhancing the Nation's
infrastructures: a role for intelligent material systems and structures", 1993.
These new structural concepts actively damp noise and vibration, suppress
flutter at trailing edges of airfoils and enable active twist/camber of both
fixed wing and rotorcraft; attenuate or suppress water borne signatures (active
acoustic signature control), etc. The transition of novel smart structures into
new, truly revolutionary platforms faces many obstacles. The most significant is
design optimization: both of the smart structure and its communication and
control systems. The present project aims at producing a contribution in this
area, based on solid mathematical foundations and analysis.
