
* 0104118
* Microstructure and Symmetry Breaking Phase Transition: Analysis and Numerical Simulation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2001,06/19/2001
* Georg Dolzmann,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2004
* USD 81,497.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0104118 PI: Dolzmann, Georg Institution: University
of Maryland, College Park Program: Applied Math Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis

Title: Microstructure and Symmetry Breaking Phase Transition: Analysis and
Numerical Simulation

The goal of this project is to understand macroscopic properties of materials
undergoing solid to solid phase transitions through modern methods in the
calculus of variations. A main objective is to investigate the possible patterns
that can form and their impact on the elastic behaviour of the material.

On the analytical side, virtually all methods to attack this problem are
connected to the deep mathematical concept of quasiconvexity. Even 50 years
after Morrey's seminal work, quasiconvexity is despite its fundamental
importance still poorly understood, and any progress in this program will
contribute to the unraveling of its mysteries.

The numerical simulation of microstructure poses a wealth of challenging
problems. New insight into the underlying theoretical concepts will enhance the
performance of algorithms and lead to their rigorous verification. Successful
computations will help to develop new experiments that allow to identify optimal
properties of materials.

The proposed integrated analytical and numerical approach is designed to advance
the understanding and the optimization of new materials which play a crucial
role in emerging technological applications, for example of microactuators based
on shape memory materials or light guiding devices and bifocal contact lenses
made of nematic elastomers.

Date: May 11, 2001
