
* 0104096
* Nonlinear Geometric Optics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2001,05/14/2003
* Jeffrey Rauch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 123,000.00

Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Geometric Optics

0104096 Rauch

The project concerns the development and analysis of new asymptotic methods to
study short wavelength solutions of nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential
equations. Short wavelength asymptotics, also known as geometric optics, is one
of the most penetrating and widely applicable methods for analyzing partial
differential equations. Traditionally applied to linear problems, the method has
recently been employed to furnish rigorous results in the nonlinear context.
This project continues the development of the method for treatment of nonlinear
problems. Special emphasis is placed on analysis of solutions that model
ultrashort laser pulses and on the behavior of both wave trains and pulses upon
crossing focal points.

This project develops new mathematical tools to describe the propagation of
waves whose form is that of short pulses. The technique, called asymptotic
analysis, studies such pulses in the limit as the wavelength of the pulse
becomes shorter and shorter. In such limiting situations, much can be learned
about solutions of the underlying equations, which express physical laws such as
Newton's second law for fluids or the laws of electromagnetism. This project
develops the technique to analyze important nonlinear equations that arise in a
variety of applications. Special attention is given to diffractive effects that
occur when rays of geometric optics stay close together for long times, and to
the effects that occur when pulses focus in a nonlinear regime. Promising
preliminary results show that standard numerical techniques can be improved in
both accuracy and simplicity. The results of this project will yield reliable
procedures for numerical simulations of important physical systems, including
lasers that produce ultrashort pulses.
