
* 0105004
* The Lagrangian Averaged Navier-Stokes Equations with Applications to Turbulence Modeling
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2001,07/27/2001
* Steve Shkoller,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 10/31/2004
* USD 94,599.00

0105004 Shkoller

This three year research effort is founded upon the author's recent development
of a novel Lagrangian averaging procedure for the Euler and Navier-Stokes
equations of fluid dynamics. The method is based on expressing the exact
Lagrangian fluid flow as a composition of a smooth deterministic volume-
preserving Lagrangian flow and a rough stochastic flow consisting of volume-
preserving near-identity transformations. This decomposition is asymptotically
expanded about the identity, substituted into the variational principle, and
then averaged. The resulting deterministic system of equations is termed the
Lagrangian averaged Navier-Stokes (LANS) equations in the presence of viscosity,
and the Lagrangian averaged Euler (LAE) equations in the ideal case when
viscosity is absent. Both the LAE and LANS models are parameterized by a small
spatial scale alpha, and are derived in such a fashion as to accurately
reproduce the dynamics of the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations at spatial
scales larger than alpha, while averaging (or homogenizing) the fluid motion at
scales smaller than alpha. Unlike current approaches such as Reynolds averaged
Navier-Stokes (RANS) or Large Eddie Simulation (LES) models which add artificial
dissipation to the system to remove subgrid scales, the LAE/LANS equations
preserve the underlying structure of the inviscid dynamics, namely, energy,
helicity, and circulation, by instead using a geometric, nonlinear dispersive
mechanism. As a result, our LANS model, unlike RANS or LES, does not
artificially suppress intermittency, a fundamental feature of fluid turbulence.
The resulting system is a set of dynamically coupled partial differential
equations for the mean velocity field and covariance tensor. This system will be
the backbone of a massive analytic and computational assault on the modeling and
understanding of fluid turbulence.

Although heavily studied by numerous researchers for over a century,
incompressible fluid turbulence elusively remains one of the last great
challenges of modern scientific exploration. Its understanding is of paramount
importance in a wide range of engineering and physical applications, ranging
from the design of airplanes and automobiles, to daily weather forecasts and
global climate prediction. Roughly speaking, a flow becomes turbulent when all
of the spatial scales in the fluid are activated, or in other words, when the
fluid is moving so chaotically, as to create smaller and ever smaller vortices.
In such a flow regime, the trajectory of each fluid particle appears
unpredictable, yet the challenge is to derive a mathematical set of equations
which can describe this unpredictable motion. About 150 years ago, the Navier-
Stokes equations were introduced for this very purpose, and although it is now
generally accepted that these equations do indeed provide a remarkable physical
model of reality, it remains a mathematical mystery as to whether or not unique
solutions to these equations exist for all time. Moreover, even numerical
approximations of these equations on the world's fastest supercomputers are
incapable of modeling the small-scale structures and patterns which are formed
in a turbulent regime -- the computer simply runs out of memory long before it
can simulate the prohibitively small vortical motion. The LANS model, described
above, is intended to alleviate these fundamental difficulties, and make the
computational simulation of turbulent flows feasible.
