
* 0109872
* Hyperacuity in the Auditory System
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, SENSORY SYSTEMS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/15/2001,06/03/2005
* Michael Reed,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 501,071.00

Reed 0109872 Certain cells in the mammalian auditory brainstem (three neurons
from the periphery) show exceptionally small standard deviations in the
microsecond range of the timing of the first action potential response under
repeated trials of the same sound. Moreover, the latency and its standard
deviation are quite independent of frequency and decibel level over large
ranges. This behavior is exceptional since the inputs to these cells come from
octopus and other cells in the contralateral cochlear nucleus, a nucleus which
is ennervated by auditory nerve fibers that have much larger standard deviations
and high dependence on frequency and decibel level. Thus, this system is an
example of how the brain can use relatively sloppy and variable devices
(neurons) to perform surprisingly accurate calculations. Professor Michael Reed,
with colleague physiologist Joseph Blum, investigates this system with three
research projects: (i) They create and investigate by machine computation a
large scale mathematical model of the whole system using known physiological
properties of auditory nerve fibers and recently discovered properties of
octopus cells; (ii) They use mathematical analysis investigate of the
improvement of the standard deviation of latency in converging networks where
the target cells require coincident inputs within time windows in order to fire;
(iii) They use partial differential equations to understand the special
properties of dendritic information processing in octopus cells. Using
mathematics and machine computation, Professor Michael Reed continues to study
how groups of cells (neurons) in the auditory brainstem perform calculations
that individual cells can not do by themselves. Neurons are inherently sloppy
and variable devices that perform differently even under (apparently) the same
conditions with the same inputs. Nevertheless, large groups of these neurons are
able to perform together, reliably, highly accurate calculations. This project
tries to understand this apparent paradox. The project sheds light on how and
why human brains are organized the way they are and it suggests new mechanisms
for the development of man-made thinking devices.
