
* 0124121
* Conference: Variational Methods: Open Problems, Recent Progress, and Numerical Algorithms, June 11-14, 2002, Northern Arizona University
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 03/15/2002,03/15/2002
* John Neuberger,AZ,Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0124121 Neuberger

This grant will support a conference on Variational Methods: Open Problems,
Recent Progress, and Numerical Investigations to be held June 11-14, 2001 at
Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, Arizona. The term Variational Methods
in the title refers to a rich area of partial differential equations and a
family of methods historically used to investigate them. Many famous
mathematicians have made significant contributions in the last century to this
area, but it is widely held that the time is ripe for a new round of discoveries
to be made. Solutions of these problems typically rely on tools from a wide
range of mathematical areas and potentially have a significant impact on the
study of important physical applications. The purpose of this conference is to
assemble as many experts as is possible in this research area, in order to
discuss and catalog the area's most important open (unsolved) problems and the
methods that might be used to attack them. Numerical investigations (using a
computer to visualize and approximate solutions and their properties) are
gaining respect in the mathematical community, but their power is not yet fully
appreciated by many in the established research world, nor are they yet
accessible to many of those who do appreciate that power. This modern approach
will be integrated with traditional (non computer-related) discussions via
numerical lectures and hands-on technological demonstrations. Special attention
will be given to physical applications, in order to facilitate our contributing
to real-world science and to provide a source of renewed inspiration for our
endeavors.

The driving force for this conference is a desire to produce a highly usable, in
fact essential, reference for those actively researching in the area and for
young mathematicians just starting their careers. Both groups will benefit
greatly from having a single succinct catalog of good research problems together
with an introduction to the most fruitful relevant mathematical tools and an
exhaustive bibliography. A publisher (American Mathematical Society Journal of
Contemporary Mathematics) has already provisionally accepted a proposal for
publishing this document. The conference will encourage informal discussion
about the future of our field, the potential for it to make significant
contributions to the sciences, and how best to put all this information in a
single proceedings volume.

The focus of the discussed research will be on nonlinear elliptic partial
differential equations, a key application of variational methods. Nonlinear
equations in general are vital to the description of physical phenomena, and
elliptic equations describe (roughly speaking) one third of these. The efficient
harvesting of biological mass, modeling of star birth and death, and the
fundamental equations governing quantum physics all rely on elliptic equations.
Significant progress in this research area has the potential to make a real
difference, scientifically and economically, to the world at large. The aim is
to trigger a vibrant renewed surge of interest and effort towards solving these
types of problems. The conference and corresponding proceedings volume will be
of equal parts research and educationally oriented. Beginning researchers will
be exposed to research in mathematics to the physical importance of the field,
unsolved problems will be suggested for their pursuit, and analytical and
numerical tools essential to that research will be introduced. These new
researchers who attend or, more generally, have access to the resulting
proceedings volume, will in the long run be the key contributors. The aim is to
encourage informal discussion, where real mathematics is done, but guide the
process with a focus on the ultimate goal of producing a cohesive document.
