
* 0201303
* The Sixth Conference on Clifford Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical Physics, Tennessee Technogical University, May 20-26, 2002, Cookville, Tennessee
* DMS,GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2002,03/28/2002
* Rafal Ablamowicz,TN,Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 03/31/2003
* USD 24,990.00

DDMS-0201303 Rafal Ablamowicz and John Ryan

This award provides partial support for active research mathematicians and
scientists with limited means of support to attend in The 6th Conference on
Clifford Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical Physics to be held at
the Tennessee Technological University from May 20 through May 26, 2002, in
Cookeville, Tennessee. The award, together with other funding, will provide
travel support for some of the speakers and for some participants who do not
have funds available through other source, with priority given to graduate
students, recent Ph.D.'s, minorities and women. As part of the conference, a
Lecture Series on Clifford Algebras and Applications aimed at graduate students
and recent Ph.D.'s will be presented on May 18 and 19, 2002.

The 6th Conference will be sponsored by the National Science Foundation, the
American Mathematical Society, the International Society for Analysis, its
Applications and Computation (ISAAC), University of Arkansas, George Mason
University, and the Tennessee Technological University. The organizers of the
conference look for interaction among mathematicians, scientists and engineers.
The conference will include the following speakers, five sessions, six 90 minute
lectures, and other activities:

Speakers: Christian Bar, Helga Baum, Carlos A. Berenstein, Michael Eastwood,
Bertfried Fauser, Alexander J. Hahn, Jacques Helmstetter, David Hestenes,
Tadeusz Iwaniec, Jan J. Koenderink, Bertram Kostant, Heinz Kruger, Anthony
Lasenby, Shahn Majid, Michael McCarthy, Marius Mitrea, Victor Nistor, Tao Qian,
Lee Smolin, Joseph Varilly, S.L. Woronowicz, Sijue Wu

Sessions:

- Clifford analysis (Dirac operators, Wavelets, non-linear transformations,
Harmonic analysis/Fourier analysis, Singular integral operators, Discrete
potential theory, Initial value and boundary value problems)

- Geometry (Geometric index theory, Conformal and noncommutative geometry,
Geometric integral transforms, Spin structures and Dirac operators, Twistors,
tractors, and related topics, Invariant differential operators, Quaternionic
geometry)

- Mathematical structures (Hopf algebras and quantum groups, Category theory,
structural methods, Quadratic forms, Hermitian forms, Witt groups, Clifford
algebras over arbitrary fields, Lie algebras, spinor representations,
exceptional Lie algebras, super Lie algebras, Clifford algebras and their
generalizations, Infinite dimensional Clifford algebras and Clifford bundles)

- Physics (Perturbative renormalization and Hopf algebra antipodes, Spectral
triples and elementary particle physics, q-deformations and noncommutative
spacetime, Quantum Field Theory using Hopf algebras and other algebraic
techniques, Spin foams and quantum gravity, Quaternionic quantum mechanics and
quantum fields, Dirac equation in electron physics, Electrodynamics, Non-
associative structures, octonions, division algebras and their applications in
physics)

- Applications in computer science, robotics, engineering (Quantum computers,
error correction, algorithms, Robotics, inverse kinematics, space control,
navigation, cybernetics, image processing and engineering, Neural networks)

Lectures on Clifford Algebras and Applications (May 18 and 19, 2002):

Lecture 1: Introduction to Clifford algebras (Pertti Lounesto) Lecture 2:
Mathematical structure of Clifford algebras (Ian R. Porteous) Lecture 3:
Clifford analysis (John Ryan) Lecture 4: Clifford algebras in mathematical
physics (Heinz Kruger) Lecture 5: Clifford algebras in engineering (Jon Selig)
Lecture 6: Clifford algebras in differential geometry (Tom Branson)

Additionally, poster session, round table discussion, and book exhibits are also
planned. The organizers expect to recruit two additional speakers. Further
information is available at
http://math.tntech.edu/rafal/cookeville/cookeville.html.
