
* 0202851
* Topics in Stochastic Control, Portfolio Optimization and Credit Risk Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2002,02/05/2004
* Lidia Filus,IL,Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 85,000.00

0202851 Bielecki

The proposed research will be organized into two principal research areas: 1)
Development of mathematical theory for risk adjusted portfolio optimization and
fixed income investment management, incorporating factor modeling of security
returns, and 2) Development of mathematical theory for credit risk valuation and
hedging. There are three fundamental aspects of the first research area: 1A) The
concept of risk adjusted control (optimization) criteria for investment problems
with finite and infinite planning horizons. More specifically, we shall continue
to develop theory and applications for mean-variance stochastic control. This
kind of control problems is appealing to financial industry as it extends to
more realistic dynamic framework the classical approach of Harry Markowitz (1990
Nobel Prize in Economics). 1B) Development of control methodologies for the
fixed income investment problems with finite planning horizon coinciding with
the maturity of the underlying bond. We shall attempt to overcome certain
singularity problems arising in this context, which will lead to derivation of
applicable fixed income investment strategies. 1C) Explicit consideration given
to statistical estimation issues. Optimal control methodologies are rarely used
in the financial industry, largely because of statistical difficulties
associated with the estimation of constant drift coefficients in diffusion
process models of individual securities. Practitioners typically channel their
energies into forecasting security returns based upon exogenous factors such as
interest rates and firm- specific accounting measures. The proposed research
will serve to reduce the gap between theory and practice by developing
optimization models, which explicitly incorporate exogenous factors. By
explicitly modeling the dependence of the assets on factors, it will be possible
to obtain more realistic models, to better understand the statistical estimation
difficulties, and to be in a position to apply adaptive control methods. The
fundamental aspects of the second research area are: 2A) Explicit consideration
given to possibility of credit migrations of defaultable contingent claims. This
will be done in the context of conditionally Markov chains both with regard to a
single defaultable claim as well as with regard to several such claims. The
latter situation is very important for applications to basket credit
derivatives. 2B) Development of mathematical theory for hedging of certain
classes of credit derivatives that are vital for financial industry. This will
be done in the context of martingale representations associated with
conditionally Markov chains. 2C) Development of analytical tools for computation
of certain class of functionals of conditional Markov processes. This will build
upon the classical Feynman-Kac characterizations, and will find applications for
valuation and hedging of some fundamental (basket) credit derivatives such as
default swaps.

Although the proposed research will require fundamental advances within the
areas of applied mathematics, probability, and financial economics, it is
anticipated that the proposed research will lead to new and practical tools that
eventually become widely used in the financial industry, and possibly in the
insurance industry as well. The main reason for this expectation is that the
proposed research addresses the need of the two industries for quantitative
methodologies that would enable financial and insurance decision makers to
properly manage certain categories of risks. The major implication of incidence
of risks in financial/insurance decision- making is the possibility of financial
losses. In general, neither the possibility of financial losses, nor their
occasional severity, can be completely eliminated. However, workable tools, such
as pricing and hedging strategies, are sought for controlling some of the risks
underlying financial and insurance industries, so that both the possibility and
severity of losses are kept to minimum. The proposed research will provide
mathematical basis for development of such tools.
