
* 0204309
* Simulations and Models for Sedimentation at Small Reynolds Numbers
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,07/30/2002
* Peter Mucha,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 118,429.00

This award supports simultaneous mathematical and numerical study of various low
Reynolds number sedimentation flows. These systems are complicated by the long
range nature of the fluid flows generated by individual solid particles as they
fall, requiring efficient algorithms for particle simulations, introducing
variable nonlinear coefficients of different dependencies into model continuum
partial differential equations, and leading to nontrivial distributions in the
statistical mechanics of the interacting particles. In this work, efficient
algorithms specialized to dilute wall-bounded sedimentation, previously
developed to investigate the scaling of velocity fluctuations in monodisperse
sedimentation, will be used to provide quantitative data for comparison with
existing and newly-developed kinetic and fluid models. The simulations will be
generalized to include effects due to inclined channels, polydispersity, non-
spherical particles, and small non-zero Reynolds numbers.

Interactions between solid particles sedimenting in a fluid are important in
many natural and industrial processes, including the settling motions of silt in
rivers and dust in the air, and in applications which use centrifugal or
gravitational separation such as those for proteins, minerals, waste water, and
recyclable plastics. While the mathematics describing the interactions between
individual particles and the suspending fluid are well known, simulations of
large scale flows based on these rules are computationally prohibitive. It would
be far preferable to use macroscopic models which are less costly to solve
because they neglect the detailed motion of individual particles. Unfortunately,
existing macroscopic models for sedimentation have very limited ranges of
validity. This work will consider restricted classes of sedimentation systems in
which efficient computation of the interactions between large numbers of
particles remains possible because of simplified geometries and limits for the
mathematical rules describing particle motion. Results will be used to help
identify improved macroscopic models to describe both these restricted classes
and more general sedimentation flows. Ultimately, this work will lead to
improved equations for modeling sedimentation flows in nature and for better
design of separation processes based on sedimentation.
