
* 0204225
* Nonlinear Problems in Conservation Laws and Fluid Dynamics and Related Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2002,06/06/2002
* Gui-Qiang Chen,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2005
* USD 128,116.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0204225 PI: Chen, Gui-Qiang Institution:
Northwestern University Program: Applied Mathematics Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis

Title: Nonlinear Problems in Conservation Laws and Fluid Dynamics and Related
Partial Differential Equations

The investigator continues studies of nonlinear problems in conservation laws
and fluid dynamics and related nonlinear partial differential equations and
their applications, along with the analysis and development of efficient
nonlinear methods. The objective of this research program is twofold: (1) to
investigate important nonlinear problems such as multidimensional transonic
shocks and free boundary problems, vacuum problems, asymptotic stability
problems, compressible fluids with various constitutive relations, singular
limit problems, multiphase problems, and the Riemann problem to gain new
physical insights, to guide the formulation of efficient nonlinear methods, and
to find the correct function spaces in which to pose the nonlinear conservation
laws and develop the numerical methods that converge stably and rapidly; and (2)
to analyze and develop nonlinear methods including free boundary methods,
kinetic methods, geometric measure methods, weak convergence methods, shock
capturing techniques, energy methods, and related potential techniques to
formulate new, more efficient nonlinear methods and to solve various more
important nonlinear problems in conservation laws and fluid dynamics.

The nonlinear problems and related partial differential equations in this
research program arise in such areas as gas dynamics, hydraulics, combustion,
magnetohydrodynamics, semiconductor, elasticity, multiphase flow, phase
transitions, kinetic theory, biophysics, and material science. The award will
support research on the solvability of these nonlinear problems and related
partial differential equations, the qualitative behavior of their solutions and
related applications, as well as the analysis and development of nonlinear
methods in applied analysis and numerical analysis. This research will lead to a
deeper understanding of nonlinear phenomena and will provide more efficient
nonlinear methods and theories for applications.

Date: May 1, 2002
