
* 0205093
* Analysis of Optimal Controls for Biomedical Models of Cancer and HIV
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
* 07/01/2002,06/13/2003
* Urszula Ledzewicz,IL,Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 108,958.00

0205093 Ledzewicz

In the project, optimal control problems will be investigated which arise as
mathematical models for biomedical systems in the chemotherapy of diseases which
have a strong cell proliferation aspect such as cancer or AIDS. Three directions
of research will be pursued: the analysis of models in cancer chemotherapy, an
analysis of models for HIV-infection and anti- viral treatment of AIDS, and the
design and analysis of a general mathematical framework which combines common
features of both cancer and HIV models. The investigators will use their
previous experience working on cancer chemotherapy models and apply new tools
based on the method of characteristics and high-order conditions for optimality.
In compartmental models for cancer chemotherapy the cell-cycle is controlled by
clustering its phases into compartments and using phase specific cytostatic
killing and blocking agents. The goal is to maximize the number of cancer cells
that the cytostatic agent in the drug kills while keeping the toxicity to the
normal tissue acceptable. In this project a synthesis of optimal controls for
these models will be constructed. Furthermore, more complex mathematical models
that take into account additional aspects such as evolving drug resistance or
bone marrow destruction will be analyzed. Due to the complexity of HIV
infection, mathematical models for AIDS have only recently been developed and
still are constantly being revised and updated taking new medical data into
account. With the main attention so far given to the form of the dynamics that
best models the interactions between the virus and the human immune system under
drug treatment, many of these models still have not been formulated as optimal
control problems. The investigators will analyze a variety of these models in
the framework of optimal control and compare the solutions aiming at a design of
optimal treatment protocols.

In the project, the investigators will consider mathematical models in the
chemotherapy of diseases that have a strong cell proliferation aspect such a
cancer or AIDS. These models will be analyzed as optimal control problems with
the drug dosage serving as control parameter with the goal of maximizing the
number of cancer cells killed by the drug in the case of cancer (respectively
maximizing the number of uninfected cells in the case of chemotherapy for AIDS)
while minimizing the harmful side effects and cost of the chemotherapy. Although
individually these problems are very different in their specifics, they also
have many aspects in common and can be put into one general mathematical model
that encompasses them all. Thus, while on one side there is a need to consider
these problems separately to understand the implications for the underlying
disease, on the other side there are simplifications and insights to be gained
by looking at the general properties common to these models. This project will
address both directions. A biomedical interpretation of the conditions that
optimal controls satisfy will be given in terms understandable by biomedical
personnel and the conditions will be related to the underlying biological
situation. It is expected that the outcomes of this project will be of interest
to the medical community by giving some insights into the analysis of existing
chemotherapy protocols for cancer or HIV and possibly aid in the design of new
improved protocols. These results are particularly important for HIV treatments
which so far do not cure the disease, but only provide a long-term maintenance
program.
