
* 0206631
* Large Solutions to Systems of Nonlinear Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2002,04/08/2003
* Helge Jenssen,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 03/31/2004
* USD 74,222.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0206631 Mathematical Sciences: Large Solutions to
Systems of Nonlinear Equations

Abstract

0206631 Jenssen

The object of this research is threefold. First, we seek a better understanding
of solutions to systems of hyperbolic (inviscid) conservation laws that are
large in either amplitude or variation. New examples of explosive behavior will
be considered, as well as conditions preventing singular behavior. Next, we will
consider the multi-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations for a compressible fluid
and establish global existence of large solutions with spherical or cylindrical
symmetry. Finally, we will consider flow describing combustion. This is modeled
by the Navier-Stokes equations augmented by equations describing the chemical
processes. In this case we are particularly interested in the stability of wave
patterns.

The work deals with mathematical analysis of solutions to nonlinear partial
differential equations. The research will investigate systems of conservation
laws, compressible fluid flow, and equations describing reactive flow. Much of
the existing theory for such nonlinear equations applies only to small
solutions. However, large solutions are of great interest in applications such
as gas flow, combustion, and detonations, and study of these solutions requires
new techniques that will be developed in this project.
