
* 0208586
* Algorithms for Simulating Flows of Complex Fluids: Fluid-Solid Mixtures and Liquid Crystals
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2002,08/01/2002
* Noel Walkington,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2006
* USD 233,630.00

This project considers the construction and analysis of algorithms for the
simulating fluid systems where microstructural properties influence the
macroscopic flow. Liquid crystals are an important class of such fluids, and in
this instance the microstructural properties reflecting the geometry of the
molecules are usually incorporated into a continuum model. Another example is
flows containing visco-elastic particles. If the passages through which the
fluid flows are of comparable dimension to the particles, it is necessary to
explicitly compute the motion of the particles in order to determine the
stresses they experience. If the particles are small and numerous continuum
models must account for their elasticity.

The research proposed here was motivated by collaborative work with engineers
who wish to determine the distribution of and damage to damage red blood cells
in the small clearances within mechanical heart assist devices. This specific
project considers the development and analysis of computer algorithms for the
simulating fluid systems where microstructural properties influence the physical
flow. The microstructural properties may be due the presence of elastic
particles, (such as red blood cells) or molecular structure (such as long
polymer chains). If the passages through which the fluid flows are of comparable
dimension to the particles or molecules, it is necessary to explicitly compute
their motion in order to determine the stresses they experience. If the
particles are small and numerous continuum models must account for their
elasticity.
