
* 0211367
* Ecological Modeling: From Individual Utilization of Space to Community Structure
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, BE: NON-ANNOUNCEMENT RESEARCH
* 08/01/2002,08/29/2003
* George Cosner,FL,University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2005
* USD 269,970.00

Cosner 0211367 The investigators derive and analyze mathematical models that
describe how spatial aspects of the environment and the ways that organisms
utilize space and disperse through it influence the dynamics of populations and
the structure of ecological communities. The underlying motivation for the
project is to gain a better understanding of how spatial effects can threaten or
maintain biodiversity or affect interactions between important types of
organisms such as crops, pests, and biological control agents. The project is
focused primarily on edge-mediated effects in habitat fragments and on the
effects of nonrandom dispersal. The main goal is to gain insight into the ways
that edge-mediated effects and dispersal behavior influence the persistence or
extinction of species. Understanding edge-mediated effects is important because
one of the most significant ways in which humans alter natural environments is
by fragmenting habitats and thus creating edges. The investigators study many
spatial effects, including edge-mediated effects, via reaction-diffusion models.
However, reaction-diffusion models assume random dispersal, and the dispersal
patterns of some organisms are affected by behavioral responses to the presence
of prey, predators, or conspecifics. Reaction-diffusion equations cannot capture
those effects, so the investigators model them with more general forms of
quasilinear parabolic partial differential equations. The investigators use
methods and results from the theory of partial differential equations, dynamical
systems, and nonlinear functional analysis to develop the mathematical framework
needed to analyze the models. The investigators study mathematical models for
the ways that plant and animal populations are affected by the size and spatial
structure of the environment they inhabit and by the way they move or spread
through the environment. The goal of the project is to gain a better theoretical
understanding of how spatial effects influence the persistence or extinction of
populations. The underlying motivation is to provide insights into the impact of
spatial effects on biodiversity and on economically important organisms such as
crops and pests. The potential practical benefits of the project are
improvements in decision making in areas such as land management, conservation,
and urban planning. Much of the project is focused on the effects of habitat
edges, because one of the main effects of human activity on the environment is
to divide it into fragments and create edges, for example by building roads.
Different organisms respond to edges in different ways; for example, a new road
may isolate a population of one species of animals that refuse to cross it but
may add to the mortality of another species of animals that do attempt to cross.
When population interactions such as predation by one species upon another are
combined with spatial effects, the results can be complex and sometimes
counterintuitive. To understand them the investigators derive mathematical
equations that incorporate spatial effects and population interactions and
analyze those equations to determine when they predict persistence of
populations versus when they predict extinction. To conduct the analysis the
investigators use and develop various mathematical methods.
