
* 0223354
* Collaborative Research: High-Performance Computational Methods for Continuous-Time Markov Processes in Financial Engineering
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, SERVICE ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS
* 09/15/2002,08/22/2002
* Vadim Linetsky,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 02/28/2005
* USD 99,129.00

The project focuses on the development of high-performance computational tools
for financial engineering. The goal is to develop computational methods to
evaluate complex financial products used to manage foreign exchange, interest
rate, equity, commodity and energy price risks and credit risk, and manage large
portfolios of assets. The methodology is based on extensions to financial
engineering of finite-element methods successfully used in diverse branches of
engineering to solve numerically multi- dimensional partial differential and
integral equations. Partial integro- differential equations arise in the study
of Markov jump-diffusion processes and associated optimal stopping and
stochastic control problems in financial engineering. The aim of the present
proposal is to develop both the necessary mathematical theory to extend finite
element methods to jump- diffusion processes and develop high-performance
computational tools based on these methods that can be effectively implemented
and used by industry practitioners in the financial services, as well as
researchers in financial engineering, applied probability and branches of
operations research that use continuous-time Markov processes. Specific
challenges in financial engineering to be addressed in the project include high
dimensionality and jumps.

Methodologies developed in this project will help financial institutions,
corporate treasuries and energy companies accurately value complex financial
instruments, efficiently manage risk of financial transactions, and dynamically
manage portfolios of assets. In addition to financial engineering, we anticipate
that this project will have a broader impact on research and application areas
that use continuous-time Markov processes as a modeling framework. Constructive
approximations and computational algorithms for jump-diffusion processes
developed in this project should prove useful for diverse areas of application
that use jump-diffusion processes. This proposal will support the new Ph.D.
major in financial engineering at Northwestern University. This new Ph.D. major
will result in training of highly qualified researchers in financial
engineering. This project is a part of the long-term development effort at
Northwestern University in the area of financial engineering. This project will
also help the Department of Mathematical Sciences at the University of Nevada
Las Vegas establish a research program in financial mathematics.
