
* 0242543
* Modeling Biomolecular Transport Processes
* DMS,Cellular Dynamics and Function, CELLULAR ORGANIZATION, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2002,07/19/2004
* Timothy Elston,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 09/30/2004
* USD 45,952.00

Elston 0075821 The broad goal of this project is to gain a mechanistic
understanding of energy transduction in biomolecular transport processes. The
project focuses on three specific systems: the bacterial flagellar motor, the
motor protein dynein, and protein translocation systems found in membranes of
the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria. While the biology involved in these
systems is very different, the same mathematical techniques are applicable for
analyzing theoretical models of all three. To model these systems requires the
use of Langevin or stochastic differential equations. The randomness in these
equations comes from two sources, thermal diffusion and chemical kinetics.
Thermal fluctuations are characterized by the diffusion coefficient, which can
be measured experimentally, and many of the important reaction rates are known
from biochemical studies. In addition to molecular collisions, electrostatic
interactions are the other dominant forces involved in these transport systems.
If available, structural data are used to determine the relevant electrostatic
potentials. Once model equations for the systems have been developed, numerical
and analytical techniques are used to compare their behavior with experimental
data. The final phase of the analysis is to use the mathematical models to
produce experimentally testable predictions. Biological molecular motors are
nanometer-sized engines that use chemical energy to generate force. A well known
molecular motor is myosin, which is the protein responsible for muscle
contraction. Other examples include the flagellar motor, which is used by
bacteria for swimming, and dynein, which produces the force necessary for cilia
motion. The broad goal of this project is to gain a mechanistic understanding of
force generation in both these systems. Current experimental techniques are
allowing biophysicists to study molecular motors at the single molecule level,
thereby allowing the mechanical properties of motor proteins to be measured.
These new physical data in conjunction with structural data provide the impetus
for renewed theoretical investigations into molecular motor function. An
important reason for performing a mathematical analysis of force generation is
that it allows a quantitative comparison between experimental data and model
behavior to be made. The results of such a comparison not only are important for
model validation, but also can be used to uncover errors in the assumptions
underlying the model. However, the significance of mathematical modeling goes
beyond model validation and lies in its predictive power. Once a theoretical
model has been developed that is consistent with current experimental data, it
is straightforward to extend the analysis to include situations that have not
yet been investigated in the laboratory. If model predictions are borne out by
experiment, further confidence in the reality of the model is gained. For the
systems under consideration in this project, this means a mechanistic
understanding of force generation has been achieved. From a technological
standpoint, the results of these investigations should be relevant for designing
and fabricating manmade nanomachines.
