
* 0244491
* FRG: Collaborative Research: New Challenges in the Dynamics of Thin Films and Fluid Interfaces
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2003,06/18/2003
* Michael Shearer,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2007
* USD 198,085.00

This collaborative project among Duke University, the University of California
at Los Angeles, and North Carolina State University involves research into an
array of interrelated problems in the fluid dynamics of thin viscous films. It
combines analytical, computational, and experimental approaches to fundamental
issues concerning surfactant spreading, patterned surfaces, vibrational forcing,
Marangoni flows, flows on curved surfaces, and spin-coating flows. Methods
include the theory of nonlinear partial differential equations, scientific
computing, mathematical modeling, asymptotics, and experiments. Connections will
be made with applications such as the role of surfactants in lung physiology,
and the emerging field of microfluidics. The weekly Focused Research Group
meeting, a central organizing feature of the project, combines research and
education by promoting discussion and interaction across disciplines, and among
faculty, students, and post-docs.

The central theme of this project is the study of how surface tension forces
govern the motion of micro-scale fluids in many different settings. Progress in
this basic research on thin liquid films will lead to new theoretical
understanding of the physics of fluid flow on a microscopic scale, which is
crucial to the emerging technology of microfluidic devices. These "labs on a
chip" are transforming biotechnology in much the same way that microelectronics
has transformed the computing industry. Contributions from this project will
help to identify fluid flows and surface properties relevant to specific
devices, as well as establishing the theoretical underpinnings for future
research in this area. In addition to microfluidics, research will also be
undertaken in the modeling of surfactant transport in the liquid lining of the
lung. In developing new theory for this important physiological application, the
research group will focus on how the surfactant changes surface tension, giving
rise to a force that mobilizes the fluid coating of the lung walls. Development
of theory, experiments, and numerical simulations in this project will involve
ongoing interactions with scientists and engineers directly connected with the
applications.
