
* 0245513
* Hyperbolic Conservation Laws with Application to Blood Flow Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,03/22/2005
* Suncica Canic,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 111,921.00

The focus of the proposal is on mathematical study of the equations known as
hyperbolic conservation laws. They describe the basic physical principles such
as conservation of mass, momentum and energy, and as such arise in many applied
sciences such as biomedicine (e.g., study of blood flow) and aerospace
engineering (e.g., study of stability of supersonic flow around a wing of a
space shuttle). The main goals of this proposal are to understand the structure
of solutions of conservation laws that model (1) blood flow through compliant
arteries, and (2) supersonic and transonic flow problems in more than one space
dimension.

(1) The proposer's research on one-dimensional hyperbolic conservation laws
modeling blood flow in compliant arteries stems from the study of blood flow
through the abdominal aorta after endovascular repair of abdominal aneurysm
using inserted prostheses called ``stents''. The proposer has begun an
investigation of the dynamics of the abdominal aorta and of the stents, subject
to the pressure induced by the pulsatile blood flow. The plan is to work on two
problems which are essential in understanding fluid-structure interaction
between blood flow and vessel wall: (a) mathematically rigorous derivation of
the new, improved one-dimensional models that would account for both the
longitudinal and the radial displacements of the vessel wall and and of the
stent, and (b) mathematical analysis of the reduced models which have
discontinuous coefficients to account for the fact that the aorta and the
prostheses have different elastic properties. (2) The research on supersonic and
transonic flow problems in more than one space dimension has been motivated by
the fact that in spite of the importance of the applications, the theory for
transonic flow problems in more than one space dimension is still
underdeveloped. This is primarily due to the fact that new singularities appear
in the solutions which cannot be analyzed by one- dimensional techniques. The
main objective in this proposal is to study singularities and global structure
of self-similar solutions in two-dimensional hyperbolic conservation laws by
using and by developing the techniques for free-boundary problems that describe
transonic shocks, and by using and developing the analysis of mixed (hyperbolic-
elliptic) systems arising in the subsonic part of the flow.

Much of this proposal has been motivated by the work on vascular prostheses
(stents) initiated by the proposer through a multi-disciplinary collaboration
with cardiologist Dr. Z. Krajcer (Texas Heart Institute), molecular biologist
Dr. Doreen Rosenstrauch (Texas Heart Institute) and material scientist Dr. K.
Ravi-Chandar (UT-Austin). The main goal is to advance knowledge of this
fundamental area of mathematics while at the same time guide research in
applications related to biomedical research and to transonic flow. The results
of this research will be important not only in the development of new
mathematical theories, but also in the design of reliable numerical schemes for
high-performance computing of blood flow in human arteries and in the optimal
design of vascular prostheses for certain cardiovascular interventions.


