
* 0300959
* Support for MCT'03, an International Conference on Mathematical Control Theory at LSU
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2003,03/04/2003
* Peter Wolenski,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 03/31/2004
* USD 10,500.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0300959 Mathematical Sciences: Support for MCT'03, an
International Conference on Mathematical Control Theory at LSU

Abstract

0300959 Wolenski

This award supports travel for participants in the Louisiana Conference on
Mathematical Control Theory, held at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge
in April 2003. This interdisciplinary conference includes talks by over thirty
leading researchers in control engineering and mathematical control theory.
Topics include nonsmooth analysis, Hamilton-Jacobi equations, computational
methods in control, stabilization, and industrial applications. The conference
promotes interdisciplinary contact between engineering and mathematical control
researchers, and provides opportunities for young researchers and graduate
students interested in applied controls and optimization to meet and interact
with the established control community. This award supports attendance at the
conference by young researchers and participants without other means of travel
support.

This conference fosters advances in mathematical control theory and increased
interaction between the engineering and applied mathematics communities. The
meeting includes five plenary talks, shorter lectures by over thirty prominent
researchers, and sessions on open problems in control engineering. The
conference includes speakers from at least eight countries, including students
and young faculty, furthering collaboration among different parts of the world.
Broad dissemination of the conference papers will be achieved through the
publication of conference proceedings.
