
* 0305873
* Research and Education in Physical Mathematics
* DMS,INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2003,07/11/2006
* Michael Brenner,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 239,001.00

Proposal: DMS-0305873 PI: Michael P. Brenner Institution: Harvard University
Title: Research and Education in Physical Mathematics

ABSTRACT

This proposal addresses the coupling of the analytic tools of applied
mathematics to numerical computation, in the context of both research and
education. The research addresses several unsolved scientific problems through a
combination of approximate analysis and computation. The specific projects
include: (1) The investigator will determine the continuum equations for a
sediment at low volume fraction, with special attention to the proper way to
understand particle diffusion, and the role of intrinsic noise in the dynamics;
(2) The investigator will attempt to uncover the origin of recently observed
violations of the no slip boundary condition on hydrophobic surfaces. In
particular the investigator will address both the stability and the dynamical
consequences of small bubbles adhering to the solid surface, as observed
experimentally; (3) The investigator will study the role of elastic stresses in
influencing the morphology of growing tissue, and in particular develop
mathematical models for the morphology of growing yeast colonies; (4) The
investigator will develop accurate short time solutions to the Fokker Plank
equation in arbitrary potentials as a means towards a novel algorithm for
numerical computation of dynamics in fluctuating environments. The educational
programs center around teaching a unified view of ''the art of approximation''
(including both asymptotic and numerical methods) to students at all levels. New
courses at the graduate level and the beginning undergraduate level will be
developed to teach how to effectively combine analysis with computation, for
understanding difficult mathematics problems.

The proposal consists of two parts: the research questions to be investigated
address important problems of current interest, whose solution could lead to
significant scientific and technological advances, with impact on fields ranging
from applied mathematics, to materials science, to geophysics and biology. The
specific problems range from developing mathematical models for understanding
when fluid sticks to surfaces to developing new ways of simulating complex
objects undergoing Brownian motion to developing a proper mathematical
description for a set of particles falling in a fluid. These are all fundamental
questions whose solution could significantly advance the design and development
of materials for nanotechnology. For example, all nano-scale objects in an
underlying fluid undergo Brownian motion; the lack of an efficient numerical
algorithm for simulating these objects severely hampers computational design
efforts. The second part of the proposal is educational, focusing on developing
methodologies for teaching the art of approximation (combining computation and
approximate analysis in a single framework). By finding ways of training
students at all levels to effectively combine analysis and computation, they
will be better educated to address the important questions of today. The
materials that are developed will be broadly disseminated, both through web-
based and traditional texts.






