
* 0305815
* Variational Eigenvalues of Quasilinear Elliptic Operators and Critical Groups
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2003,05/15/2003
* Kanishka Perera,FL,Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 08/31/2004
* USD 19,068.00

Abstract

Award DMS-0305815

Kanishka S Perera, Florida Institute of Technology

Title: Variational eigenvalues of quasi-linear operators and critical groups

Boundary value problems involving variational type quasilinear elliptic
operators arise naturally in a wide range of applications. The solutions of such
problems can often be obtained as the critical points of an associated
variational functional defined on a suitable function space. In recent years
infinite dimensional Morse theory, which is one of the most important tools in
critical point theory, has been used to study semilinear problems with striking
success, but unfortunately this is not so in the quasilinear case. Basic Morse
theory describes the local behavior of a functional near an isolated critical
point by a sequence of groups called the critical groups, and there are serious
difficulties in determining the critical groups, both at finite critical points
and at infinity, for functionals arising from quasilinear problems. Standard
tools such as the generalized Morse lemma and the shifting theorem can no longer
be applied since the domains of such functionals are generally not Hilbert
spaces. Moreover, a complete description of the spectrum of a quasilinear
operator is usually not available and there are no eigenspaces to work with. The
goal of this proposal is to determine the critical groups in a broad class of
variational form quasilinear problems, both resonant and nonresonant, and apply
the results to obtain existence, multiplicity, and qualitative properties of
solutions such as the number of nodal domains. Nonlinear partial differential
equations is one of the most applicable and highly interdisciplinary areas of
mathematics. They are widely used to model fundamental processes in science and
engineering. While tools for numerically computing solutions of quasilinear
equations have been developed extensively, there is very little analytical
theory currently available. Our goal is to establish parts of the needed theory
and to investigate the structure of solutions. The knowledge gained by this
project will have applications to a wide variety of physical systems.


