
* 0307011
* Multiscale theory for paraxial waves with applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2003,08/17/2004
* Knut Solna,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2007
* USD 150,811.00

Award Abstract: DMS-0307011, Knut Solna, University of California-Irvine

Title: Multiscale theory for paraxial waves with applications

When a laser beam propagates through the atmosphere it is affected by bad
whether and turbulence. Similarly wireless communication systems, remote sensing
systems and imaging algorithms are affected by medium fluctuations. This
proposal aims at developing a theory for waves propagating in random and
multiscale media that is needed to describe and analyze such phenomena and at
applying this theory for optimal design of systems involving waves in
complicated and multiscale media. The medium heterogeneity is modeled by a
random field and one aims at analyzing the statistical character of the waves
that have propagated through the medium. Two regimes are considered. First, a
regime with a clear ``scale separation'' where the medium variations take place
on a microscale, a scale that is much smaller than the wave length for instance.
Second, the case with variations on a continuum of scales, like in turbulence,
is being considered. Despite the importance of this regime there is no general
theory that describes how the medium affects the wave pulse in this case. In the
novel approach set forth here one aims to analyze these regimes in a unified
framework in which the medium fluctuations are described by a Brownian field and
then one aims to develop a general scaling theory for such a white noise model.
That is, a description of moments of the wave field and how these depend on for
instance the relative propagation distance. The analysis involves stochastic
differential equations driven by the Brownian field and how the moments of the
solution can be described in various regimes using martingale theory, this is a
topic of general interest in stochastic analysis. In the analysis the parabolic
or forward scattering approximation that leads to a random Schr\"odinger
equation as well as acoustic and electromagnetic waves will be considered.

In the atmosphere small scale fluctuations of temperature, pressure and
humidity caused by the turbulence of air velocities lead to complicated and
multiscale spatial and temporal variations in the wave-speed. The turbulence
results therefore in phenomena like wave beam wander, beam broadening and
intensity fluctuation (scintillation). The proposed work that will characterize
such effects is important for the design of imaging and communication algorithms
and several applications will be considered. The work regarding propagation and
communication in the turbulent atmosphere is particularly important due to the
significance of associated applications like laser communication and tracking
and since so far little theory is available. The theory is needed for design of
for instance optimal communication protocols, multiple-input-multiple-output
antenna systems for wireless communication, for design of secure communication
algorithms and robust tracking algorithms through the atmosphere. As a part of
this work the development of Speclab a general purpose software package for
analysis of multiscale and turbulent data has been initiated and it will be
further developed. It has so far been used for analysis of atmospheric
turbulence data (Kirtland Air Force Base) and also for analysis of biomedical
data (Harvard University). This work is important to guide the modeling of the
wave phenomena and ensure the relevance of our work. The work on waves in
multiscale media will also be important for understanding wave-fields
propagating in the heterogeneous earth, the fluctuating and stratified ocean and
through biological tissue. In these contexts some important applications that
will be considered relates to medical imaging, imaging through foliage and mine
detection.




