
* 0308019
* Multi-scale Phenomena in Macromolecular Fluids and Nano-Composite Materials
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2003,07/16/2003
* M Forest,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 167,000.00

The goal of this research is the development of a mathematical theory, models,
and computational tools which underpin the design and of macromolecular
materials and nano-composites. These materials are comprised of anisotropic
molecules (nematic polymers), which undergo a spontaneous disorder-order
transition above a critical concentration. Materials made from nematic polymers
achieve their properties through the collective molecular alignment structure.
Specific molecular elements yield diverse property enhancements, from strength
(the Dupont product Kevlar and spider silk), to electrical conductivity (carbon
tubes and conducting polymers), to barrier penetration properties (discotic clay
platelets). The major technological challenge is to extend results with fibers
to other geometries such as films and molds. However, in typical laminar
processing flows, the molecular response is highly sensitive to flow type and
strength, and to molecular properties such as shape and concentration. In
addition to complex dynamics, during flow processing there is a spatial conflict
between interior flow response and molecular anchoring conditions at solid
boundaries. The result is that instead of a uniform molecular orientational
distribution, as in fiber processing flows, film and mold flows always generate
morphology on length scales between the molecules and the processing devices.
These ubiquitous structures are not understood, either theoretically or
experimentally, yet they dictate the effective properties of the end-use
materials. The research supported by this award will help to understand the
dynamics and structures that occur in typical laminar flows of nematic polymers.

Modern high-performance materials and nano-composites are primarily designed
with simple elements, from rod-like to platelet molecules. Remarkable property
enhancements have been achieved thus far in laboratory-scale experiments, with
increased strength and durability, the ability to shield heat or gases, and to
tune electromagnetic wave transmission. The technological challenge is to scale
these experimental results to industrially viable processes and materials. The
challenge to mathematics and computational science is to build a solid
foundation of theory, modeling, and simulation tools from which to design and
control the processes and final material properties. The theory of flowing
molecules in confined spaces is still unable to predict and control the
molecular structure created during flow processing. Yet micron-scale molecular
structures always occur in processed films and molds of nano-composites.
Furthermore, the bulk material performance properties as well as their failure
and damage modes are dominated by the molecular structures generated in
processing. The award will support a research program combining theory,
modeling, simulations, and comparisons with laboratory data in the dynamics and
structure properties of nematic polymer materials and nano-composites in
processing flows. These results will be the basis for the next phase of the
materials pipeline, where bulk material properties are deduced from the molecule
properties.


