
* 0308687
* Research and Education in Multi-Scale Fluid Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2003,07/16/2007
* Richard McLaughlin,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2008
* USD 262,000.00

This project concerns theoretical modeling of transport in fluid systems. The
award supports both improved scientific understanding of fluid behavior and
research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students of the natural
sciences. The research is focused on averaging of gravity currents in
groundwater flow; analytical, asymptotic, and computational calculation of
effective mixing coefficients in turbulent mixing; and experimental and
theoretical study of stratified fluid systems. Students participate in the
research on stratified fluid dynamics through an experimental fluid dynamics
laboratory.

The natural environment is influenced by a complex system of coupled fluids
whose dynamics occur on a wide range of space and time scales. Understanding the
dynamics of this system, from the smallest scale turbulent mixing in the ocean
to the largest scale atmospheric weather systems, is a central goal of the
geosciences. The complete description of such a system remains beyond the
computational scope of even the largest supercomputers, and a fundamental
scientific endeavor is to characterize and understand phenomena on different
scales, ultimately to understand how a large scale system functions as a whole.
This award supports mathematical investigation of fluid systems for which
interplay between scales may be mathematically explained. Insight gained from
the project will have application to understanding multiple-scale fluid behavior
in the environment.
