
* 0311788
* Atoms, Defects and the Kinetics of Phase Transformations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/15/2003,08/05/2004
* Kaushik Bhattacharya,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 192,836.00

A fundamental understanding of the kinetics of phase boundaries, and more
broadly hysteresis, remains an open challenge in the study of active materials.
The lack of kinetic information is a consistent difficulty in various problems
including dislocation mechanics and growth of thin films. The research in the
current award, though focussed on active materials, will impact these areas.
There is now an accepted framework to model this based on the notion of kinetic
relations, but it is phenomenological in that it does not address why some phase
boundaries are more mobile than others and how one can change the mobility. This
project examines through computation and rigorous mathematics whether one can
derive a kinetic relation starting from a more fundamental or smaller scale
description of materials in the context of displacive phase transformations. Two
scales are of particular interest, atoms and defects. First, the project seeks
to understand the atomic-continuum linkage by starting from an atomistic
(discrete) model capable of phase transformations and passing to the continuum
in such a manner that captures the essential dynamics of the phase
transformation process. Second, the project seeks to understand the role of
defects such as vacancies, impurities and second phase precipitates in
determining the overall propagation of a phase boundary. This leads to the
mathematical problem of homogenization of a non-local free boundary problem.

Active materials like shape-memory materials and ferroelectric materials possess
unusual but useful properties that make them vital for a variety of applications
like dental braces, cardiac stents, space antennas, ultrasonic devices, pressure
sensors and microactuators. The unusual properties arise from very
characteristic and intricate patterns that these materials can form at a
microscopic scale. Over the last decade, much advance has been made in
understanding the nature of the microstructure, its relation to basic
crystallography and its consequences for material properties. In particular, a
sophisticated mathematical theory for static microstructures has emerged, and
this theory has had important practical impact by predicting and explaining new
phenomena and applications. However, much remains unknown regarding how the
microstructure changes as we apply stress to these materials. This is important
since it determines an important property of these materials known as hysteresis
or shape memory. Work supported by this award will build a mathematical theory
of the evolution of microstructure. It will also train graduate and
undergraduate students in research in the emerging and important area of
multiscale modeling.


