
* 0311856
* Phantom Bursting Models and Complex Bursting Patterns in Pancreatic Islets
* DMS,Cellular Dynamics and Function, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2003,06/12/2003
* Richard Bertram,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2007
* USD 127,298.00

Bertram The investigator and his colleagues study the behavior of insulin-
secreting pancreatic beta-cells. These cells display a wide range of complex
dynamics that are best understood with the aid of mathematical modeling and
analysis. The investigator has recently developed a new mathematical model for
beta-cells that postulates an intracellular calcium subspace compartment located
between the endoplasmic reticulum and the cell membrane. This model is based on
recent data from a collaborating lab, and is being further developed as new
experiments are performed. One direction of development involves the
investigation of complex electrical bursting patterns that are often observed in
pancreatic islets and isolated beta-cells. The investigator determines, through
mathematical modeling, whether these complex rhythms are due to oscillations in
glycolysis -- that is, whether the coexistence of a membrane-driven bursting
oscillator and an endogenous glycolytic oscillator is consistent with the
published data, and with data from collaborating labs. One key question that is
addressed is whether these oscillators involving glycolytic rhythms can be
synchronized by electrical coupling. This is a necessary condition since beta-
cells are electrically coupled in islets. Finally, the effects of stochasticity
through channel noise are investigated in both single-cell and islet models.
Channel noise is evident in the electrical patterns of single beta-cells, and
suppression of this noise through elecrical coupling may play a key role in the
more regular and slower bursting patterns observed in islets. The study of
pancreatic islets, composed of beta-cells, is important for a number of reasons.
From a clinical viewpoint, they are key players in normal glucose homeostasis.
Because beta-cells are the only cells in the body that make and secrete insulin,
their malfunction leads to type II or late-onset diabetes, the most prevalent
form of the disease. To understand what makes the cells malfunction, one must
first understand their normal functioning, which is the primary aim of this
work. From a biological viewpoint, beta-cells are of great interest as the focal
point of a number of biochemical and cellular processes. They are similar in
many ways to neurons, but have more complex biochemical regulatory mechanisms.
Thus, information gained from the study of beta-cells largely transfers over to
neurons, as well as other secretory cells. Finally, from a mathematical
viewpoint, beta-cells display rich dynamics that can only truly be understood
with the aid of mathematics. Modeling and anlysis of beta-cells has led to new
mathematics, most of which can and is being applied to the study of other
bursting nerve and endocrine cells. The investigator involves graduate and
undergraduate students in the project, providing them with research
opportunities at the important interface between biological and mathematical
sciences.


