
* 0312360
* Improving overlap-finding techniques for whole genome shotgun data
* DMS,ADVANCES IN BIO INFORMATICS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2003,07/10/2003
* James Yorke,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2005
* USD 99,375.00

Yorke A genome (the DNA in a cell) can be represented by a sequence of letters
called "bases." A large genome can consist of billions of bases. Chemical
techniques allow scientists to read only a few hundred bases at a time. The
whole genome shotgun (WGS) assembly technique creates a draft of the sequence of
a whole genome by selecting such short fragments at random from the genome,
determining the sequence of the fragments, and then computationally re-
assembling millions of these fragments. Two fragments are said to "overlap" if
it is plausible that they come from the same part of the genome, based on a
comparison of their sequences. The goal of this project is to focus efforts on
producing an extremely robust set of overlaps, using a combination of
sophisticated error-correction techniques, as well as "localizing" fragments to
validate overlaps by ensuring that both fragments come from the same vicinity of
the genome. Several issues complicate the determination of which pairs of
fragments overlap. First, most genomes contain many "repeat regions," i.e., two
or more almost identical copies of long stretches of sequence. Thus, two
fragments that do not actually overlap may look like they do. Second, the random
sampling technique results in many base errors --- bases can be mis-read or
missed entirely. These errors, combined with the fact that repeat regions
usually differ slightly, make it very difficult to distinguish a spurious
overlap from a true overlap in which one or both fragments contain read errors.
Thus, if extreme care is not taken, it is easy to use a spurious overlap and
thereby mistakenly connect distant parts of the genome. Preliminary results in
collaboration with Celera Genomics, the Baylor College of Medicine, and The
Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR) have demonstrated that the investigator's
current techniques can already produce more sequence at higher quality. The goal
is improve these techniques and make them widely available. The determination
and interpretation of genetic information is one of the great challenges of the
twenty-first century. The genome, i.e., all the DNA in a cell, is the molecular
basis of diversity and the cornerstone of genetic information. Draft genomes
have been obtained for human, mouse, and some insects, fish, plants, and
bacteria. This is a start, but a full understanding of biological processes
cannot be had by studying the genomes of only a handful of species. The federal
government is spending about 100 million dollars per year generating sequence
data. Millions of small pieces of a genome are sampled from the genome. The
second stage is called "assembly," when these pieces are re-assembled on a
computer like a giant jigsaw puzzle. The puzzle is complicated by two facts:
first, many of the puzzle pieces have small errors that make them mis-fit
against pieces that they SHOULD fit with; and second, many pieces that should
NOT go together actually fit together quite well. This makes it extremely
difficult to correctly assemble a genome. There are two ways to decrease the
ambiguities: first, one could generate more pieces. However, each new piece
costs about $2, and one would need to generate millions of new pieces to have a
significant effect on assembly quality. The investigators use a second route.
They attempt to squeeze as much information out of the existing pieces as
possible. The latter route is substantially cheaper, and there is still much
room for improvement here over existing techniques. The investigators are using
sophisticated mathematics to help discern with extreme precision those pairs of
pieces that do, and those that do not, fit together. Preliminary results of the
investigators -- in collaboration with several large sequencing centers -- have
demonstrated that using their techniques to "pre-process" the pieces can produce
more of the genome, with fewer errors. This project aims at extending these
ideas further and making them freely accessible to all investigators. The impact
on the federal genome (biotechnology) projects is potentially great.


