
* 0313890
* Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of Photonic Microstructures
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2003,09/03/2003
* Robert Kohn,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2007
* USD 320,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0313890 (GOALI) Academic PI: Robert V. Kohn, New York University
Industrial Co-PI: Michael I. Weinstein, Lucent Technologies

Title: Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of Photonic Microstructures

ABSTRACT

*********** Use text below this line *******************

Photonic microstructures are heterogeneous optical media. Technologically
important examples include (a) photonic crystal fibers, and (b) periodic planar
structures with defects; applications range from transmission media and devices
in telecommunication systems to optical computers. The optical properties of
such structures depend in complex ways on the details of the microstructure. At
present, direct numerical simulation is the main tool for analyzing the
performance of a photonic structure. This tool is inadequate, because while
simulation can be applied to specific structures, it does not provide general
principles to guide the design of better structures. The research between New
York and Lucent Technologies will develop and analyze new, homogenization-based
methods for understanding the characteristics of photonic structures. These
methods will provide improved intuition about how a structure's geometry
determines its overall optical properties (group velocity, dispersion,
resonances, radiation rates, etc.) They will also lead to improved numerical
schemes for computing the spectral properties of photonic structures.

There is a large physics and engineering literature on photonic microstructures
and their applications -- which include optical fibers and devices for use in
data transmission and computing. The design and analysis of such structures
relies mainly on intuition, experimentation, and computer simulation. The
research between New York and Lucent Technologies will employ mathematical
analysis to provide new sources of intuition and improved techniques for
simulation -- leading, we hope, to the design of improved photonic
microstructures and devices. This GOALI cooperative activity between New York
University and Lucent Technologies will provide a postdoctoral researcher with
valuable industrial experience.


