
* 0317372
* Mathematical Modeling and Computational Analysis of Cell and Tissue Movement
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2003,10/31/2005
* Hans Othmer,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

Othmer and Stolarska The investigators formulate and analyze mathematical models
for signal transduction, direction sensing, and movement in individual, non-
interacting amoeboid cells and incorporate the individual-based model in models
for the collective motion of tissue-like cellular aggregates in which the cells
interact strongly. The cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum is used as
the model system because it exemplifies both the free-ranging movement of
individual cells and the collective motion of aggregates, and because it is
widely used as a model experimental system for the study of cell movement.
Current information on movement of Dictyostelium is used in the formulation of
the mathematical models, and interaction with different experimental groups
provides feedback on the validity of the models. Suitable computational
techniques to simulate the resulting partial differential equations are
developed. What is learned about cell and tissue movement is applicable to
Dictyostelium; it can be used in several other contexts, including embryonic
development, wound healing, angiogenesis, and the immune system. Macroscopic
descriptions based on microscopic models of cell behavior will significantly
improve large-scale tissue simulations and expand the scope of feasible,
microscopically-accurate simulations. In this project the investigators develop
mathematical models to help understand how signal transduction, direction
sensing, and movement in individual, non-interacting cells of Dictyostelium
discoideum, a cellular slime mold, contribute to the collective behavior of
large aggregates of cells. Directed cell migration plays an essential role in
the early development and ongoing maintenance of most organisms. Single-cell
organisms such as bacteria find food and avoid repellents by chemotaxis,
leukocytes must detect sites of infection and move toward them in order to
ingest bacteria and cellular debris, and directed cell migration is essential
for embryonic development and wound healing. Cell migration also occurs in many
diseases; in cancer, for instance, it leads to invasion and metastasis, and cell
adhesion and motility also have important roles there. Metastasis is probably
the major cause of death in cancer patients. The potential impact of a better
understanding of cell motion is enormous. Not only is control of motility an
important therapeutic target for cancer treatment, but cell and tissue
engineering holds the promise to provide new tissues and organs by in vivo
tissue regeneration. The success of this hinges on understanding the ways that
cells attach to natural and artificial extracellular matrix, as well as the
characteristics of the cell-cell interactions that eventually dictate how cells
move, proliferate and remodel into new capillaries or other types of functional
tissues.


