
* 0318532
* N-body Aspects in the Kinetic Theory of Plasmas and Gravitating Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 12/01/2002,04/17/2003
* Carlo Lancellotti,NY,CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 72,455.00

Proposal: 0204939

PI: Michel Jabbour

Institution: University of Kentucky

Title: Some studies on phase segregation and the influence of microstructure on
multispecies thin film growth

ABSTRACT

The phenomenon of phase segregation is commonly observed in many multispecies
thin films, where secondary-phase islands may nucleate and grow on the surface
of a film and thus influence the properties of the film. The influence may be
detrimental or beneficial. For example, barium-rich YBCO films may loose their
superconducting properties but, on the other hand, islands on YBCO films may act
as pinning centers for the magnetic field. Further applications of phase
segregation and the formation of secondary-phase islands are found in quantum
dots and wires in semiconductors. Understanding the mechanisms underlying phase
segregation and the stability of secondary-phase islands is therefore crucial
for the design and controllability of thin films. One objective of the present
research project is to provide, in the context of deposition of multispecies
thin films, a mathematically rigorous and thermodynamically consistent
derivation of the equations governing the evolution, away from equilibrium, of
interfacial triple junctions along which the film, vapor, and secondary phases
intersect. Such a continuum model lends itself to a stability analysis and may
thus shed light on the conditions under which surface precipitates can be
expected to form and grow. When the film surface is a vicinal one, growth can
occur via step flow---that is, lateral motion of atomic-high steps which
separate several-unit-cell-wide terraces. In multicomponent films, the
deposition of gas-phase atoms can be competitive---that is, adsorption of
distinct species on individual terraces can occur on the same site. The second
objective of this proposal is to develop a micromechanical model for
multicomponent films that accounts for the combined effects of the terrace-and-
ledge microstructure, adatom diffusion, and competitive adsorption-desorption
kinetics. A third objective of this project is to link the nanoscale to the
microscopic scale by incorporating averaged information obtained by
homogenization of the micromechanical model of film growth discussed above into
macroscopic models in the form of constitutive relations.

Thin films constitute a fundamental component of numerous novel technologies.
Examples include semiconductors in micro- and opto-electronic device
applications, diamonds in industrial cutting tools, various anticorrosion and
antiwear coats, shape-memory alloys as actuators in microelectromechanical
systems (MEMS), and superconductors in wireless communication devices. In most
industrial applications, multispecies films are more widely used than their
single-component counterparts. The properties of these films and their
performance under very stringent conditions depend on their chemical composition
and the morphological details of the film surface. To better control the
chemistry and microstructure of thin films during the growth process, a
mathematically rigorous understanding of the fundamental physical and chemical
mechanisms at play is necessary, especially as the atom-by-atom fabrication of
materials is no longer a remote dream. Applied mathematicians can (and already
do) make a significant contribution to such a global effort by developing
physically sound predictive models which can be analyzed rigorously and
implemented for numerical simulations. The concepts of modern continuum physics,
when combined with the tools of modern mathematics (for example, homogenization
and the theory of nonlinear partial differential equations), constitute a potent
methodology with which to address many of the challenging issues related to the
growth of multicomponent thin films.
















































































