
* 0320044
* Thematic Workshops for the 2003 Les Houches Summer School on Theoretical Neuroscience
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2003,07/29/2003
* Carson Chow,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2004
* USD 12,000.00

Chow The investigator and colleagues organize thematic experimental workshops in
conjunction with a summer school on theoretical methods in neuroscience in
France from July 28 - August 29, 2003. The course covers modern theoretical
methods used in systems neuroscience. It is part of the Les Houches summer
school series, which has a distinguished tradition of covering leading edge
theoretical topics. The course is intended for graduate students and postdocs
who have backgrounds in physics, mathematics or other quantitative fields.
Neuroscience rapidly changes and it is essential for theorists to be aware of
new experimental results and techniques. Thus, the organizers hold three
Thematic Workshops in conjunction with the theoretical program. In these
workshops, experimentalists give talks on physiological issues and lead
discussions related to the topics covered in the theoretical lectures. The
impact of this summer school on the students, theoretical lecturers and
experimentalists cannot be overstated. In addition to the training the students
receive they also have the opportunity to meet and interact with many prominent
neuroscientists. Conversely, the senior participants have an opportunity to meet
the next generation of theorists. In biology the relationship between theory and
experiment is still tentative. The workshops present topics important in
themselves, they fit well with and amplify and ground the theoretical agenda,
and they provide a remarkable opportunity to establish connections between
theoreticians and experimentalists in an important and dynamic area of biology.
All of the lecturers are required to write an accompanying paper to be placed in
a published proceedings. These proceedings will have sufficient detail to be
treated like a textbook on modern methods of theoretical neuroscience and will
be a valuable source of information.


