
* 0324609
* University of Florida 2003/2004 Special Year in Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, THEORY OF COMPUTING
* 09/15/2003,07/28/2003
* William Hager,FL,University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 30,000.00

The 2003/2004 Florida Special Year Program in Mathematics, in applied
mathematics, is in the area of multiscale analysis and applications. Four
conferences will be held:

1. Conference on mathematical methods in imaging and vision. 2. Conference on
multiscale optimization methods and applications. 3. Conference on computational
methods in multiscale analysis and applications. 4. Student workshop.

The three conferences are organized by the Mathematics Department in
collaboration with Computer and Information Science and Engineering, Industrial
Systems and Engineering, Mechanics and Aerospace Engineering, and industry.
These conferences highlight recent mathematical innovations, including

(a) variational, probabilistic, statistical, and geometric methods in image
analysis and vision, (b) pattern recognition and statistical classification in
image analysis, (c) multilevel and multiple scale methods in optimization, (d)
multigrid and homogenization methods for partial differential equations.

The conferences include both junior and senior researchers and student
participants. The student workshop, organized by the UF SIAM Chapter, provides
an opportunity for graduate students to play a principal role in organizing a
conference and in presenting their ongoing thesis research to an audience
composed of their peers.

The conferences held during the 2003/2004 Mathematics Special Year Program:

http://www.math.ufl.edu/special03/

would have broad impact in the sciences, engineering, and industry. The
conferences will broaden the educational experience and career options of the
participating students, and will give graduate students a broader perspective of
their research field. The mathematical technology presented at the imaging
conference is important for medical diagnostics where high accuracy is needed
for determining appropriate medications and dosages. The technology can also be
applied in other domains like computational physics, computer and information
science and engineering, and finance. The optimization conference showcases
recent computational methodologies having applications to scheduling, optimal
control of manufacturing processes, the design of faster and more reliable
computer chips, parallel computing techniques for solving difficult scientific
problems, and many other areas. The conference on multigrid and asymptotic
analysis focuses on recent numerical methods that are used in many fields
including oil exploration where acoustic signals are used to detect structure
beneath the surface of the earth, nondestructive testing of materials, where
external measurements of electric fields are used to detect imperfections
beneath the surface of the material, and medical modeling used in the design and
development of new diagnostic sensors.
