
* 0328626
* Eleventh International Conference on Approximation Theory; May 18-22, 2004; Gatlinburg, TN
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2003,08/08/2003
* Larry Schumaker,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 16,000.00

It is proposed to hold an international conference on Approximation Theory and
Related Topics in Gatlinburg, TN on May 18-22, 2004. Approximately 200
mathematical scientists from academia, industry, and government laboratories
from around the world are expected to participate. The conference would continue
the tradition of holding a triennial meeting for workers in the field, and will
be the eleventh in a series of similar conferences. These meetings have
traditionally been the main general international conferences on this topic for
more than 30 years. The meeting will feature 7 one-hour survey lectures on
topics of current interest (including classical approximation, wavelets,
multivariate splines, nonlinear approximation, neural networks, surface
approximation, and the mathematics of imaging). In addition, it would provide a
forum for the awarding of the Fourth Vasil A. Popov Prize in Approximation
Theory. The winner will also present a one-hour survey lecture. The conference
is planned for five days, and would result in a carefully reviewed and edited
conference proceedings.

The conference will bring together researchers and graduate students for in-
depth discussions on all aspects of Approximation Theory, which is a subject
with a long and rich history. Its current vitality is attested to by the large
number of specialized conferences, new and well-established journals, and
recently-founded research centers devoted to the subject. In addition to
providing a forum for the exchange of ideas, the meeting will also help identify
trends and areas for future research. The conference will help educate graduate
students by exposing them to the latest research and helping them identify
problems in approximation theory and related areas. Students, young researchers,
minorities, and women will have the opportunity to meet leaders in the field, as
well as to present their own research. Two-thirds of the requested funding will
be devoted to supporting these groups, and senior researchers will be asked to
help identify candidates to participate. In recent years approximation theory
has found more and more applications in such diverse areas as computer-aided
geometric design, image and signal processing, geophysical and medical modeling,
PDE, robotics, and elsewhere. These applications have resulted in the
development of several new subject areas of approximation theory, including
neural networks, radial basis functions, and wavelets, and the subject has
become more and more interdisciplinary. This research will have a major impact
on medicine, science, engineering and information technology for years to come.
