
* 0349023
* CAREER: Solitons in Bose-Einstein Condensates: Generation, Manipulation and Pattern Formation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,01/31/2005
* Panayotis Kevrekidis,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2010
* USD 400,755.00

Abstract: CAREER Award DMS-0349023

Panayotis Kevrekidis, University of Massachusetts at Amherst

Title: CAREER: Solitons in Bose-Einstein Condensates: Generation, Manipulation
and Pattern Formation

The aim of this project is to examine the behavior of solitary wave structures
in the setting of atomic physics (Bose-Einstein Condensates). Solitons as per
their structural robustness and quasi-elastic interactions are natural building
blocks that have been used for information transmission in optical settings in
the past and could naturally be extended as information carriers in this new
matter wave setup. Furthermore, these structures can be appropriately
manipulated, waveguided or used to construct various patterns at this
microscopic (atomic) level. The study will be undertaken at three different
levels: (1) The level of creating these solitary waves by taking advantage of
instabilities and/or experimentally available mechanisms (such as the Feshbach
resonance); (2) The one of manipulating the waves (either dragging them by means
of an optical tweezers or waveguiding them through junctions); (3) And, finally,
at the level of combining them to create patterns and to identify their steady
states and structural transitions. These steps will be carried through for the
two principal types of interactions: a) For attractive interactions between the
atoms (e.g., for focusing nonlinearities and negative scattering lengths as in
the case of lithium); b) For repulsive interactions (e.g., for defocusing
nonlinearities and positive scattering lengths as in the case of rubidium and
sodium). The models that will be examined will be both continuum models of
partial differential equations with external potentials (linear or quadratic, or
combination thereof), as well as quasi-discrete ones (relevant for periodic
external potentials as in the case of the so-called optical lattice). The
techniques that will be used will involve regular and singular perturbation
methods, linear and modulational stability analysis, regular and possibly
exponential asymptotics, numerical bifurcation theory as well as direct
numerical simulations and also molecular dynamics techniques (to study patterns
and their structural transitions).

The main focus of this research project is a detailed study of solitary waves
generated in the very controllable, ultra-low temperature, atomic physics
context of Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs). Since their recent experimental
realization (for which the 2001 Physics Nobel prize was awarded), BECs have been
the center of an intensive and ever growing experimental and theoretical effort
in the Mathematics and Physics communities. The examination of BECs has also
strong ties with a deeper understanding of the exciting and important fields of
superconductivity and superfluidity (which were the theme of the Physics Nobel
prize in 2003). From a Mathematical Physics perspective, one of the most
interesting and appealing aspects of studying BECs is their rich nonlinear wave
phenomenology, the wide variety of possible settings (one to three dimensions)
and the detailed experimental control that permits a precise
engineering/manipulation of the external conditions under which these waves
dynamically evolve. The main purpose of this research effort is to extend and
deepen our understanding of the fundamental structures and waves and their role
and importance in BECs, but also more generally (due to the similar mathematical
description) in nonlinear optics (optical fibers and waveguides) as well as wave
physics. As an aside, it should be noted that this effort will heavily rely on
computational resources and the concomitant use of numerical codes that model
these phenomena; it should also be remarked that one of the longer term
perspectives of this activity on matter waves is to conceive and construct novel
devices that would guide and more generally control the motion of the matter
waves and could potentially be used for quantum information processing at the
nanoscale. These aspects lead us to expect that significant benefits may result
from the implementation of this project in areas of strategic federal interest
such as high performance computing and materials and manufacturing.


