
* 0402276
* Kinetic Pathways to Formation and Self-Organization of Quantum Dots
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CONDENSED MATTER & MAT THEORY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/15/2004,07/09/2004
* Russel Caflisch,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 338,080.00

Proposal: DMS-0402276 PI: Russell E Caflisch Institution: University of
California - Los Angeles Title: Kinetic Pathways to Formation and Self-
Organization of Quantum Dots

ABSTRACT

Quantum dots are nanoscale structures on a crystalline surface that can be
produced by self-assembly during epitaxial growth. Because of their novel
electronic and optical properties, many technological applications have been
proposed for quantum dots. A key requirement for these applications is the
ability to predict and control the geometry and material properties of both
single dots and arrays of dots. The kinetics pathways to formation and
organization of quantum dots are important because the spacing and regularity of
a quantum-dot array is largely determined at the early stages of their growth.
The most common growth mode for quantum dots is Stranski-Krastanov (SK), in
which growth of a wetting layer precedes the three-dimensional islanding that
leads to quantum dots. Computations of epitaxial growth have been surprisingly
unsuccessful in simulating SK growth, and the reasons for this failure are not
well understood. This is a major open question in computational material
science; its resolution is the principal aim of this proposal. Strain due to
lattice mismatch between the substrate and film is an essential ingredient in SK
growth and self-assembly of quantum dots. Inclusion of strain in models for
material growth and device properties has proved to be difficult and
computationally complex due to the short times scales of atomistic processes and
the long-range influence of strain.

This proposal is aimed at modeling and predicting the formation and
morphological evolution of quantum dots, which are self-assembled structures
proposed for future use in microelectronics ("beyond CMOS"), optics and
spintronics applications. This includes both modeling of the microscopic
physical processes during thin film growth as well as the development and
numerical implementation of new algorithms in applied mathematics. The result
will be an effective and robust simulation method for strained epitaxial growth
that includes atomistic strain, anisotropic diffusion, three-dimensionality,
alloying, and surface chemistry. The broader impacts of this project include the
injection of applied mathematics into materials science and improved methods for
design and growth of quantum dot arrays for opto-electronic applications.

This award is co-funded by the Applied Mathematics program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Materials Theory program of the Division of
Materials Research under the umbrella of the NSF-wide Mathematical Sciences
Priority Area.
