
* 0404682
* Mathematical Finance and Stochastic Networks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,08/15/2007
* Steven Shreve,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2009
* USD 522,593.00

This proposal has two parts. The part on stochastic networks will consider
networks of queues in heavy traffic when tasks have due dates. The lead times
(time until due date) of these tasks are modeled as counting measures on the
real line. As part of a previous project, the limit of these measure-valued
processes was identified as the network traffic intensity approached one. This
project will identify the difference between the limiting measure-valued process
and the pre-limit processes, so that the accuracy of using the limiting process
as a model for a heavily loaded network can be determined. The second part of
the proposal treats credit risk in financial markets. Of particular interest is
the spread movements of tranches of collaterialized loan obligations. These
respond to market expectations concerning the default probabilities of the loans
composing the structure, but in a highly nonlinear way.

Computer networks, manufacturing networks and telephone networks have the common
feature that tasks (e.g., messages, silicon wafers, telephone calls) arrive at
stations (e.g., computers,, machines, switches) at random times and require
random amounts of service. Under heavy traffic conditions, the performance of
these networks can be analyzed using the theory of Brownian motion. In this
project, we consider networks in which tasks arrive and must move through and
exit the network ahead of deadlines. This project will develop a method to
determine what proportion of tasks a network will process within their
deadlines. Brownian motion is also the fundamental process for building models
of the behavior of prices in financial markets. A second part of this proposal
will consider prices of financial assets that are backed by loan payments (e.g.,
mortgage-backed securities). These assets are sensitive to the credit risk of
the loans backing them. Construction of reliable models for the price movements
of these assets is an important step in measuring and controlling the risk
associated with holding and trading these securities.
