
* 0404778
* A Transfer Operator Approach to Modeling Deterministic and Stochastic Transport, with Applications in the Physical Sciences
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,05/16/2007
* Erik Bollt,NY,Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 169,697.00

Proposal: DMS-0404778 PI: Erik M Bollt Institution: Clarkson University Title: A
Transfer Operator Approach to Modeling Deterministic and Stochastic Transport,
with Applications in the Physical Sciences

ABSTRACT

While highly successful, the stochastic ordinary differential equations (SDEs)
and stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs), have a high overhead of
background material to learn. Traditional methods become particularly complex
when coping with real problems, which may generally be high dimensional, with
general noise profiles, and have nonlinear interactions. Directly approximating
the action of the stochastic Frobenius-Perron operator offers a practical and
accessible tool. The investigator develops computational methods to model and
identify transport activity in both deterministic and stochastically perturbed
dynamical systems. The investigator develops an analysis of the transfer
operator beyond their usual theoretical use, into a broad and unified suite of
computational tools for solving practical problems. The investigator is
developing important applications of the computational methods including: 1)
mapping the phase space for regions corresponding to high transport flux
activity, leading for example to noise-induced bursting in multi-stable systems,
2) developing control of transport algorithms, to either amplify or decrease
bursting activity through low-energy control inputs, 3) developing efficient and
low-dimensional models of the transfer operator from experimental data, to do
system identification and parameter estimation within the global perspective of
the transfer operator, 4) developing low-dimensional, nonparametric statistical
hypothesis tests to identify nonstationarity and significant system changes, or
system "damage," in high dimensional data sets known only through measured data.
Even though the complex oscillations seen in the physical world around us have
been a subject of intense study in practically every branch of science and
engineering, the traditional tools for their analysis remain somewhat technical
to learn and apply to practical problems when noise is involved. There are many
examples in which the interaction between determinism and a small noise
component can give rise to complicated motions that would not occur without the
interaction of both mechanisms. Mapping mechanism and timing of noise induced
bursting has implications of important social impact. For example, the
investigator is studying population dynamics of disease spread, in which
external noise excitation can lead to complicated oscillations, and large bursts
corresponding to epidemic. Understanding the timing and mechanisms behind these
epidemics together with control algorithms leads to suggesting a radically new
vaccination protocal in which well timed but relatively noninvasive intervention
will result in averting the problem. Similarly, investigations of noise induced
transitions of a mechanical beam structure, in nonlinear optics (a noisy
lasers), in electronic circuits, in the dynamics of air-pollution, and a
reaction diffusion system of a chemical oscillator shows that these developing
tools have wide ranging application and importance. Development of damage
detection tests of nonstationarity with global perspective suggests a powerful
new way to observe when a system has been radically changed, suggesting
algorithms for a new class of better sensors to avert hazards.


