
* 0405827
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Optimal Control of Mathematical Models for Cancer Treatments
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2004,07/19/2004
* Urszula Ledzewicz,IL,Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 102,015.00

In this project mathematical models for various cancer treatments will be
investigated with the methods of modern optimal control theory. A class of
models based on chemotherapy with single or multiple killing agents will be
formulated and analyzed under evolving drug resistance. In the case of a single
drug this leads to bilinear structures, but for the multiple drug case
unconventional formulations arise and new tools need to be applied. Aside from
problems involving drug resistance, attention also will be directed to models
representing treatments with angiogenic inhibitors (which slow tumor growth by
depriving it from recruiting new blood vessels). The dynamics in these models is
fully nonlinear and its analysis within the framework of geometric methods of
optimal control is expected to answer some open questions about this novel
therapy. Drug resistance and other side effects related to chemo-, radio- or
antiangiogenic therapy naturally lead to the need for combination treatments.
Mathematically such treatments provide a challenge not only in the formulation
of the complex dynamics, but also in the choice of proper objectives which would
capture the various and multi-fold aspects reflecting the medical criteria by
which to judge these therapies. All of these efforts will serve the overall goal
of finding the optimal control, which could aid in designing improved therapy
protocols.

Conventional cancer treatments aim at directly killing tumor cells, be it by
means of drugs in chemotherapy or by means of radiation in radiation treatments.
However, there exist many limiting factors and probably the single most
important, and what has been called "certainly the most frustrating one," is
drug resistance. As of today no medical solution exists for this obstacle to
developing effective cancer treatments. In the project tools of modern optimal
control theory will be employed to analyze a variety of mathematical models
representing cancer treatments with the focus on the important medical issue of
drug resistance. New models that capture these phenomena will be analyzed in an
effort to better reflect the underlying biological situation and goals of the
treatment. The research conducted will provide mathematical insights into an
understanding of these important biomedical models aimed at designing more
effective therapy protocols which may be difficult, or at least very expensive,
if not impossible, to test in a laboratory setting. It will also contribute to
optimal control theory by developing and employing new techniques aimed at
significant applications. Due to its applied and interdisciplinary character the
project is of interest to students and consequently will contain a substantial
educational component.
