
* 0405853
* Challenges in Systems with Semctic and Nematic Order
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATH PRIORITY SOLICITATION, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2004,04/21/2009
* Konstantina Trivisa,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2010
* USD 259,925.00

Proposal: DMS-0405853 PI: Georg Dolzmann Institution: University of Maryland
College Park Title: Challenges in Systems with Smectic and Nematic Order

ABSTRACT

Many physical systems that can be found both in nature and in modern
technological applications possess internal degrees of freedom at a microscopic
scale with tremendous impact on the macroscopic properties of the system. A lot
of fundamental research has been directed in the past decades towards developing
mathematical theories that allow one to `bridge the scales', i.e., to understand
analytically the mechanisms that relate microscopic and macroscopic structures,
to predict the response of these materials to applied forces, and to design
algorithmic strategies that allow an efficient simulation of the system. A
successful completion of this program would ultimately allow one to `tailor--
make smart materials' for key--technological applications. The principal
investigator plans to addresses key questions within this general framework with
special emphasis on two particular systems with excellent potential for
technological applications. The first system is a special class of elastomers
that combine the entropic response of polymer networks with the orientational
instabilities of liquid crystals. The other systems are lipid bilayer membranes
(bio-membranes), which form the vast majority of all membranes in biological
systems. The molecules in each of the layers tend to have a nematic order and
are uniformly arranged in domains of macroscopic sizes. Key issues concern the
influence of the internal structure of the two layers on the macroscopic shape
and elasticity of the membranes, the formation of domains within the layer, and
their stability. Potential applications include artificial blood cells and
mechanisms for drug delivery. From the point of view of the general mathematical
framework, this proposal is concerned with the analysis of variational problems
that arise in the modeling of these systems and addresses questions of existence
and regularity of solutions which are closely related to structural properties
of the variational integrals. An improved understanding of the analytical
aspects is also at the heart of efficient algorithms for the numerical
simulation of the systems mentioned above, and it is expected that a combined
analytical and numerical approach will lead to significant progress in the
understanding of the complex physical systems.

Many modern materials have striking elastic properties that allow novel
technological applications. Frequently these surprising properties are related
to internal degrees of freedom and patterns (so-called microstructures) that
form in the materials at a scale much smaller than the size of the sample itself
(nanoscale). This proposal aims at developing analytical and numerical tools for
the prediction and simulation of these effects, with special emphasis on two
particular systems, a class of rubber-type materials (with potential
applications as artificial muscles or light guiding devices) and bio-membranes
(possible applications include drug delivery mechanisms).


