
* 0405903
* Regularity and Scale Invariant Properties of Critical Dynamic Systems: Harmonic Analysis and Numerical Implementations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2004,08/16/2004
* Nikola Petrov,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2005
* USD 112,113.00

This proposal is focused on developing numerical methods for analysis of the
fine structure of functions and measures, and applying them to study several
critical objects in theory of dynamical systems. The project brings together
ideas from harmonic analysis (Littlewood-Paley theory, multi-resolution
analysis, wavelets) and theoretical physics (renormalization, thermodynamic
formalism) to analyze the regularity and scaling properties of critical objects.
The importance of critical functions is due to the fact that they serve as
models of critical phenomena like transition to turbulence and phase
transitions, provide "barriers" between regular and chaotic behavior of physical
systems, etc. The critical objects that the investigator and his collaborators
plan to study are conjugacies between (critical) circle maps, critical invariant
circles of area-preserving maps, and boundaries of Siegel disks. The objectives
of the project are the following: (A) Mathematical techniques for computation of
global regularity of functions developed by the PI and collaborators will be
applied to a wide variety of problems of scientific interest. (B) Recent results
in theory of wavelets, as well as existing methods, will be implemented to
investigate numerically the local regularity of critical functions, and the
scaling properties of the associated invariant measures. (C) Accurate Fourier
and wavelet spectra will be computed, and their structure will be analyzed by
utilizing techniques from harmonic analysis and renormalization methods.

The proposed research will supply accurate empirical data that will provide
physicists with better understanding of critical phenomena and will pose
challenging problems for pure mathematicians. In the long term, developing,
implementing, and testing new numerical methods will provide researchers with
robust tools for numerical studies of regularity and scaling properties, which
are important in many areas of science and engineering (in particular, in
atmospheric science, geophysics, signal processing, data network traffic). It
will motivate new research in the theory of critical functions and self-similar
measures -- a central problem of modern theory of dynamical systems. This
activity will provide research opportunities for students majoring in different
branches of science and engineering. Since the project is highly
interdisciplinary, it will train students not only for academic, but also for
other scientific applications, and will stimulate contacts between students and
scientists in different areas.
