
* 0405921
* Mathematical Analysis of Parametrically Excited Hamiltonian Systems with Applications in Quantum Physics, Nonlinear Optics and Wave Propagation in Random Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2004,07/22/2004
* Eduard-Wilhelm Kirr,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth J. Shaw
* 01/31/2006
* USD 93,121.00

The PI will study the long time behavior of solutions of dispersive partial
differential equations under time dependent perturbations. The focus will be on
the Linear and Nonlinear Schroedinger Equation in the regimes in which it
supports bound states (periodic in time, localized in space solutions). The
perturbation is expected to redistribute the energy among the bound state and
transfer part of it to radiation. A rigorous description of this process will be
sought. For this purpose the PI will develop novel mathematical techniques for
studying the evolution of both the radiation field and the bound states. The
tools are expected to generalize to other dispersive equations like Klein-
Gordon, Sine-Gordon and Korteweg - de Vries.

The Schroedinger Equation is a well established model for a variety of physical
phenomena and engineering processes. For example, dispersion managed optical
fibers used in high bit rate telecommunications consist of concatenated pieces
of fiber with different material properties. As the light pulses pass through
them they suffer two main transformations. On one hand they are kept from
spreading out which is desirable. On the other hand they loose energy to
radiation. Striking the right balance between the two effects is a design
problem to which the PI plans to contribute. The second example is related to
the new ideas on generating matter waves out of particles in a special phase
(Bose-Einstein Condensates) by controlled variation of their environment. The
stability and long time behavior of these waves is not well understood and will
be investigated in the project. The third example concerns radar detection
through fluctuating media. On one hand, due to the random fluctuations, the
signal reflected by the target that reaches the detector tends to contain more
information compared to a signal that propagates through a stationary medium. On
the other hand, the same fluctuations tend to radiate out of the environment
both the direct and reflected signal. A better qualitative and quantitative
understanding of the second phenomena is one of the goals of this project.
