
* 0405899
* Applied Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,05/25/2006
* Jeffrey Rauch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 125,170.00

Abstract: 0405899, J. Rauch, University of Michigan

Applied Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations

The principal investigator will investigate mathematical problems involving
hyperbolic partial differential equations. These equations appear in the
description of waves which propagate with finite speed, for example acoustics,
electromagnetism, fluid and aero dynamics, plasmas, lasers, telegraphy, radio,
television, cell phones, shock waves, music, power lines, .... etc. Typical
mathematical problems involve showing that specific problems, motivated by
applications, have solutions and studying their qualitative properties, for
example stability and methods for effective computation. A first set of problems
in the proposal concerns the damping of acoustic waves by enclosing the acoustic
cavity in a diffusive medium. Two situations easy to understand are the
protection of pilots and passengers in airplanes from the noise of the engines
and the absorption of sound in a submarine so that it will not escape to the
sea. There are also applications to the automatic control of mechanical systems
immersed in fluids. A second problem concerns the scattering of solutions of a
strongly nonlinearly damped wave equation. A third problem is to show that the
phenomenon of continuum generation in focused laser pulses is a consequence of
nonlinear electromagnetic models without ionization. Self focused laser beams
exhibit continuum generation. The band of frequencies present in the focused
beam is much broader and spans a continuum of frequencies (in contrast to a
discrete set) than before the focusing. Current explanations are frankly not
very convincing. This is a fundamental problem long recognized in the laser
physics community. It is a place where mathematics may add important insights.
Focused beams are used in many situations including a surprising application to
reduce resistance in hypersonic aircraft.

The proposer will study the behavior of solutions of the differential equations
that govern the propagation of waves. One problem investigated is how well sound
can be excluded from a region by enclosing the region is an absorbing layer.
Here the absorption in the layer is supposed to be of a diffusive nature, like
one would have for a gel. Applications include sonic insulation of airplane
fuselages and submarines and the control of immersed mechanical systems. A
second problem to be studied is that of white light generation in focused
lasers. When high power lasers focus, their color changes from the color of the
carrier frequency to nearly white light. There are a variety of explanations of
this, none very convincing. The PI will try to find a better one. There is
convincing experimental evidence that the phenomenon does not require ionization
of the propagation medium and this will help to keep the equations under study
manageable and well founded.


