
* 0406748
* Isotropic Multiresolution Analysis in Multi-Dimensions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2004,10/11/2006
* Emanuel Papadakis,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2008
* USD 313,635.00

This proposal addresses the fundamental challenge of creating a theory that
gives rise to directionally unbiased, fast processing of images and
multidimensional data structures. The proposed Isotropic Multiresolution
Analysis (IMRA) enables decompositions of data structures without orientational
preference that parallel the numerical efficiency of one dimensional MRA-wavelet
constructions. A crucial ingredient of this new theory is an MRA of radial
functions based on an innovative concept of radial translations. Together with a
suitable angular resolution, this allows to replicate all the beneficial
characteristics of classical one-dimensional MRA-wavelets in higher dimensions.
Therefore, IMRA-wavelets are expected to parallel the success of their one-
dimensional predecessors in isolating edges and separating textures. Compared to
previous attempts of MRA-construtions in higher dimensions, IMRAs combine
symmetry properties, smoothness, and compactness of support of scaling functions
and wavelets to an unprecedented degree. The proposed theory is anticipated to
have a significant impact on all areas of digital signal processing in two or
more dimensions, especially in biomedical image processing.

To date, digital image processing systems commonly handle data in a row and
column fashion. Although this pixelized approach is natural for digital
machines, it is much less natural if the objective is to extract information
from natural images or more general multidimensional data structures. In this
proposal, we create a mathematical theory that mimicks features of retinal
processing by mammalian visual systems. Retinal processing is known to detect
edges and textures at different scales of spatial and temporal resolution,
regardless of their orientation and of the topology of their boundary contours.
The proposed theory of Isotropic Multiresolution Analysis (IMRA) offers a way of
digitizing analog signals and of synthesizing analog signals from digital data
in a manner that is more compatible with the "digitization" of natural images
performed by our retina. One particular component of IMRAs is the use of radial
translations, inspired by the evolving wave pattern created when a rock falls in
a pond of calm water. To ensure fast numerical processing capabilities, we use
concepts similar to those in the framework of wavelets, which have proved
computationally efficient in the processing of one- dimensional signals, e.g.
audio. The intellectual merit of this work is that it delivers directionally
unbiased, fast processing capabilities to all areas of digital signal processing
of two or more dimensions, in particular to biomedical image processing. The
Fast Isotropic Wavelet Algorithms resulting from our theory will be applied to
anonymized medical patient data provided to us by the world renowned Texas Heart
Institute (THI) in a joint effort for the accurate and early detection of the
formation of vulnerable plaque in coronary arteries. The goal of this effort is
an accurate non-invasive initial screening test to assess the risk of mycardial
infarcts using CT-scans of the heart.


