
* 0407110
* Symbolic Dynamics Methods for Low Dimensional Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2004,06/30/2008
* Divakar Viswanath,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2009
* USD 105,000.00

Proposal: DMS-0407110 PI: Divakar Viswanath Institution: University of Michigan
Ann Arbor Title: Symbolic dynamics methods for low-dimensional dynamics

ABSTRACT

Symbolic dynamics is an important and central concept in the mathematical
description of low-dimensional chaos. The leading principle of symbolic dynamics
is the construction of symbol sequences that encode segments of trajectories. As
nearby trajectories of a chaotic system diverge rapidly, even long segments of
trajectories will have short symbolic codes. Furthermore, these symbolic codes
explicitly indicate various recursive relationships between families of
trajectories. In earlier work, the investigator used symbolic dynamics to obtain
explicit plots of the fractal structure of the well-known Lorenz attractor,
which was inferred by Lorenz in 1963 but was not exhibited explicitly prior to
the investigator's work. The investigator develops mathematics and computational
algorithms to apply the symbolic dynamics method to low dimensional Hamiltonian
systems. A particular focus of this project is on physically interesting
instances of the three-body problem. In particular, this project studies
resonance transitions in the three-body problem with a view towards the motion
of celestial bodies and spacecrafts. In collaboration with other researchers,
the investigator explores new methods that apply to dissipative partial
differential equations with low dimensional attractors. The investigator uses
results from this project and related research to transmit the excitement of
research to an interdisciplinary audience of undergraduate and graduate
students.

Climactic changes, weather prediction, the motion of planets and other celestial
bodies, spacecraft trajectories, and the flow of hydrogen through the channels
of a fuel cell, to consider but a few examples, present quite different
scientific challenges. Yet all these diverse phenomena are described by the same
type of mathematical objects called nonlinear differential equations. The use of
mathematics leads to concepts of quite great generality that can illuminate very
diverse phenomena. An example is the concept of resonance, which means that the
ratio of the period of motion of one part of the system to that of another part
is a simple fraction such as 1/2, 2/1, or 1/1. When two parts of a system are in
resonance, the two parts interact much more strongly than otherwise leading to
unexpected results, one of these unexpected results being the loss of
predictability. The investigator studies resonances related to the motion of
planets, satellites, and spacecrafts. The investigator develops methods that
make accurate computations possible in spite of the loss of predictability. The
key to these methods is a concept that utilizes the loss of predictability to
give compact descriptions of changing and unpredictable phenomena. This concept
is called symbolic dynamics.


