
* 0408040
* Microscopic properties and physical behavior of materials and media.
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2004,07/19/2005
* Oscar Bruno,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2007
* USD 423,851.00

Proposal: DMS-0408040 PI: Oscar P. Bruno Institution: Caltech Title: Microscopic
properties and physical behavior of materials and media

ABSTRACT

The investigator and his colleagues will consider two distinct research areas:
1) Estimation of the overall (homogenized) behavior of inhomogeneous materials
containing microscopic misfits, and, 2) Direct and inverse scattering by
inhomogeneous media. As is well known, fine scale material interactions
(including microscopic strains, stresses, thermal and plastic fields, etc.) play
crucial roles in determining the overall behavior of materials. While such
microscopic interactions are well understood in many cases, certain fundamental
issues in this context have remained elusive from both theoretical and
experimental standpoints, and have still not been fully resolved. The proposed
efforts in these regards will seek to produce an improved theoretical
understanding as well significantly more general rigorous solvers than
previously available for problems involving three-dimensional fields of misfits
in anisotropic and nonlinear materials. Such solvers should allow significant
improvements in our capability to investigate problems such as polycrystalline
plasticity and magneto-rheology of elastomers. Problems of direct and inverse
scattering of electromagnetic and acoustic waves by inhomogeneous media will
also be investigated as part of this research effort. The work proposed here
will build upon recent contributions by the investigator and his colleagues on
fast high-order integral-equation solvers for penetrable and surface scattering
problems. These solvers can deal with complex scattering problems with
unprecedented accuracy and efficiency; the proposed work will deal with special
emphasis on recently developed O(1) algorithms - which can resolve problems of
arbitrarily high frequency (which would usually require increasingly large
discretization densities as frequencies increase) with a prescribed accuracy and
within a fixed computational time-independent of frequency.

The proposed work impacts upon a variety of areas of societal interest,
including the medical field (optical coherence tomography), automotive (magneto-
rheological elastomers), materials design (actuators, strength of materials),
military (radars); communications (aircraft- and spacecraft-mounted antennas,
wireless communications); critical dimension metrology (optical monitoring of
silicon wafers); modeling of electromagnetic induction in next-generation
processors; etc. As previous work by this PI, on the other hand, the present
effort will result in training of students at both, graduate and undergraduate
levels, as well as postdoctoral associates. In particular, over the last five
years, fifteen different research efforts have been directed by this PI, each
one for a period of ten summer weeks and each one centered around one
undergraduate student. The undergraduate students included seven American
citizens, three women, two black males, two Hispanic, and two students from a
local community college. These activities have been highly rewarding for all
involved, including the graduate students and postdocs that collaborated with
the undergraduate students and this PI, as well as some of the industrial and
lab researchers who proposed specific engineering applications. As a result of
this work, some of the participating graduate students and postdocs discovered a
talent for teaching and advising in mathematics. Most of the participating
undergraduate students went on to graduate schools or four-year colleges, as
appropriate, and have sought to pursue work on mathematically related fields.
The efforts to integrate undergraduate students in research projects will
continue as part of the proposed work.

The award is funded jointly by the Applied Mathematics and Computational
Mathematics programs of the Division of Mathematical Sciences.


