
* 0431744
* The Fourth IMACS International Conference on Nonlinear Evolution Equations and Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory; April 11-14, 2005; Athens, GA
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2004,05/20/2004
* Thiab Taha,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 15,000.00

The Fourth IMACS International Conference on Nonlinear Evolution Equations and
Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory April 11-14, 2005 University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602, USA

ABSTRACT

Partial Support is requested for `The Fourth IMACS International Conference on
Nonlinear Evolution Equations and Wave Phenomena: Computation and Theory' to be
held at the University of Georgia (April 11- 14, 2005) and sponsored by IMACS
(International Association for Mathematics and Computers in Simulation).
Presentations will be both invited (about 4) and submitted (about 120), and
attendance is estimated to be 150 or so. The requested support is for the
expenses of the four invited speakers, students, recent doctoral recipients, and
some of the direct costs of operating the conference. The proposed conference
will focus on computational and theoretical aspects of nonlinear waves and
optical fiber communication systems. Nonlinear wave equations describe a wide
class of physical phenomena in plasma physics, anharmonic crystals, bubble-
liquid mixtures, fiber optics, etc. It is to be noted that fiber optics
communications has experienced tremendous growth in the last twenty years. In
the last decade alone, data rates have increased by orders of magnitude. At the
same time, the recent rise of the Internet and the World-Wide Web has quickly
contributed to make this area one of the key technological sectors in the
national and global economy, and has generated an unprecedented demand for even
higher transmission capacities. At the conference, researchers will present
recent research in the broad area that include theory and computations of
solitons. In addition, research will be presented that uses high performance
computers for solving computationally intensive problems. This conference will
build on the success of the previous year's conference. In 2003, at the third
conference in this series, more than 135 research papers were presented. This
includes contributed papers and papers presented in organized sessions. In
addition, a tutorial on `Introduction to Optical Fiber Communication Systems'
was given. Six invited speakers, ten students and 1 post-doc were fully or
partially supported by the grant. Three `best paper' awards were give to
graduate students. More than 13 students and post-docs as well as 11 women have
participated in the conference. A good number of scientists from the Naval
research laboratories as well as the Los Alamos National laboratories were
present. We expect an even greater representation of women at the fourth
conference, and we are working hard to increase the representation of minorities
and persons with disabilities. This conference is expected to have a substantial
impact on the quality of the research and teaching in the major areas of
discourse which is due to its interdisciplinary nature as well as to the high
quality of the invited speakers and participants. Participants from Mathematics,
Physics, Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering and Industry were present at
the previous conferences.


