
* 0449910
* CAREER: Stochastic analysis and numerics in partial differential equations and extended dynamical systems
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2005,05/17/2005
* Jonathan Mattingly,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2011
* USD 409,560.00

The importance of stochastic modeling is increasing in all engineering and
scientific disciplines. The inclusion of random effects can serve a number of
distinct purposes. On one hand, randomness can be used to compensate for
elements of a system not fully modeled or for insufficiently resolved scales in
the system. This research proposal concentrates on the analysis of how
randomness spreads through large dimensional, extended dynamical systems. One of
the central questions is how passing through many nonlinear interactions or
scales shapes the randomness. Stochastically forced partial differential
equations (SPDEs) such as stochastic fluid equations or stochastically forced
reaction diffusion equations will be a focus of the proposed work. These systems
are often agitated at one scale and it is of both mathematical and modeling
interest to understand the effect of this agitation at other scales. In
particular, this proposal hopes to shed light on the transfer of randomness
between different scales in turbulent fluid flow. In addition to SPDEs, the
proposal will study related questions in large chemical networks arising in cell
regulation and nutrient flow in forest environments. The emphasis will be on the
pathwise dynamics, novel stochastic numerical methods, and estimation problems.

Quantifying and modeling uncertainty is increasingly important in our attempts
to understand and predict our complex and changing world. From the financial
markets, to weather prediction, to environmental engendering, to neuroscience,
to aeronautics, models including random influences have become central to the
physical sciences, to the social sciences and to engineering. Of particular
significance is understanding how pure randomness is shaped into the structures
we observe, especially when the randomness is transferred across disparate
spatial scales. This understanding is the key to producing effective models with
which to predict complex real systems. This proposal specifically addresses
questions central to turbulent water flow and complicated biochemical pathways
in cells. More broadly, applied mathematicians are on the leading edge of our
scientific and technological future. Because of their broad training, they are
the best equipped to move into new, non-traditional fields as they appear, build
the bridges between classical disciplines, and disseminate the understanding
gained in purer mathematical studies to larger scientific and social endeavors.
America's leadership in science and technology requires us to continue producing
world-class researchers and students in applied mathematics. This proposal
includes an undergraduate research component to encourage interested students to
choose a science-related career. It includes outreach to local high schools to
expose students at an earlier age to modern mathematics and the myriad of career
possibilities it presents.
