
* 0456447
* Many-stage Stochastic Programming
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2004,09/24/2004
* Lisa Korf,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 76,945.00

0204206 Korf

The proposed project addresses modeling, duality, approximation, implementation
and application of stochastic programming problems with many time stages. The
typical so-called multi-stage stochastic program tends to be modeled as an
extension of a two-stage problem (often referred to as a stochastic program with
recourse). This misses some important features of a problem with many time
stages, including a description of the dynamics inherent to the problem, the
structure of information, and the degree to which one may respond to that
information at a given time stage. A typical problem from mathematical finance
will be framed in a many- stage stochastic programming setting, allowing for a
description of the dynamics. The classical pricing results of mathematical
finance and extensions to more complicated problems will be obtained using the
new model. This model will be generalized to be applicable to a much broader
range of many-stage stochastic optimization problems, highlighting duality
results and their significance. In conjunction with this will be an
investigation into problems that could be modeled in a continuous time
framework, and problems with infinitely many time stages. New stochastic
programming models, and approximation techniques using the tools of variational
analysis, will be developed for these respective problems. Finally, an
investigation into the structure of many-stage problems that include a
description of system dynamics will be undertaken, leading ultimately to the
development and implementation of algorithms for solving them.

Decision making under uncertainty and the theory and techniques of mathematical
programming merged in the 1950's to create the field now known as stochastic
programming. A stochastic program is a mathematical program (e.g. a linear
program) that includes in its formulation a probability distribution to describe
uncertain parameters. Research consists largely of understanding problem
structure, deriving duality results and optimality conditions, developing
approximation techniques, and exploiting the structure and theory in the
development of solution schemes. The field's development began with a two-stage
recourse model, where the cost of a decision made now (e.g. production) is
affected by an uncertain outcome in the future (e.g. demand), and the
possibility of taking recourse action once the future is revealed (e.g.
overtime). A typical problem is to determine the present decision that minimizes
expected cost. While much knowledge has been gained from the investigation of
two-stage models, a limited view of many-stage stochastic programming has
resulted in which multistage problems are considered as simple extensions of the
two-stage case. This fails to address the inherently dynamic nature of problems
with many time stages. Additionally, two-stage applications tend to come largely
from areas such as production and manufacturing, whereas the bulk of problems
with many time stages arise from financial, economic, and environmental planning
applications and other problems where dynamics are driving a system. Thus, much
of the new many-stage theory should be geared toward these sorts of
applications. The proposed research will explore the additional dynamic
structures, theory (duality, approximation), and questions regarding
implementation, of stochastic optimization problems involving many (possibly
even infinitely many, or a continuum of) stages. This will be motivated
primarily by financial applications.
