
* 0502266
* "EMSW21-RTG": Laboratory and Mathematical Fluid Dynamics: Experiments, Computation, and Modeling
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 09/01/2005,08/18/2005
* Richard McLaughlin,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 08/31/2011
* USD 1,726,947.00

Fluids are everywhere, in the air we breathe, and in the water we drink. As
living organisms, fluids provide the environment in which we live, and the
understanding of fluid motion (from the smallest micro-scale organisms to the
largest planetary-scale storms which stir our atmosphere) is vital to
understanding how living organisms function.

The understanding of fluid dynamics is both an experimental and mathematical
endeavor. This research training grant will facilitate training of a full
spectrum of students (undergraduates, graduates, and post-graduates) to work at
the interface of experimental and theoretical science in research focused upon
discovering new fluid phenomena through laboratory experiments, and the
development of mathematical theory for better predicting these new phenomena.
The training provided will prepare future mathematical scientists to engage
directly with experimentalists in the area of biological and environmental fluid
dynamics crucial to understanding how we interact with our environment on a wide
range of spatio-temporal scales. The trainees will be developed into true
interdisciplinary mathematical scientists with expertise in both mathematical
technique and experimental laboratory method. The experimental fluid phenomena
studied in the UNC fluid dynamics laboratories housed in the Mathematics and
Physics departments will be the focus of a uniformly balanced research approach
which will bring together new experiments and new mathematical (theoretical and
computational) predictions to better our understanding of fluid phenomena in
nature.

The specific focus will be upon two different experimental regimes of micro-
fluidic transport phenomena (directly relevant to muco-ciliary transport in the
lung), and of laboratory-scale stratified fluid phenomena (directly relevant to
mixing in the atmosphere and oceans). Through a combination of a structured
advising system (with 8 mathematics and 1 physics faculty advisors), rotations
through the involved laboratories, regular group meetings, and a modified course
of study, this RTG grant will develop a new generation of mathematical
scientists prepared with the necessary tools to effectively work on truly
interdisciplinary science.
