
* 0503965
* Asymptotic Study of a Smoluchowski Equation Arising in Modeling of Nematic Polymers
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/27/2005
* Jesenko Vukadinovic,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2006
* USD 94,586.00

The investigator and his collaborators study the Smoluchowski equation arising
in the kinetic molecular theory of nematic liquid crystalline polymers. The
intermolecular interaction of excluded volume effects, which is responsible for
the isotropic-nematic phase transition, is modeled by a mean-field potential.
Both the Mayer-Saupe and the Onsager potentials are used. The main purpose of
the project is a rigorous study of the dynamics and rheological properties of
such systems. The problems to be addressed include bifurcation analysis of both
the equilibrium and the shear flow case, and questions arising in the treatment
of the equations by means of the classical theory of infinite dimensional
systems. One of the central problems is the question of the existence of
inertial manifolds on which the partial differential equation reduces to a
finite system of ordinary differential equations, the so-called inertial form.
The starting point of the project is recent results in which the isotropic-
nematic phase transition was resolved for the Smoluchowski equation using the
Mayer-Saupe potential in the equilibrium case (no external flow), as well as the
existence of absorbing balls (cones) in Gevrey spaces of analytic functions.
These questions remain open for the Onsager potential, and are addressed in the
study. In the absence of the flow, the Smoluchowski equation is a gradient
system that preserves uniaxial symmetry, and as such it exhibits fairly simple
dynamical behavior. However, even a passive interaction with a symmetry-breaking
shear flow introduces complicated dynamical features, such as different kinds of
periodic solutions (tumbling, kayaking, log-rolling), and even chaos. These are
characteristic for intermediate shear rates. At low and high shear rates flow
aligning takes place. A rigorous investigation of these dynamical features is
conducted in the project.

The main goal of the project is a mathematical understanding of the transition
that occurs in a class of polymeric materials containing anisotropic molecules
known as mesogens to a so-called liquid crystal phase. Due to their anisotropy,
the molecules interact with each other, resulting in alignment. This long-range
orientational order resembles the one found in solid crystals, while, unlike
solid crystals, the material retains fluidity due to the absence of the long-
range positional order of molecules. The transition to such a phase is induced
by changes in the temperature and the concentration of the mesogens in the
solution. The distribution of the molecules can be described by a partial
differential equation known as the Smoluchowski equation, which is the main
subject of this project. It was already employed successfully to explain the
transition to the liquid crystal phase under some very special conditions, with
many unanswered questions still remaining. The significance of these liquid
crystalline polymers lies in the fact that crystal-like properties, combined
with many of the useful and versatile properties of polymers, make these
materials suitable for a wide range of important applications. For example,
liquid crystalline polymers are abundant in living systems such as DNA,
polypeptides, and cell membranes. Accordingly, they attract particular attention
in the field of biomimetic chemistry. An application of liquid crystalline
polymers that has been successfully developed for industry is the area of high
strength fibers. Kevlar, which is used to make such things as helmets and
bullet-proof vests, is just one example of the use of polymer liquid crystals in
applications calling for strong, light-weight materials. The optical properties
of liquid crystalline polymers lead to applications in optical imaging and the
display industry. Liquid crystalline polymers can be used to coat drugs in the
pharmaceutical industry. However, as very complex materials, liquid crystalline
polymers exhibit very complex behavior, and many of the actual and potential
applications of these materials depend on multidisciplinary research. A better
mathematical understanding of the process of aligning is essential for better
understanding of the behavior of liquid crystalline polymers. This project
addresses some of the central questions regarding this process.
