
* 0504858
* Mathematical investigation of light propagation in tissues for physiological monitoring and tissue imaging
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/27/2005
* Arnold Kim,CA,University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2009
* USD 58,389.00

Abstract: DMS-0504858, A Kim, University of California - Merced

Title: Mathematical investigation of light propagation in tissues for
physiological monitoring and tissue imaging

We study light propagation in tissues for biomedical applications. In
particular, we study three problems: i) inverse problems for physiological
monitoring, ii) fluorescence imaging, and iii) direct and inverse obstacle
scattering in tissues. For the physiological monitoring problem, one seeks to
detect changes in tissue structure and composition, especially in superficial
tissue layers of organs where most pre-cancers form. For the fluorescence
imaging problem, tumor-seeking fluorescent molecules are introduced into deep
tissues and are excited by a laser. By detecting the emitted fluorescent light,
one wishes to determine the support, and fluorescent efficiency and lifetime.
For the direct obstacle scattering problem, one seeks the light scattered by an
obstacle (e.g. a tumor) inside tissue due to a light source. For the inverse
obstacle problem, one seeks to determine distinguishing characteristics (e.g.
support, strength, etc) about the obstacle from scattered light measurements.
The key challenge in all of these problems is to understand the complicated
light-tissue interactions because tissues multiply scatter light strongly. This
proposed research aims to develop more accurate theory to predict and interpret
diagnostic data. In particular, this research begins with the theory of
radiative transport for light propagation in tissues. Computational methods for
boundary value problems of the radiative transport equation will be developed to
solve the direct and inverse problems proposed here. We pay special attention to
computing quantitative resolution estimates for these three problems.

Many of the significant advances in biology and medicine correlate directly with
technological advances in biomedical imaging systems. In particular, laser-based
imaging systems offer great potential for safe, portable and economical
monitoring and imaging of tissue function and health. This research project
involves the theoretical and computational study of laser-based imaging of
biological tissues. In particular, we seek mathematical results that impact
directly applications in physiological monitoring, fluorescence imaging and
direct and inverse obstacle scattering. The interaction of laser light with
biological tissues is complicated to model because tissues scatter light very
strongly. Hence, the overarching goal of this research project is to gain a
better understanding of multiple scattering of light in tissues.


