
* 0504271
* Coherent Structures: Interaction and Propagation of Defects
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2005,08/10/2005
* Arnd Scheel,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2009
* USD 93,999.00

We will investigate coherent structures in complex systems using a model-
independent, dynamical systems approach. Among the phenomena that we will study
are the spread of instabilities, the dynamics of wave trains in excitable and
oscillatory media, line and corner defects in two-dimensional media, and the
interaction of coherent structures. We exploit a detailed description of spectra
to separate properties of defects from the background field. We isolate
organizing centers where properties of the medium change and bifurcations occur.

Important applications range from biology through material science to fluid
dynamics and turbulence modeling. Prominent examples are spiral waves in cardiac
tissue, spiking and bursting in nerve axons, giant vortices in superconductors,
interface propagation in crystallization processes, or crack tip motion. In many
of these examples, little is known about the exact microscopic mechanisms, or
the mere size of the system does not allow for an accurate prediction of
macroscopic behavior from microscopic laws. Coherent structures are the major
obstruction to crude statistical approaches in complex systems. We intend to
explore the properties of coherent structures using analytical methods and we
project to develop reliable numerical tools. The results will further our
ability to predict the behavior of complex systems in parameter ranges far from
equilibrium by joining large-scale computations, based on a mean field theory,
with small-scale information, based on a combined analytical and numerical
description of coherent structures.
