
* 0504166
* Dynamical aspects in nonautonomous and random differential equations and applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/15/2005,05/11/2007
* Wenxian Shen,AL,Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2009
* USD 149,542.00

This project is to investigate the dynamics of nonautonomous and random
differential equations arising from a variety of applied problems. In
particular, the investigator will explore (1) wave front dynamics in diffusive
random and inhomogeneous media arising in phase transitions, nerve pulse
propagation, population genetics, and cellular neural networks; (2) spectra and
Lyapunov exponents for nonautonomous and random linear parabolic equations, with
applications to uniform persistence and coexistence in competitive systems; and
(3) global dynamics in stochastically forced oscillators, including Josephson
junctions in superconducting circuits. The project involves extension of
classical notions in differential equations and dynamical systems as well as the
development and implementation of new tools and techniques for the study of the
problems in the project. The results of the project will enhance the
understanding of the dynamics of the systems under investigation, will provide
theoretical and methodological foundations for the further study of these
systems and related ones, and will bring closer together three separate, but
related, branches of mathematics: differential equations, topological dynamical
systems, and metric dynamical systems, enriching each of them.

Realistic physical and biological systems are influenced by variations in the
external environment, and are often situated in anisotropic or inhomogeneous
media. For this reason, the study of such systems via models involving
nonautonomous or random or stochastic differential equations has been gaining
more and more attention. Due to a lack of general methodology and difficulties
in generalizing classical concepts and notions, there is still little
understanding of many of these equations. The investigator will extend relevant
classical concepts and notions and develop new tools and techniques to study the
dynamics of these equations. The results of the project will provide deep
insight into the effects of random external influences and inhomogeneity of
media on the dynamics in models of physical and biological problems including
phase transitions, nerve pulse propagation, population dynamics, cellular neural
networks, pattern formation, and superconducting circuits. The project will
provide graduate students training in the area and will create opportunities for
students to interact with scientists from other disciplines.
