
* 0504213
* Collaborative Research - Smoluchowski Equations: Analysis of Dynamics, Singularities and Statistics in Complex Fluid-Particle Mixtures.
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2005,08/10/2005
* Peter Constantin,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 300,000.00

In this collaborative project, the investigators study the interaction between
fluids and particle distributions. They examine the nonlinear Smoluchowski
equations with both passive and active interaction with an ambient fluid. The
specific goals are: a study of the transition to nematic states in the high
concentration limit, effects of shear, complex dynamics and modes of coupling.
Particular attention is given to the active interactions with fluids,
singularity formation, the stabilization of high concentration suspensions, and
the dissipation effects due to the insertions.

Many biological and artificial materials are involved in processes in which
melts or fluid flows carry inserted particles. The orientation of the particles
and their overall distribution influence the physical and chemical properties of
the mixture. The investigators carry out a mathematical study of models of such
mixtures. The goals are to describe qualitatively the patterns formed by the
particles, which of these patterns are stable, what are the conditions for the
creation of discontinuities in the patterns, and what are the energetics and
bulk physical properties associated with them. Better understanding of the
effects of small-scale nonequilibrium dynamics on large-scale transport in
complex particle-fuid systems, such as the viscous polymer suspensions
considered here, is important in chemistry, biology, and engineering.
