
* 0504720
* Numerical computation and qualitative properties of nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2005,05/16/2005
* Jeremie Szeftel,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2009
* USD 121,400.00

Award Abstract 0504720, J Szeftel, Princeton University

Title: Numerical computation and qualitative properties of nonlinear Partial
Differential Equations

The principal investigator proposes to work on three problems in applied
mathematics. The first problem is related to the design of absorbing boundary
conditions for nonlinear partial differential equations. The main goal is to
obtain absorbing boundary conditions for systems such as those of fluid
dynamics. This work will contain numerical computations as well as advanced
microlocal analysis. The second problem deals with the optimization of the
transmission conditions in domain decomposition methods. The principal
investigator intends to use the absorbing boundary conditions designed for
nonlinear partial differential equations to optimize the transmission
conditions. This project will contain in particular numerical computations. The
third area of work deals with long-time existence for nonlinear partial
differential equations on compact manifolds. The aim is to improve the estimate
on the time of existence given by the local existence theory for solutions of
nonlinear partial differential equations. The mathematical techniques will
involve advanced tools in analysis.

This project focuses on three problems, two problems being related to numerical
analysis and one to qualitative properties of nonlinear partial differential
equations. The suggested works involve very interesting mathematical questions
and at the same time are important for applications. The first and the second
problem tackle with the numerical computation of huge systems and have therefore
applications in numerous areas such as environmental sciences (oceanography and
meteorology) as well as medicine (simulation of blood flows in human vascular
system). While it is too soon to appraise the wide societal impact of the third
problem, the last decades have seen stunning applications in many fields (e. g.
environmental sciences and dynamic of populations to name just a few) of the
study of qualitative properties of partial differential equations. These three
proposed problems will solidify important connections between area of modern
mathematical research such as numerical analysis, nonlinear partial differential
equations and advanced microlocal analysis. The principal investigator will
disseminate results of the project among both applied and pure mathematicians.
