
* 0505878
* Feedback Control of Pattern Forming Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2005,07/26/2005
* Alexander Golovin,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2008
* USD 157,897.00

Self-organization of spatio-temporal patterns in non-equilibrium systems is a
ubiquitous phenomenon that occurs in many areas of science and technology, such
as materials science, chemical and biological engineering, nanotechnology,
biology and medicine, etc. A new direction of research in this area is the
feedback control of pattern-forming systems. The proposed project is devoted to
the study of feedback control of pattern-forming systems on the basis of most
generic nonlinear evolution equations that can be applied to a large class of
various systems in physics, chemistry and biology. Specifically, the research
will be focused on the following aspects: (i) feedback control of subcritical
instabilities in monotonically and oscillatory unstable systems; (ii) feedback
control of selection of stationary and wave patterns; (iii) feedback control of
nonlinear dynamics in unstable systems with Goldstone mode; (iv) feedback
control of nonlinear dynamics in non-variational systems; (v) feedback control
of driven phase-separating systems.

In many areas of science and technology - materials science, chemical and
biological engineering, nanotechnology, biology and medicine - self-assembly of
regular spatio-temporal patterns and structures is observed. This phenomenon
provides an efficient and inexpensive route for creating new types of devices
and technologies. It is very important to be able to control self-organization
processes in pattern forming systems. A promising way to do that is to apply a
feedback control by which the desired structure or behavior is achieved by
appropriately adjusting the system parameters in real time according to the
observed system characteristics. The proposed project is devoted to the
investigation of feedback control of self-organization in most generic pattern-
forming systems. The results of this research will therefore be applicable to a
large variety of systems in physics, chemistry and biology, and will allow to
determine the most efficient ways to control self-assembly processes in many new
technologies.
