
* 0505780
* Laser-Matter Interactions and Highly Nonlinear Geometrical Optics; Dynamics of Reacting Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2005,03/09/2006
* Kevin Zumbrun,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2009
* USD 84,572.00

Abstract:

This project investigates mathematical properties of models equations describing
a) laser-matter interactions, and b) reacting flows, specifically: a) High-
frequency, large-amplitude solutions of the Maxwell-Euler and Maxwell-Landau
equations. Systems of equations based on the fundamental equations of physics
are too complex to serve as a basis for numerical simulations. Hence the need of
simple model systems. This project addresses the question of the validity of
model systems describing laser-matter interactions, such as the Zakharov and the
Davey-Stewartson models. b) Stability issues for reacting flows. The project
will provide a simple mathematical description of one-dimensional instabilities
occurring in reacting flows by studying bifurcations of simple model systems.
Ultimately, the analysis will be carried out to the more complex framework of
the reacting Navier-Stokes equations, where recent techniques using pointwise
Green's functions bounds will have to be used.

The motivation for these projects comes from actual experiments: large-scale
experiments of high-energy lasers show important enerngy losses; detonation
waves are seen to develop longitudinal instabilities. This project will
contribute to a rigorous mathematical analysis of relevant model equations
describing these phenomena. Such an analysis is a key step in the development of
predictive tools, as a deep mathematical understanding of the models is needed
in order to devise efficient numerical simulations.


