
* 0505414
* Topics in Mathematical Finance
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/01/2005,07/25/2005
* Dmitry Kramkov,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2009
* USD 197,194.00

In a complete financial market every contingent claim can be perfectly
replicated by a controlled portfolio of the traded securities and therefore
admits a well-defined arbitrage free price. In an incomplete market, as a rule,
contingent claims are not replicable. In this case, arbitrage arguments alone
are not sufficient to determine unique prices and, hence, more general
equilibrium based (or utility based) approach has to be used. This project will
study the following related topics of Mathematical Finance: The existence of
second derivatives of the value function in the problem of optimal investment
and the differentiability of the optimal investment strategy with respect to
initial wealth; sensitivity analysis of utility based prices with respect to the
number of non-traded contingent claims; the asymptotic analysis of the problems
of optimal investment under "small" transaction costs; the "equilibrium"
derivation of the interaction between a "large" economic agent and a financial
market and the impact of this interaction on the prices of derivative
securities. A particular attention is on the derivation of "tight" (ideally,
necessary and sufficient) mathematical conditions for the results to hold true.

An important development in world financial markets over the last 25 years is
the rapid broadening and expansion of derivatives markets. This became possible
primarily because of the creation of the arbitrage-free pricing theory initiated
by Black, Scholes and Merton. Several recent events (for example, the near-
collapse of Long Term Capital Management) show, however, that the results of the
arbitrage-free pricing theory should be used in practice rather cautiously as
this theory does not take into account many important features of financial
markets such as incompleteness, liquidity constraints, transaction costs and so
on. In this project we plan to develop techniques that allow for the computation
of the corrections to the arbitrage-free prices of derivatives due to different
types of market imperfections.
