
* 0505494
* Efficient Algorithms for Inversion of Cone Beam Data for General Trajectories
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2005,05/16/2005
* Alexander Katsevich,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2009
* USD 71,419.00

Award abstract 0505494, Alexander Katsevich, University of Central Florida

Title: Efficient algorithms for inversion of cone beam data for general
trajectories

ABSTRACT

The Principal Investigator (PI) plans to develop practical image reconstruction
algorithms for inverting the cone beam transform in the cases when the x-ray
source moves along trajectories, such as circle-and-arc, saddle, etc. It is
expected that the new algorithms will be theoretically exact and efficient
(i.e., with the Filtered Backprojection structure). In addition to algorithm
development, the PI plans to perform theoretical analysis of the algorithms. As
opposed to the Radon transform, inversion of the cone beam transform in the
three dimensional Euclidean space is a complicated problem. Not much is known
about the properties of exact inversion algorithms. Do they generalize to
distributions? What is the stability of reconstruction in the scale of Sobolev
spaces? What are possible artifacts in the case of non-perfect data? These are
some of the questions that the PI plans to address.

The proposed research is of practical significance, because the cone beam
transform is a theoretical foundation of computer tomography (CT). The main
principle of CT is based on transmitting a cone beam of x-rays through the
patient from various directions. This is achieved by moving the x-ray source
along a predetermined trajectory. For each source position a detector measures
the intensity of the beam as it exits the patient. Then the data are inverted
according to a mathematical algorithm. CT scans can be performed using a gantry
or a C-arm. The circle-and-arc trajectory may arise when the scanner is a
portable C-arm. There is a significant need for volumetric visualization using
portable C-arms. The prime application is for image-guided interventional
procedures requiring intraoperative imaging, in which moving the patient is to
be avoided. The advantage of portable C-arms is that they can be moved into the
room where the patient is undergoing the procedure. Saddle trajectories may be
of interest for cardiac imaging. The theoretical component of the proposed
research will result in a deeper understanding of cone beam transform inversion
for general trajectories.


