
* 0505738
* Analysis of Spin Polarized Transfer and of Micro-Macro Theories for Polymers and Liquid Crystals
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CONDENSED MATTER & MAT THEORY
* 08/15/2005,05/22/2007
* Carlos Garcia-Cervera,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2008
* USD 97,402.00

The investigator takes up three projects. In the first project, the emphasis is
the analysis and the design of efficient numerical methods for the simulation of
recent models proposed for the dynamics of the magnetization coupled to the spin
accumulation in multilayers when a current perpendicular to the plane of the
layers is applied. The dynamical equation for the spin is a diffusion equation
with discontinuous coefficients, and the magnetization dynamics is described by
the Landau-Lifshitz equation from ferromagnetism. In the second project, the
investigator studies a new model for liquid crystals based on Inhomogeneous
Density Functional Theory. The model can describe the isotropic, nematic,
smectic A, and crystalline phases. Finally, in the third project, the
investigator studies the formation of aggregates in polymer mixtures.

Ferromagnetic materials are widely used in the magnetic recording industry,
which continues to be the dominant technology for the storage of digital data.
The project addresses some of the technological difficulties found in the design
of magnetic devices such as magnetic memories (MRAMs). Liquid crystals have a
wide range of applications. Their optical properties are highly sensitive to
electric and magnetic fields, which has made liquid crystals ideal candidates
for optical-switching devices, such as video displays and optical memories. They
are very sensitive to temperature changes as well, which makes them useful in
applications involving sensors. More generally, polymers appear in most aspects
of our life, from the amniotic fluid inside biological cells, to plastics and
shampoos used on a daily basis. Understanding the dynamics of biological
membranes and transport through them is of fundamental importance in the
development of efficient methods for the delivery of medicines. Understanding
the process of aggregation in polymer mixtures can have a significant impact in
the design of new products. This study of polymers and liquid crystals addresses
some of these technological and biological issues.
