
* 0505663
* Topological excitations in Bose-Einstein condensates: Existence, stability, dynamics, and interactions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2005,07/06/2005
* Ricardo Carretero,CA,San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 91,861.00

Nonlinear media host a wide variety of localized coherent structures (solitons,
wavetrains, vortices, spirals, etc.) with complex intrinsic properties and
interactions that, in turn, give rise to emergent patterns with nontrivial
dynamics. The theme of the proposed research is a detailed examination of
vortices generated in dispersive nonlinear media. The main focus is to extend
and deepen the understanding of vortex structures, their existence and dynamical
stability as well as their interactions and mesoscopic lattices in nonlinear
media such as Bose-Einstein condensates and related fields (such as nonlinear
optics). We propose to follow a step-by-step methodology in studying the
generation, stability and dynamics of vortices in a progression of scenaria of
increasing complexity, extending from single vortices, to few vortices, to
vortex lattices. Specifically, we plan to study: (1) Vortex generation through
dynamical instabilities and external manipulations such as phase imprinting and
via instabilities driven by rapidly moving impurities (focused laser beams). (2)
Dynamics and stability of single vortices (a.k.a. atoms) in the presence of
external traps and manipulation of vortices by translating the external traps or
by using localized optical "tweezers". (3) Interactions between vortices and
formation, stability and dynamics of vortex dipoles (a.k.a. molecules/dipoles).
(4) Finally, we intend to investigate, by cross-fertilizing ideas from material
science, large arrays of vortices, their crystallization and structural phase
transitions into regular vortex lattices (a.k.a. crystals).

In the 1920's Bose and Einstein predicted that a gas at low density and ultra-
cold temperatures undergoes a transition towards what is nowadays called a Bose-
Einstein condensate (BEC). The most important characteristic of a BEC is that
all atoms occupy the same quantum state creating a macroscopic lump of coherent
matter. BECs are to matter what laser is to light. BECs allow for direct
manipulation and observation of quantum effects at the macroscopic level,
providing ultimate control over matter. Since their recent experimental
realization (for which the 2001 Physics Nobel prize was granted), BECs have been
at the focus of an intensive and ever growing experimental and theoretical
effort. Vortices are fundamental coherent, topologically charged, nonlinear
excitations that emerge in BECs; but which also play a profound role in exciting
and important fields such as superconductivity and superfluidity (which were the
theme of the 2003 Physics Nobel prize). Interestingly enough, they also arise in
our daily life in the form of hydrodynamic vortices in water or in air. There
are strong parallels (as well as differences) between such fluid vortices and
these ultra-cold, superfluid vortices that we plan to examine and delineate. The
outcome of this research will shed light into the pattern formation and
interaction of such vortex structures in Bose-Einstein condensates. Since the
underlying equation that describes the BECs also describes the behavior of
coherent light embedded in a nonlinear material, the research hereby proposed
will also be applicable to problems of optical waveguides and fiber bundles,
photonic crystals, and light storage in optical traps, all of which are active
research areas at the forefront of optical technologies. The proposed research
has potential applications to quantum-optical storage and quantum computing for
the next generation of computers. The research effort is part of an ongoing
collaboration between the PI and Co-PI and involves more than a dozen coworkers
that blend in expertise in fields as diverse as dynamical systems, nonlinear
optics, condensed matter, materials science and scientific computing. Specially
attractive is the prospect that our results will be partially driven and could
be relevant to current experimental research conducted in BEC experiments. This
highly inter-disciplinary research program will also involve a major educational
component through the direct involvement of graduate research assistants and
postdoctoral fellows.
