
* 0505454
* Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Nonlinear Multiscale PDE
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2005,08/29/2005
* Ricardo Nochetto,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2009
* USD 403,011.00

The adequate numerical treatment of nonlinear phenomena governed by partial
differential equations (PDE) with several disparate space-time scales is a
formidable mathematical and computational challenge. Modern algorithms should be
able to resolve fine scales for certain physical quantities without
overresolving others, thereby optimizing the computational effort and making
realistic three-dimensional simulations feasible. This proposal deals with
fundamental mathematical questions for the design, testing, and analysis of
adaptive finite element methods (AFEM) as well as their application to a variety
of multiscale problems for which AFEM are among the most powerful computational
techniques.

This project considers mathematical models in materials science (such as
epitaxial and crystal growth), in biophysics (such as biomembranes), in fluid
and solid mechanics (such as the Navier-Stokes equations), in image processing
and in finance. They are typical, yet quite distinct, examples of multiscale
phenomena which exhibit singularities, fast transients, and topological changes.

This proposal builds upon, and in fact extends and enhances, the prior NSF Grant
DMS-0204670. It is organized in a number of small and seemingly independent
projects, which are however related through the interplay of nonlinearity, error
estimation, numerical analysis and computation, the unifying themes of the
proposal. It is a collaborative endeavor involving a number of scientists in the
US and abroad, as well as several graduate students and postdocs. Resources are
requested to support them partially. A substantial effort is devoted to
education and human resource development.
