
* 0505473
* Mathematical Problems in Nonlinear Conservation Laws and Related Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2005,08/23/2007
* Gui-Qiang Chen,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2010
* USD 145,438.00

The investigator studies mathematical problems involving shock waves in
nonlinear conservation laws and related applications, along with the analysis
and development of efficient new nonlinear techniques. Shock waves often occur
in solutions of nonlinear conservation laws of hyperbolic type, mixed elliptic-
hyperbolic type, and mixed parabolic-hyperbolic type. The proposed work is in
three interrelated topics corresponding to the nonlinear conservation laws of
three types: (1) multidimensional transonic shocks, free boundary problems, and
related nonlinear problems; (2) divergence-measure fields for entropy solutions
with shocks to hyperbolic conservation laws; (3) solutions with shocks to
anisotropic degenerate diffusion-convection equations and related nonlinear
problems. In each, both nonlinear problems involving shock waves and new
mathematical techniques are proposed. The unifying mathematical theme of the
three topics is shock wave problems and related nonlinear techniques. The
objective of this proposed program is twofold: (1) investigate important
nonlinear problems involving shock waves to gain new physical insights, to guide
the formulation of efficient nonlinear techniques, and to find the correct
mathematical frameworks in which to pose the nonlinear conservation laws and
develop the numerical methods that converge stably and rapidly; (2) analyze and
develop nonlinear techniques including free boundary methods, kinetic methods,
compensated regularity methods, and related potential techniques to formulate
new, more efficient nonlinear techniques and to solve various more important
nonlinear problems in conservation laws and related applications. The
mathematical problems in this research program arise in such areas as gas
dynamics, hydraulics, elasticity, multiphase flow, combustion,
magnetohydrodynamics, semiconductor, phase transitions, kinetic theory,
biophysics, sedimentation-consolidation processes, material science, and image
processing. The award will support research on the solvability of these
mathematical problems involving shock waves in nonlinear conservation laws and
related applications, the qualitative behavior of their solutions, as well as
the analysis and development of nonlinear methods in applied analysis and
numerical analysis. This research will lead to a deeper understanding of
nonlinear phenomena, especially for shock waves, and will provide more efficient
nonlinear methods and theories for applications. Given the richness and the
range of applications for which shock waves are involved in nature, this project
will have a broad impact by understanding the behavior of shock waves and
developing methodology and a set of nonlinear techniques for their further
study.


