
* 0507901
* Near-and-Far-from-Equilibrium Statistical Physics of Nonlinear Dispersive Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/15/2005,05/18/2009
* David Cai,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2009
* USD 271,362.00

The investigator studies the non-equilibrium statistical physics aspects of
large spatially extended systems, in particular, nonlinear dispersive wave
turbulence. He aims to go beyond the traditional weak-turbulence regime to
include the dynamics of turbulence of coherent excitations induced by strong
nonlinearity, including intermittent wave collapses, in the interaction of
resonant waves. The non-equilibrium statistical physics of wave turbulence is
studied from two new perspectives: (1) Fluctuation Theorems: These new theorems
have provoked much recent activity for many physical systems. Here the
investigator considers whether Fluctuation Theorems hold for non-equilibrium
wave turbulence and studies related far-from-equilibrium issues, such as (i) the
universality of Fluctuation Theorems in wave turbulence, (ii) the relation to
large-deviation theory, (iii) the dynamical consequences of effective
temperatures, and (iv) the implications of Fluctuation Theorems for phase-mixing
and dephasing processes at the onset of wave turbulence. (2) The Maximum-Entropy
Principle: Previously, wave turbulence has been examined using this principle
for equilibrium states only. Here the investigator aims (i) to include the
consequences of the maximum-entropy principle for wave turbulence flux dynamics,
when applied to the weakly nonlinear regime, in which the weak-turbulence often
arises, and (ii) to further examine the applicability of the maximum-entropy
principle to wave turbulence far from equilibrium. The project requires
synergistic applications of theoretical concepts and techniques that are derived
from statistical physics, stochastic processes, dynamical systems, computational
science, and asymptotic analysis in modern applied mathematics. The topics are
theoretically important for providing a more complete description of
fluctuations in the dynamics of wave turbulence from near-equilibrium to far-
from-equilibrium. The results derived from these investigations could provide
new mathematical formulations of nonlinear dispersive wave turbulence.

The investigator uses new theoretical approaches to study nonlinear dispersive
wave turbulence, which is one of the most challenging theoretical problems. This
work broadens the scope of wave turbulence from non-equilibrium statistical
physics and extends the applicability of physical principles of non-equilibrium
statistical mechanics to wave turbulence, which arises, for example, in
nonlinear optics, acoustic waves, plasmas, superfluid helium and the Bose-
Einstein condensation, capillary and gravity waves on the ocean surface,
internal waves in the ocean. Theoretical insights derived from this work may
shed light on turbulence-induced complexity, such as in the atmosphere and ocean
dynamics, or in the transport of chemicals in a turbulent environment.
