
* 0507256
* Design of attractors for enhanced sensitivity biosensing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATH PRIORITY SOLICITATION, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2005,07/28/2005
* nan,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2008
* USD 310,000.00

We will study nonlinear dynamics of bioparticles at nanoscale for the purpose of
design of enhanced sensitivity biosensors. The physical processes that we can
improve by pursuing such a study include 1) molecular focusing for purposes of
detection and reaction and 2) separation methods for molecular sorting. The
essential idea of the proposal is that a combination of hydrodynamic and
electromagnetic forces, designed using dynamical systems theory, can enable
trapping and separation methods for submicron scale bioparticles. We will focus
our study on applications in dielectrophoretic biomolecule manipulation where
forces on particles are generated by spatially nonhomogeneous alternating
current electric fields and induced fluid flows. However, the dynamical systems
aspects of the theory are projected to have broader impact to enabling
technologies for manipulation of particles with electromagnetic fields and fluid
flows.

In particular, major medical technology breakthroughs and advances in security
against bioterror will be enabled by the use of electromagnetic fields and fluid
flows for manipulation and detection of materials and processes at the nanometer
scale. However, the accuracy, speed and sensitivity of the currently available
devices is not at the level that allows for such breakthroughs. The lack of
quality is in part due to the lack of understanding of nonlinear dynamics of
processes and motions at micro- and nanoscale. In our work we will provide such
an understanding that will ultimately enable development of fast, miniaturized
devices for detection of biotoxins. Our results will also impact developments in
the area of point-of-care diagnostics, where medical doctors will be able to
perform a simple check based on the "cheek swab" that can tell them whether to
administer an antibiotic (and which one, at that) or not in the matter of
minutes. The broader impact of the proposed project includes interdisciplinary
education of the members of the group. We are planning several educational
activities where some of the biotechnology issues that we study will be
popularized for K-8 and high-school level students in the region.
