
* 0507540
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical and Engineering Study of Multi-Channel All-Optical Regenerator
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/24/2005
* Michael Vasilyev,TX,University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 61,734.00

This is a proposal to design and build a multi-channel all-optical regenerator
with a 2R (reampli?cation and reshaping) capability. The proposed regenerator is
a novel device that has the potential to extend the reach and reduce the cost of
fiber based optical transmission systems. The proposal covers both the
mathematical design, optimization, simulation and the initial experimental
testing of the planned system. Mathematically, the proposed device requires a
complex study of the evolution of an intense pulse in a ?ber with periodic
dispersion compensation. This problem is different from that of pulse
propagation in dispersion-managed transmission systems, because in the latter
case, the propagation is only weakly nonlinear. We expect that the outcome of
the mathematical part of this project will be a theory that will describe both
the pulse propagation under the conditions described above and the effect of
perturbations on this propagation. No such a theory exists at the present time.

The proposed regenerator can potentially be used for any number of channels and
does not require their temporal synchronization or any polarization control. The
co-PIs have recently numerically demonstrated the feasibility of such a 2R
regenerator, which, to the best of their knowledge, was the first demonstration
of multi-channel all-optical regeneration under the above conditions.
