
* 0508779
* Asymptotic Methods for Singularly Perturbed Nonlinear Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2005,05/18/2007
* Alexander Tovbis,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2009
* USD 94,426.00

The present proposal consists of two major topics: A) semiclassical (small
dispersion) limit of the focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger Equation (NLS) and
related problems, and; B) persistence of integrable dynamics, including
homoclinic/heteroclinic solutions, of a system undergoing a singular
perturbation. A) Numerical experiments of Bronski and McLauchlin revealed the
formation of a region of violent and disorganized oscillations in the small
dispersion limit of the focusing NLS. Using the method of Riemann-Hilbert
Problem (RHP), we found a way to track the evolution of our initial data into
the region of ``violent and disorganized oscillations" through the evolution of
a hyperelliptic surface associated with the problem. Changes of the genus of
this surface correspond to phase transitions in the evolution of our initial
data. The pure radiational case was studied completely in the joint work with
Venakides and Zhou. Here we propose to study phase transitions in the most
difficult case that includes both solitons and radiation. B) It has been
recently proved (Tovbis, Pelinovsky) that persistence of homoclinic/heteroclinic
solutions to singularly perturbed 5th Kortveg - de Vries (KdV) equation can be
expressed in terms of the Stokes' constants of certain (leading order) rescaled
system. The proposed goal is to develop the corresponding technique to other
types of solutions and systems, including stationary and moving travelling waves
on lattices for NLS and other models.

It is well known that only a tiny portion of nonlinear systems used to model
real world problems allows for explicit form mathematical solutions, leaving
approximate methods and computer simulations to be the most used tools.
Asymptotic methods play a prominent role among approximate methods, as it is
often easier to study a system in some asymptotic limit (say, infinite time) and
then to allow some ``small" corrections for large but finite values of time.
This approach was used for centures, for example, in celestian mechanics.
However, ``small" corrections are not necessarily small if the original and the
limiting systems exibit qualitatively different behavior. For example, a weakly
coupled system of 2nd order nonlinear oscillators generically has a chaotic
behavior whereas the limiting system of uncoupled oscillators has no chaos. Such
systems, called singularly perturbed, are the most difficult subject in the
asymptotic analysis. The current proposal is focused on two still developing
methods for singularly perturbed nonlinear problems: the method of RHP and of
asymptotics beyond all orders. The first method will be used to find small
dispersion limit of the focusing NLS - the problem that was open for many years.
The NLS is the most frequently used model for nonlinear waves phenomena in
physics, engineering, etc. The second method will be used to find when
travelling waves solutions to KdV, NLS and some other integrable models survive
singular perturbations, including discretizations. Solitons and travelling waves
on lattices (discretized models) are rapidly becoming a very important topic,
for example, in fiber optics (including periodic optical structures), design of
computational numerical methods, etc.
