
* 0508901
* Inverse Homogenization for Microstructured Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2005,06/30/2005
* Elena Cherkaev,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2008
* USD 79,887.00

Abstract: DMS-0508901, Elena Cherkaev, University of Utah

Title: Inverse Homogenization for Microstructured Media

The project develops a method of extracting information about the fine scale
geometric structure of micro- or nano-structured material from effective
acoustic or electromagnetic measurements. The technical difficulty of using
sound or electromagnetic waves in sensing micro- or nano-structured media is the
complexity and fine scale of the microgeometry. The length of the applied sound
waves is much larger than the variations of the microstructure, so that only an
effective or homogenized response of the structure is present in measured data.
The proposed "inverse homogenization" method derives microstructural parameters
from effective measurements. The method is based on the Stieltjes analytic
representation of the effective properties of a randomly microstructured medium,
and a possibility to reconstruct the spectral function in this representation
from the effective response of the homogenized material. The approach ties
together properties of the medium on different scales: Complex permittivity on
the coarse scale provides data for microscale inversion. Computationally, the
problem is ill-posed and requires regularization to develop stable numerical
algorithms. The recovered microstructural information can be used for
characterizing other transport and physical properties of the medium, such as
permeability, diffusion, thermal and hydraulic conductivity, etc.

The project develops a novel approach to reconstruction of micro- and nano-
structural information from measurements of effective properties of composite
materials. It brings together results recently obtained in two different fields:
homogenization, and inverse and imaging theory, which makes possible to
formulate new applications for both research areas. The problem is to find a
composite material's structure from its known response to the applied acoustic
or electromagnetic field. When the wavelength of the applied field is much
larger than the microstructural scale, then fine scale features of the structure
cannot be resolved, and the microgeometry is homogenized. The project develops
an "inverse homogenization" method that utilizes acoustic or electromagnetic
measurements over a range of frequency to recover information about the
microstructural parameters of the medium.

The results of the proposed work are useful in designing artificial micro- and
nano-structured composites. They also have applications to osteoporosis through
ultrasound evaluation of bone structure and density and to noninvasive
monitoring of blood clots and evaluation of their age and structure.
