
* 0512166
* Second Purdue Minisymposium on Financial Mathematics; April 15-16, 2005; West Lafayette, IN
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 04/01/2005,02/14/2005
* Frederi Viens,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wen Chen Masters
* 12/31/2005
* USD 7,500.00

This proposal requests funds to support the Second Purdue Minisymposium on
Financial Mathematics, to be held on April 15-16, 2005. A first edition was held
at Purdue University on April 3, 2003, gathering 40 participants. The planned
format for this short conference includes: one afternoon one morning, with
expected attendance 60 to 80 participants; three main invited one-hour talks,
full travel reimbursement for these senior speakers, 6 invited 25-minute talks,
with partial travel reimbursement for 3 junior speakers; modest funds for coffee
breaks, and one conference dinner for invited speakers; partial travel
reimbursement for 7 Ph.D. students or postdoctoral scholars (people who obtained
their Ph.D. no more than 3 years ago), and the possibility to present their work
in a poster session. The three main speakers will be important researchers in
quantitative finance, known for their world-class work in both theoretical
financial mathematics and applied quantitative finance. The P.I.'s scientific
motivation for the conference includes exposing the participants to an array of
cutting-edge research topics in financial mathematics, including stochastic
volatility in option pricing, American options, stochastic control and portfolio
optimization under partial information, interacting particle methods in finance,
Monte-Carlo financial simulation techniques.

The proposed conference on Financial Mathematics at Purdue University will
provide evidence to the participants that the interaction between Finance and
Mathematics is bidirectional: beyond receiving answers to its applied questions,
Finance provides great problems for probability theory, statistical science, and
applied mathematics, motivates the development of new tools of intrinsic
mathematical interest, and helps mold and improve the image and the purpose of
Mathematics with the general non-scientific public. The conference will create
an opportunity for the education of graduate students and beginning researchers
with an interest in quantitative finance, by bringing local Purdue students in
contact with like-minded peers from other academic institutions, by providing
role models -- the main speakers, and by inspiring and uncovering possible new
research topics. The P.I. will encourage underrepresented minorities to
participate in the conference, and will target such groups for financial support
by selecting invited speakers and supported graduate and postdoctoral
participants appropriately.
