
* 0555272
* Kinetic Techniques for Hyperbolic and Multiscale Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2005,01/03/2006
* Athanasios Tzavaras,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2009
* USD 97,035.00

In recent years there has seen a very fruitful exchange between ideas in the
theory of kinetic equations and the theory of weak solutions for hyperbolic
systems. At the core of this exchange lies the issue of deriving continuum
theories from microscopic models of kinetic theory of gases or statistical
physics. In this context transport properties play a crucial role whether in a
framework of kinetic equations, or in a context of nonlinear transport as it
appears with differential constraints in the context of polyconvex
elastodynamics or nonlinear models for Maxwell?s equations. This proposal has
the objectives to perform analytical and modeling work on the topics: (i)
transport and oscillations in systems of two conservation laws, (ii) collisional
kinetic models and their hydrodynamic limits, (iii) effect of differential
constraints on the equations of polyconvex elastodynamics, (iv) mathematical
aspects of kinetic theory of dilute polymers, and (v) development of kinetic
techniques for homogenization problems.

Hyperbolic systems of conservation laws express the basic laws of continuum
physics and as such are central in modeling in the sciences. Kinetic modeling is
becoming all the more pronounced, as microscopic modeling and the associated
derivation of mesoscopic equations is commonplace in today?s engineering
applications. Understanding of homogenization issues and the couplings in
problems where multiple scales interact are necessary ingredients for the design
of e cient computational algorithms that proceed without resolving all
microscopic information of the problem. The mathematical analysis of issues
related to the passage from small to coarser scales has significant implications
on the design of high-performance computing algorithms, particularly when
treating problems where scale interactions occur. Such problems are at the
center of modern material science with several applications in chemical and
materials engineering.
