
* 0602204
* EMSW21-RTG, Biodynamics at Boston University
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI, MATH PRIORITY SOLICITATION, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, ENVIRON & STRUCTURAL SYS CL, Activation
* 09/01/2006,06/15/2010
* Nancy Kopell,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2012
* USD 2,144,307.00

This project will advance the creation and support of a community of scholars,
from undergraduate to faculty, working at the interfaces among dynamical systems
and biological applications. The three main areas of focus are: 1. Analysis of
systems with multiple length and time scales, including applications to pattern
formation; 2. Mathematical neuroscience, including analytical methods for
working with small networks and reduction of dimension techniques; 3. Gene
regulatory networks, including the development of RNA switches, transcriptional
bursting and programmable cells. These areas have major applications to issues
concerning health and medicine. The project will build on the previous research
and training experience of the Center for BioDynamics, co-directed by the
Principal Investigator and one of the other senior faculty members. Trainees
will be pre- and post-doctoral students who will take part in a wide variety of
formal and informal activities, including special seminars, working groups,
mini-symposia, laboratory work, journal clubs and social events, which will
enable them to acquire the multiple scientific cultures needed to work in a
trans-disciplinary manner. The pre-doctoral students will be from the
departments of Mathematics or Biomedical Engineering; the postdoctoral
associates will be drawn from a wide range of backgrounds, with a focus on
applied math. In addition to their research activities, trainees will obtain
experience teaching at different levels. Math department faculty and trainees
will be involved in the construction of new interdisciplinary curricula for
undergraduates in other departments, including Biology; the faculty will mentor
the trainees in teaching the new curricula.
