
* 0602235
* EMSW21 - RTG: Numerical Mathematics for Scientific Computing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 09/15/2006,09/08/2006
* Margaret Wright,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 09/30/2012
* USD 2,476,150.00

For at least two decades, high-level reports on the health of mathematical
sciences research in the United States have recommended creation of a more
direct path between this research and its users. The most obvious means for
improving this connection is software, which is ubiquitous in science,
engineering, business, medicine, as well as everyday life. Mathematics embodied
in software can quickly bring new knowledge, insights, and methods to bear in
contexts ranging from detecting tumors to finding the best travel route to
deciding how to invest. The role of software as standard-bearer for the
mathematical sciences is especially important for industry, where mathematical
discoveries tend to be applied only if they have been transformed into software.
Successful production of high-quality, timely mathematical software brings an
array of complex intellectual challenges requiring training not only in
mathematics, but also in software development and the needs of application
areas. Accordingly, the goal of this Research Training Group is to produce
mathematical scientists with a deep, hands-on understanding of mathematical
algorithms and their instantiation in software; in addition, we intend to make
the crucial elements of the training program broadly available. The faculty
involved with this activity, from the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences
at New York University, and the Applied Physics and Applied Mathematics
Department at Columbia University, represent a variety of experiences in applied
and computational mathematics, numerical algorithms and software, and real-world
applications. Our belief is that the combined expertise of these researchers
will provide a rich source of common insights that currently exist in relative
isolation. The Research Training Group will provide, for undergraduates, Ph.D.
students, and postdoctoral researchers: (1) training that explores in depth the
relationships among mathematical modeling, algorithm design, software choices,
and the hardware environment; (2) understanding of how algorithm and software
design may be affected, even driven, by the nature of problems and the contexts
in which they need to be solved; (3) hands-on experience of designing software
that succeeds when it can and fails gracefully when it cannot. At all levels,
participants will experience individual and team involvement with mathematical
software development. The undergraduate part of the program will include an
enhanced curriculum and summer research experiences directly connecting the
mathematical sciences with real-world applications. Ph.D. student training will
include joint mentoring by faculty with expertise in applied and computational
mathematics and scientific software, an enhanced curriculum that builds on the
strengths of the two universities, and internships in government and industrial
research laboratories. Postdocs will join longer-term projects with emphasis on
applications, and will also be involved in undergraduate and graduate student
training. Our hope is that the experiences of this Research Training Group will
be helpful in developing other programs with similar goals.
