
* 0603287
* Stochastic Optimization: Approximation Algorithms and Asymptotic Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/15/2006,07/13/2006
* Gang George Yin,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2010
* USD 236,638.00

Owing to the rapid advances in technology in the new era, real-world systems
have embraced an ever-expanding complexity. Not only do they vary continuously
subject to random disturbances, but also they experience certain switching
processes, jump-changing occasionally to affect the systems' states, presenting
another fold of uncertainty. In response to the needs in wireless
communications, signal processing, manufacturing, finance, and economics, this
project aims to design efficient computational methods and analytic properties
for such systems. The project presents algorithms taking into consideration
noisy measurements and random environments for emerging applications in mobile
communications and financial market analysis. Motivated by pursuit-evasion games
that involve additional environmental variables, this project develops numerical
procedures for games with occasional and random switching, with potential
applications to homeland security. To carry out identification tasks where only
data obtained using sensors are available, as in automotive engineering and
medical applications, identification algorithms using quantized data will be
examined. To be able to describe complex systems and their inherent uncertainty
and random environment, this project also emphasizes the understanding of the
intrinsic properties of random processes, including both diffusive features and
jump characteristics. The proposed research will yield new insight, and advance
the state of the art of stochastic optimization methods.
