
* 0604491
* Problems in Stochastic Control, Incomplete Markets, and Stochastic Limit Theorems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/01/2006,07/24/2006
* Erhan Bayraktar,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2009
* USD 88,688.00

The proposed project consists of four parts: (1) Solving the optimal stopping
problems associated with several quickest detection problems for processes that
jump. The goal is to provide novel optimization techniques for such processes
and study properties of the corresponding variational inequalities. (2)
Developing stochastic control techniques to study the problem of how an
individual (retiree) should invest her wealth in a risky financial market in
order to minimize the probability that she outlives her wealth, minimizes her
life-time shortfall. In this case, the aim is to develop the earlier results of
L-infinity control and to analyze the associated variational equalities for more
realistic market models. (3) Developing new pricing principles for incomplete
markets, with the objective of providing new insights into pricing and hedging
derivative securities in incomplete markets. This part also includes developing
solutions of impulse and singular control problems for any one-dimensional
diffusion (with decision making delay). (4) Developing stochastic limit theorems
for processes with semi-Markov switching to elucidate the impact of common
characteristics of the investors on the aggregate quantities like the market
prices.

Optimal stopping problems have applications in the areas of seismology, machine
monitoring, finance, insurance, health surveillance among others. Improved
stochastic control techniques may inform the public, financial planners and
legislators about the risk of ruin in retirement. This work will benefit
individuals' decision making on important financial matters they face during
their lives: How much to invest in mutual funds; how much insurance one should
buy; whether it is a good time to borrow to invest in the stock market and how
much one should borrow; when it is best to declare bankruptcy; when one should
retire, etc. The development of new pricing principles provides better pricing
mechanisms for derivative products in the markets, which will benefit the
financial institutions which are at the center of the economy. The results in
the final section of this part will help the management make better decisions
for the welfare of their companies which will benefit the nation since available
resources will be used more efficiently. The final objective of the project will
obtain insights into the market dynamics by understanding the price formation
from typical behavioral qualities of investors. This is important in creating
good financial models that benefit economic forecast, investment and policy
decisions.
