
* 0604687
* The Kinetic Theory of Waves and Reactive-Diffusive Fronts
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,07/18/2006
* Leonid Ryzhik,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2010
* USD 246,491.00

Numerical simulation of the microscopic description of wave propagation in
random media is still beyond reach of modern computers: a typical propagation
distance may be of the order of hundreds of wavelengths and as many correlation
lengths of random fluctuations. This necessitates the use of various approximate
macroscopic models, of which kinetic equations constitute an important class.
However, the passage from microscopic wave equations to large-scale kinetics is
a complicated problem in itself. The goal of the first part of the project is
two-fold: on one hand, to develop new tools and better understanding of kinetic
limits, and second, to consider the applications of kinetic methods to the
inverse problems of wave propagation, finding sources and scatterers in a
cluttered environment. The second part of the project investigates the
qualitative behavior of solutions of reaction-diffusion-advection equations,
with the main focus on the effect of a fluid flow. We will investigate the
interaction of the mixing, dynamic, and geometric properties of the underlying
flow and the effects of diffusion and reaction. The problem becomes especially
complex in the situations where the feedback from the reaction process on the
fluid flow cannot be ignored. The project addresses the quantitative study of
the transport of the energy, momentum, and the reactants in a Boussinesq
reactive system.

<br><br>

This project carries out mathematical studies of wave propagation in complex
media and of reaction-diffusion equations. The mathematical models are relevant
to several branches of science, ranging from biomedical imaging questions to
geophysics, fluid dynamics, and astrophysics. Imaging in a cluttered
environment, whether it is a human body, earth interior, or foliage, is
inherently unstable because of media complexity. An objective of this project is
to develop imaging methods that are less sensitive to unpredictable fluctuations
of the clutter. We will strive to understand the universality and the limits of
applicability of macroscopic models and develop inversion algorithms that arise
from the macroscopic rather than detailed microscopic models and that are
therefore inherently more stable with respect to fluctuations of the
environment. Another area of this project concerns the mathematical description
of the effect of a fluid flow on chemical reactions. Turbulent fluid flow plays
an important role in many reaction phenomena: it may drastically enhance the
rate of reaction, leading to higher efficiency, or, in some situations,
extinguish the chemical process. The mathematical theory is far from complete,
due to the inherent complexity and richness of the phenomena. The project will
address these issues in simpler mathematical models to illuminate the mechanisms
present in the full problem.
