
* 0604309
* Optimal Control for Forward-Backward Stochastic Differential Equations and Related Topics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/01/2006,07/13/2006
* Jiongmin Yong,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2010
* USD 150,000.00

An optimal control theory framework will be established for forward-backward
stochastic differential equations (FBSDEs). A number of fundamental mathematical
questions will be addressed. First, well-posedness for FBSDEs with mixed initial
and terminal conditions will be established by means of a priori estimates
together with the notion of a "bridge", i.e., a map which relates the FBSDE to a
Riccati differential inequality with constraints. Secondly, a spike variation
technique for FBSDEs will be developed and used to derive a Pontryagin type
maximum principle that is satisfied by optimal controls of FBSDEs. Finally,
coupled linear FBSDEs with random coefficients and mixed initial and terminal
conditions will be studied by introducing decoupling techniques and related
linear-quadratic optimal control problems will be solved using stochastic
Riccati equations. The theory derived in this project will substantially enrich
the existing theory of FBSDEs, and will deeply extend the classical stochastic
optimal control theory.

Maximizing return and minimizing risks are very common in the world of
investment (including stock market, mutual funds, retirement accounts,
insurance, social security, etc.). It is well understood that high return is
associated with high risks. Careful study shows that people's preferences
towards return/risks are usually not linear. The well-known Allais/Ellsberg type
paradoxes, which show that decisions made in the presence of high risk are
inconsistent with expected utility theory, are excellent counterexamples for
this. To compensate for this, some nonlinear preferences (also called nonlinear
expectation) can be introduced via the so-called backward stochastic
differential equations. Therefore, when such kind of expectation is used,
optimal investment problem naturally becomes an optimal control problem for
forward-backward stochastic differential equations. A similar situation happens
for investment involving contingent claims (such as discount bonds, insurance
claims, options, etc.), markets (including financial markets, energy markets,
etc.) with large investors (such as some big hedge funds, a main feature of
which is the dependence of the price processes on the positions and trading
strategies of the large investors), and so on. The theory established in this
project will help us to answer, at least in part, the following types of
questions: How do the nonlinear preferences affect the optimal trading
strategies for an investment? What will be the optimal trading strategies when
some contingent claims are allowed to trade? How do the large investors
influence the market?
