
* 0604362
* Analysis and Applications of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Conservation Laws
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,07/24/2006
* Dehua Wang,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2010
* USD 112,634.00

The research program is for the study of multi-dimensional conservation laws
arising in fluid dynamics and magnetohydrodynamics. In particular, the
investigator studies some nonlinear problems on the multi-dimensional Euler
equations for inviscid compressible flow, the magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
equations for viscous compressible flow in an electromagnetic field, and related
applications. The objectives of this research are (1) to develop analytic
techniques and numerical schemes to construct global solutions of the multi-
dimensional Euler equations with certain symmetries and study the qualitative
behavior of the solution near the origin; (2) to construct some special two-
dimensional global solutions of Euler equations, obtain global structure of
solutions, and study evolution of discontinuities and stability; (3) to explore
the wave interactions and construct two-dimensional Riemann solutions of the
pressure gradient system and the Euler equations; and (4) to study the formation
of singularity, long-time behavior, global existence, and stability of solutions
to both the one-dimensional and multi-dimensional problems of the viscous MHD
equations when initial data are large. New ideas and techniques need to be
developed to solve these problems. The study will provide deep insight into the
structure and qualitative behavior of solutions, and will shed light on the
general multi-dimensional problems for the compressible Euler and MHD equations.

The project is devoted to a mathematical study of some nonlinear partial
differential equations governing the motion of compressible fluid flows and
related applications. Compressible fluids occur all around us in nature, e.g.
gases and plasmas, whose study is crucial to understanding aerodyanmics,
environmental science, astrophysics, and plasma physics, etc. While the one-
dimensional Euler equations for inviscid compressible fluid flow are rather well
understood, the general theory for the multi-dimensional case is comparatively
mathematically underdeveloped. The mathematical theory of magnetohydrodynamic
equations for viscous compressible conducting fluid flow in an electromagnetic
field in any space dimensions is even less developed. The purpose of this
research program is to investigate some important problems to advance the
mathematical understanding of the multi-dimensional compressible fluid flows and
magnetohydrodynamics. Success in this project will advance knowledge of this
fundamental area of mathematics and mechanics, and will provide education and
training to students on the outstanding problems in the field.
