
* 0604047
* Thin Layer Flow: Experiments, Modeling, and Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2006,08/11/2006
* Michael Shearer,NC,North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2010
* USD 477,681.00

Shearer DMS-0604047

Recent results suggest that there are strong connections between the science
and mathematics of thin liquid films and the flow of thin layers of granular
materials. The investigators explores these connections through modeling,
analysis, numerical simulation and experiments. They study multidimensional
nonlinear systems of partial differential equations of avalanche models, and the
connection to experiments, to gain new insights into fundamental aspects of
granular and avalanche mechanics. In related studies, the investigators
formulate and analyze systems of partial differential equations for thin liquid
films driven by surfactants or controlled by temperature. These equations give
rise to mathematical theory addressing new wave structures observed in
experiments and simulations.

The investigators explore strong connections between the science and
mathematics of thin liquid films and the flow of thin layers of granular
materials. Thin films are important in medical applications such as surfactant
replacement therapy, and in microscopic coating flows that arise in industry and
manufacturing. Granular materials occur over a large range of length scales,
from pharmaceuticals and agricultural grains to rocks and gravel in landslides.
The results of this project further the understanding of issues of both
specialized scientific interest and of broad significance to society, such as
the identification of mechanisms of wave propagation and patterns in surfactant
transport in human lungs, and the separation by size of rocks and other
particles in avalanches. This project incorporates training of mathematics and
physics graduate and undergraduate students in mathematics, simulation, and
experimental physics in a multidisciplinary research program. The participation
of under-represented groups builds on recent successes. Results from this
project are disseminated through journal publications, special sessions and
lectures at international conferences, articles in popular science publications,
and through a project web page.
