
* 0604946
* Mathematical methods in the kinetic theory of plasmas and gravitating systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2006,06/13/2006
* Carlo Lancellotti,NY,CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2010
* USD 103,599.00

Proposal ID: 0604946 PI: Lancellotti, Carlo Institution: CUNY Staten Island
Title: Mathematical methods in the kinetic theory of plasmas and gravitating
systems

Abstract

This project investigates some open mathematical problems in the kinetic theory
of plasmas and gravitating systems. The kinetic equations that describe systems
of particles interacting via gravitational (Newton) or electrostatic (Coulomb)
forces are crucially important in astrophysics and plasma physics, but they have
been quite impervious to mathematical analysis. The investigation builds on some
recent breakthroughs by the PI and follows two lines of attack: 1) The
mathematical properties of spatially homogeneous equations of the (linear or
nonlinear) Fokker-Planck type are being studied via a master equation approach,
in which a kinetic equation is approximated as the infinite-particle limit of a
linear Kolmogorov equation for a carefully selected $N$-body stochastic process.
This latter replaces the (much more complex) underlying Hamiltonian dynamics of
the ``physical'' $N$-body system and makes it possible to extract new
information about existence of solutions to a kinetic equation, their rate of
decay to equilibrium etc. 2) This project also explores the application of
orbit-averaging methods to the spatially inhomogeneous Vlasov-Landau-Poisson
equations that arise in astrophysics and plasma physics. These methods take
advantage of different time scales present in certain physical systems in order
to greatly reduce the number of independent variables and thus facilitate the
mathematical analysis of the equations.

Kinetic equations describe the evolution of many-body systems such as gases,
plasmas and clusters of stars. Equations of this type play an essential role in
many applications, ranging from gas dynamics to fusion plasma, from astrophysics
to physical chemistry, from traffic flow to semiconductors. This research
project focuses on those situations in which the particles in the system
interact via long-range forces, as is the case for ionized gases (plasmas) and
for stars. In these cases, the mathematical analysisis greatly complicated by
the fact that long-range forces allow many particles to interact with each other
at the same time, whereas ordinary gases are driven just by "binary" (one-on-
one) collisions between pairs of particles. The main goal of the project is to
obtain precise mathematical estimates of the behavior of solutions to these
equations. For instance, when studying a laboratory plasma it is very desirable
to know that the mathematical model being used has well-defined solutions, and
also to estimate how quickly external disturbances will fade away etc. Beside
their intrinsic mathematical value, results of this type also aid the
development (and support the validity) of the numerical simulations that play an
important role in the study of fusion reactors, of the earth's magnetosphere, of
globular clusters of stars and many other applications.


