
* 0604891
* Collaborative Research: Collaborative Proposal for Mathematics & Computation of Nano-Composite Flows & Properties
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 06/01/2006,05/15/2006
* M Forest,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2009
* USD 213,091.00

Zhou DMS-0604912 Forest DMS-0604891

This collaborative project targets mathematics and computation for a
technologically important class of materials called polymer nano-composites
(PNCs). The investigators study two topics: the hydrodynamics of processing, and
effective property characterization (e.g., conductive and mechanical
properties). PNCs consist of ensembles of thin rods or platelets (millions in a
cubic micron, generating football fields of surface contact with the solvent),
whose orientational distribution and superior properties relative to the matrix
have exhibited huge enhancements of materials properties in test systems.
However, success in Nature and industry with fibers, which uniformly align the
load bearing or conducting nano-elements, has not been duplicated for films and
molds, thereby dramatically limiting the range of applications. The difficulties
are widely documented in benchmark experiments: shear dominated, confined steady
processing yields complex dynamics and heterogeneity in the rod or platelet
ensemble. Resultant film properties are highly anisotropic, non-uniform, and
sensitive to nano-particle geometry, volume fraction, and processing conditions.
Theory, models, analysis, and numerical algorithms are undertaken to explain
these phenomena, to explore the most perplexing observations, to map out
parameter domains of robust film flows, and to characterize the conductivity and
mechanical effective property tensors. The key object across all projects is the
orientational probability distribution function (PDF) of the nano-particle
ensemble. The PDF is described by the Doi kinetic theory and its extension to
viscoelastic solvents, which the investigators and their collaborators merge
into homogenized averaging and percolation-dominated effective property
characterization.

The promises of nano-composite materials are profound. Nano-scale "designer"
molecules are added at very low percentages to traditional materials, with the
result of huge gains in performance properties of the composite relative to the
original material. The nano-elements are much stronger, conduct electricity or
heat significantly better, or are impermeable to gases and liquids that
contaminate traditional materials. There is an engineering price, however, in
that the smart engineering models and numerical codes that perform effectively
for traditional composites simply do not apply to nano-composites. There are
millions of nano-particles per cubic micron, with football fields of new surface
area per raindrop of volume. Thus, nano-composite flows cannot be simulated with
existing simulation tools. The principal investigators are designing new
numerical simulation tools, based on new theoretical models, which extend the
traditional flow processing models and codes by addition of new physics specific
to nano-composites. The predictions are tested in conjunction with nano-
engineering experimentalists. The goal of this effort is a platform for design
and control of nano-composite materials, with the ability to steer the
processing phase to achieve targeted property specifications.
