
* 0604520
* Collaborative Research: Stability, Wave Breaking and Mixing in Stratified Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2006,05/23/2008
* Esteban Tabak,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2009
* USD 247,069.00

Milewski DMS-0604635 Tabak DMS-0604520

The atmosphere and ocean are stratified fluids and as such support the
propagation of disturbances through internal waves. These internal waves may
deform nonlinearly and break by overturning, leading to the mixing of the
ambient fluid. Both the atmosphere and ocean also display strong shear flows
that may become unstable, producing rolls that can also lead to mixing and local
homogenization of the density. The investigators study the issue of which of
these two processes prevails in a given flow configuration. Based on preliminary
work, the investigators conjecture that in the shallow water regime there is a
sharp boundary below which the dynamics disallow shear instabilities, leaving
only wave breaking as the possible mixing mechanism. In mathematical terms, they
consider systems of partial differential equations of mixed type, where the
hyperbolic domain corresponds to the internal waves and the elliptic domain to
shear instability. The question of nonlinear stability of the flow can then be
formulated in terms of whether the solutions themselves can make the system
become elliptic. The investigators have proved that this cannot happen for a
simple system and here extend the result to much more general scenarios. In
addition to this stability result, they propose a closure that quantifies the
mixing taking place when waves break.

Understanding and quantifying fluid mixing is a key ingredient in global
weather and climate studies. The atmosphere and ocean are stratified fluids:
fluids whose density varies (primarily) with height due to temperature, salinity
and other effects. Stratified fluids allow for the propagation of internal
waves, and these waves may eventually break and mix the fluid. Another possible
source of mixing is due to shear instabilities: the formation of eddies at the
interface between flows of different speeds. In this project the investigators
study which of these two effects is more likely to prevail given the ambient
conditions. Such a study has far-reaching implications: the atmospheric and
ocean mixing layers control the coupling between the two, and hence exert a
critical control on the evolution of the climate. The work advances the
predictive capabilities of coupled atmosphere-ocean models, by improving their
parameterization of fluid entrainment and mixing. It also trains undergraduate
and graduate students in the use of applied mathematical tools for the
advancement of the natural sciences.
