
* 0604513
* Exchange Market Equilibrium and Auction Pricing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,07/24/2006
* Yinyu Ye,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2010
* USD 160,000.00

Complexity theory is the foundation of high-performance computing. The goal of
the theory is to develop criteria for measuring effectiveness of various
computational algorithms. The term ''complexity'' refers to the amount of
resources required by a computation. In this project, running time or number of
arithmetic operations is the major resource of interest. Linear programming (LP)
has been an important computational problem in complexity analysis. Due to the
relentless research effort in LP algorithms, a linear program can be solved
today one million times faster than it was done twenty years ago. Businesses,
large and small, now use LP models to control manufacture inventories, price
commodities, design civil/communication networks, and plan investments. LP even
becomes a popular subject taught in under/graduate and MBA curriculums,
advancing human knowledge and promoting science education. Now many other
important computational problems are emerging or reemerging. In particular,
there has been a growing trend in models, theories, and algorithms on problems
arisen in Internet economics, information network, auction/game pricing, as well
as social organization issues enabled through World Wide Web. The aim of the
project is to further develop and extend complexity theories and efficient
methods to responding these emergencies, where there is strong interest in
solving them faster and more accurate due to their wide applications in today's
US service economy, such as trade, auction, negotiation, and information
aggregation. More specifically, the following research objectives and activities
are proposed: Exchange market equilibrium: develop the algorithmic and
complexity research on solving several exchange market price equilibrium
problems, including the Nash equilibrium, where many challenging questions are
open and need answerers; Auction-game mechanism design: propose and analyze a
convex pari-mutuel call auction pricing mechanism for contingent claim markets
and to develop a forecast model for some uncertain future events; Real-time or
dynamic pricing: conduct research for pricing real-time or dynamic auctions,
such as innovative auction markets in key-word search to sell advertisements for
Internet search business.

The proposed research will deepen our understanding of complexities of these
emerging computational price equilibrium problems and possibly resolve important
open questions on whether or not they admit high efficient algorithms. The
research activities have an influence on society by the project's very nature:
improved market trading systems and economic pricing mechanism. Progress in the
areas of developing efficient algorithms for solving large-scale
game/equilibrium problems will be of great significance in improving the
efficiency of Internet/information systems and on-line/network business service
management. Strengthening research in this area will contribute to the national
interest in industrial competitiveness, scientific understanding, technology
innovation, and human knowledge. Students will participate in the project, and
materials from the project activities will be used to create teaching materials
at a graduate level and form the basis of a new course on ''Equilibrium and
Optimization''.
