
* 0604382
* AMC-SS: Numerical Methods for Finding Transition Pathways in Complex Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/15/2006,07/13/2006
* Weiqing Ren,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2008
* USD 74,238.00

Many processes in nature are rare events. These include chemical reactions,
nucleation events, and conformational changes of bio-molecules. These events are
rare but they have a profound impact on the system. As a result of such events,
the system transforms from one metastable state to another. The question of
interest is the mechanism of such transitions and the transition rates.
Classical transition-state theory works very well for systems with relatively
simple energy landscapes. In this case, the most probable transition path is the
so-called minimal energy path (MEP). Once this path is found, the transition
rate can be calculated by various linearization procedures. However, often the
systems of interest in applications have very complex energy landscapes, and the
notion of MEP becomes irrelevant.

In the last several years, Weinan E, Eric Vanden-Eijnden, and I have developed a
theoretical framework (the transition-path theory) as well as efficient
numerical tools (finite-temperature string method) for dealing with such rare
events in systems with complex energy landscapes. The theoretical framework can
be viewed as a statistical-mechanics framework for paths. We think of the
transition paths in configuration space. This allows us to make use of the
Fokker-Planck formalism and the associated variational principles, which in turn
can be used to reduce the complex many-body problem in a Fokker-Planck formalism
to a system of coupled one-body problems, much in the same way as in density
functional theory, which reduces the quantum many-body problem to coupled one-
body problems.

The numerical methods have been sucessfully applied to a variety of problems and
proven to be efficient. However, a systematic study of the numerical issues in
the methods is still lacking. In the proposed work, I will study the convergence
and accuracy of the finite-temperature string method, as well as its dependence
on the input parameters. Our aim is to make the method robust and more
efficient. In the meanwhile, I will also apply the method to study problems
arising from solids and chemical reactions which are of practical interest.
