
* 0605067
* Theoretical Studies in Fluid Dynamics and Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,08/01/2006
* Shouhong Wang,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2009
* USD 235,874.00

The phenomena of the atmosphere and ocean are extremely rich in their
organization and complexity; many of them cannot be produced by experiments.
These phenomena involve a broad range of temporal and spatial scales. The
understanding of these complicated phenomena and the relevant scientific issues
is one of the grand challenges of contemporary science, and has huge societal
impacts. The investigator proposes to study the nature and theory of fluid
dynamics and geophysical fluid dynamics, focusing on the structure, its
formation, its robustness/stability and transitions of fluid flows and
geophysical fluid flows. The study is centered around novel strategies for low-
frequency climate variabilities, including in particular specific topics in
three interrelated areas: (A) dynamic bifurcation theory and its applications to
fluid mechanics, (B) bifurcation and stability issues in geophysical fluid
dynamics, and (C) a geometrical theory of incompressible fluid flows and
geophysical fluid flows. The study focuses on both fundamental fluid dynamics
problems and geophysical fluid dynamics problems including the thermohaline
circulation and the tropical circulations associated with the El Nino
prediction. The investigator uses a combination of physical modeling, rigorous
mathematical theory, and large-scale computing to yield new insights into
physical phenomena. The proposed study involves on the one hand applications of
existing mathematical theory to the understanding of the underlying physical
problems, and on the other hand the development of new mathematical theories. In
particular, the proposed work is based on two new mathematical theories which
are developed recently by the PI in collaboration with Tian Ma. These theories
are motivated by the study in geophysical fluid dynamics, and have additional
benefit for other disciplines in science and engineering. The proposed project
involves challenging problems with important practical implications for
geophysical efforts to quantify predictability, analyze error growth in
dynamical models, and develop efficient forecast methods. These investigations
will be of great benefit in improving predictions on weather and climate
changes, which are of central importance to our economy.
