
* 0605031
* Research and Education in Physical Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATH PRIORITY SOLICITATION, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2006,08/11/2006
* Michael Brenner,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2010
* USD 287,626.00

Brenner DMS-0605031

The investigator focuses on the coupling of the analytical methods of applied
mathematics to numerical computation, in the context of both research and
education. The topics considered address a range of problems in engineering and
science using a combination of approximate analysis, computation, and
experiments. The investigator and his colleagues conduct the following projects:
(1) A mathematical analysis of ion beam sputtering, aimed at both improving
understanding of the surface patterns produced technique (e.g. why do particular
morphologies form for given sets of conditions?) and at understanding whether
ion beams can be used to create and control prespecified surface morphologies;
(2) Studies of the self-assembly of two-dimensional elastic sheets into three-
dimensional structures. Here there are important issues both with respect to
assembly kinetics and in determining the shape of the sheet that leads to the
lowest energy structure, when folded into a given topology; (3) An analysis of
the shapes of pollen grains, and the mechanisms through which they dry up; and
(4) A mathematical analysis of droplet impact on a solid substrate -- in
particular, whether or not a droplet produces a splash depends on an as yet
unknown event that occurs immediately after the impact. The educational
activities center around the general issue of how the concepts of applied
mathematics should be taught, given the prevalence of computation. The two main
issues addressed are: How can computers be used to increase the mathematical (as
opposed to computational) sophistication of students? And secondly, how should
mathematical modeling be taught, in order to clearly differentiate modeling
(which produces understanding of a phenomenon) from computer graphics (which
produces a picture reproducing it)? The investigator is developing new courses
(and modifications of old courses) to address these issues.

Over the past decade, computers, and computer simulations, play an ever
increasing role in science and scientific arguments. It is clear this trend will
continue. On the other hand, for complicated systems there are serious issues in
understanding when to judge whether a computer simulation is correct. This
project addresses this general question both in the context of specific research
projects and also through the development of educational courses and tools to
help students learn how to answer this question. The research projects include
analyses of complex, technologically important phenomena for which both computer
simulation and mathematical analysis can be combined. These project include a
study of ion beam sputtering, a complex process that occurs when surfaces are
irradiated with high energy ions. The investigator and his colleagues study this
problem using both computer simulations and analytic methods, coupled with
experiments, in an effort to understand whether ion beams can create specific,
technologically useful, patterns in a surface. Another project studies the self-
assembly of elastic sheets, in an effort to understand whether it is possible to
create small objects which self-assemble into useful components in three
dimensions. A third project studies the process when a droplet of liquid
splashes on a solid substrate. Despite the ubiquity of this phenomenon it is not
known why a droplet creates a splash. On the educational front, the project aims
to develop material to teach students both how to carry out computer
simulations, and equally importantly how to evaluate whether they are correct.
