
* 0606300
* Towards a Complete Theory of Exact Relations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2006,07/24/2006
* Daniel Sage,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2010
* USD 151,863.00

Sage DMS-0606300

Typically, physical properties of composite materials are strongly dependent on
microstructure. However, in exceptional situations, exact relations exist that
are microstructure-independent. These express fundamental invariances in a given
physical setting. Exact relations have been extensively studied, but the
classical approach has been heavily dependent on the physical context. In the
late 1990's, an abstract theory of exact relations was originated by Grabovsky
and greatly extended by Grabovsky, Milton, and the investigator. It has proved
to be enormously powerful. Indeed, by reducing the search for exact relations to
a purely algebraic problem involving group representation theory, it has led to
complete lists of all rotationally invariant exact relations for three-
dimensional thermopiezoelectric composites, which include all exact relations
for elasticity, thermoelasticity, and piezoelectricity as special cases. This
new approach has been responsible for a great leap forward in this area of
material science. However, the theory is by no means complete. The purpose of
this project is to complete the theory of exact relations by addressing the
three remaining major open questions. First, previous work has given complete
lists of exact relations only in relatively simple physical contexts. The
investigator studies highly coupled problems with the ultimate goal of finding
an explicit parameterization of exact relations for the physical problem with
any number of temperature, electric, and elastic fields. The second project is
the exploration of the relationship between lamination and homogenization for
exact relations. The basic question is whether there exist exact relations that
are stable under lamination, but not under homogenization. Third, the
investigator undertakes a detailed study of the algebraic structures associated
with exact relations. In particular, questions about exact relations may be
reformulated in terms of algebraic objects called Jordan algebras. This approach
seems very promising, and it is considered to be crucial for progress on the two
problems described previously.

Composite materials are everywhere in the modern world. They are used in the
manufacture of products ranging from skis to airplanes and from tennis rackets
to cell phones. It is accordingly of great technological importance to
understand how physical properties (such as conductivity and elasticity) of a
composite are related to the properties of its constituents. This is difficult
in general because the way in which the constituents are put together strongly
influences the end result. For example, take two materials, one soft and one
hard. If the hard material is embedded in the soft substance, the composite will
be compressible. On the other hand, if the soft material lies in a matrix of the
hard material, the composite will be rigid. However, in certain situations, this
typical variability is greatly reduced. The goal of this project is to
understand and classify these situations. From a practical point of view, the
project establishes "impossibility theorems" in engineering, i.e. results
showing that a composite with desired properties cannot be constructed from a
given set of starting materials. The proposal thus has significant implications
for industrial research and development.
