
* 0606712
* Inverse problems, Robust Optimization and Mathematical Programs with Equilibrium Constraints: Algorithms and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, OPERATIONS RESEARCH, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, COFFES
* 09/01/2006,08/16/2006
* Donald Goldfarb,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2010
* USD 485,823.00

This project involves the study and development of optimization methods for
modeling and solving inverse problems, robust optimization problems, and
mathematical programs with equilibrium constraints (MPECs). The goal of inverse
problems is to determine the most likely causes for an observed or desired
effect. Such problems arise in a number of important military, imaging, signal
processing, biomedical, remote-sensing, and geological applications. Inverse
problems are ill-posed in the sense that a small error in measurement can lead
to large errors in the estimated quantities. The regularization techniques used
to obtain stable solutions to inverse problems give rise to general nonlinear
programming problems. In special cases, such as imaging and signal processing,
the inverse problem can be reformulated as a tractable convex programming
problem. In most cases, e.g. shape optimization, however, a non-convex
optimization problem needs to be solved. Robust optimization is an approach for
modeling and managing uncertainty in an optimization context. Here, rather than
solving a parameter identification problem, one is concerned with constrained
optimization problems in which the parameters are data and, due to measurement
or estimation errors, are only known to lie within bounded uncertainty sets. In
ambiguous chance-constrained (robust) optimization it is assumed the parameters
are random variables with an uncertain distribution that is only known to lie
within an uncertainty set of probability measures. Fortunately, for certain
classes of uncertainty sets, robust optimization problems give rise to tractable
convex programming problems as long as the non-robust versions of the problems
are themselves convex. These problems arise in areas as diverse as engineering
design, portfolio selection, and the design of service networks. MPECs have
their roots in game theory and bi-level optimization. They are optimization
problems in which some of the constraints are parametric variational
inequalities or complementarity systems that arise from the optimality
conditions for a lower-level optimization problem. MPECs are a good model for a
number of important economic problems, where the equilibrium constraints arise
from competitive forces, and optimal engineering design problems. Consequently,
developing scalable solution algorithms for MPECs is of considerable practical
importance. In general, solving problems from any of these three classes is
quite difficult and requires significant computational resources. At first
glance, these three modeling paradigms appear quite distinct. Consequently,
there has been very little interaction between the algorithmic developments that
have occurred in these three areas. While all of the paradigms have a unique
structure and a special set of issues, they have much in common. Besides their
formal analytical similarity, depending on the context all three paradigms are
often used to model the same application. A goal of this project is to leverage
the common features of these paradigms to develop new and more efficient
solution methods. A second goal is to provide interdisciplinary training in
inverse problems, robust optimization, and MPECs through the development of new
doctoral courses and involvement of students in theoretical research and
software development.
