
* 0606667
* Deformation, Phase Segregation and Adhesion of Lipid-Bilayer Vesicles
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CONDENSED MATTER & MAT THEORY, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2006,08/16/2006
* Kaushik Bhattacharya,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 419,403.00

Bhattacharya DMS-0606667

The investigator seeks to study partial differential equations that describe
the equilibrium and evolution of the shape, phase distribution, and adhesion of
lipid bilayer membranes. An intricate interaction between the shape, the
composition distribution, and pressure enable these membranes to undergo a
variety of composition- and ordering-related phase transformations resulting in
complex microstructure. These in turn affect the function of the membrane. The
experimental study of the mechanics, phase segregation, and adhesion of bilayer
membranes is an extremely active and fascinating field. A number of theoretical
models and studies that consider different aspects and different approximations
are beginning to emerge. This has set the stage for a systematic mathematical
analysis that examines the relationship between the different models,
understands the status of the various approximations, and yields a mapping of
the different parameter and behavioral regimes. This mathematical analysis is
the aim of this project. The investigator seeks not only to catalog and
reconcile available experimental observations but hopes to motivate new
experiments and the discovery of new phenomena by pointing out potentially
interesting regions. The project builds on and extends the class of mathematical
problems involving diffusion, phase transformation, and pattern formation that
has been studied in flat spaces, motivated by issues in materials science, to a
new class of problems that involve these phenomena on deformable manifolds. The
investigator starts with an energetic formulation of the single phase membrane
and derives limiting theories using both formal (matched asymptotic) and
rigorous (Gamma convergence) methods. He then considers multi-species membranes
and identifies circumstances when there is strong phase separation, studies
nucleation from stability considerations, and derives sharp interface models.
Evolutionary problems are treated as gradient flows of appropriate energy.
Finally, he studies the implications of this analysis for cell adhesion.

Lipid bilayer membranes are ubiquitous in living organisms as cell walls,
mitochondria, golgi apparatus, and numerous other important organelles. They
play a critical role in biology as they protect, regulate flow, and host many
metabolic functions by forming a variety of complicated shapes and structures.
This project seeks to advance our understanding of the factors that govern the
shape and composition distribution of these membranes. It does so by building
mathematical models based on existing observations and using mathematical
analysis to explore the full implications of these models. The project provides
for the training of a doctoral student in this critical and emerging
interdisciplinary area. The student is trained in and uses contemporary methods
of mathematical analysis, but also is exposed to experiments in biology and
theories in mechanics and materials science. The project also trains three
summer undergraduate research students.
