
* 0606671
* Uncertainty Analysis on a Few Fluid Models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2006,05/22/2006
* Xiaoming Wang,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2010
* USD 167,781.00

Wang DMS-0606671

The investigator and colleagues study the impact of using simplified models as
well as the effect of noise on uncertainty propagation in terms of statistical
solutions in several fluid systems. The physical problems under investigation
are large Prandtl number or small Ekman number regimes in Rayleigh-Benard
convection, large Prandtl-Darcy number or small Darcy number regimes in
convection in fluid saturated porous media, and stochastically forced quasi-
geostrophic systems with random noise. Model reduction in the parameter regimes
for the convection problems leads to singular limit problems involving multiple
time and spatial scales. One of the goals here is to investigate what kind of
statistical properties can be approximated using the statistical properties of
the simplified models derived via singular limits. In the case of systems with
random noise, which are modeled by stochastic partial differential equations,
the investigator and his colleagues investigate possible noise-induced
statistical stabilities, i.e., stability of statistical properties with respect
to initial condition and parameters.

There are abundant uncertainties in nature. For instance, prediction of the
path of a hurricane is influenced by (imperfect) information about the initial
distribution of atmospheric and sea surface temperatures, wind, and the
atmospheric jet stream, as well as by the imperfect model itself. The climate
(long-time behavior) of the earth may be influenced by the ozone layer,
concentrations of carbon dioxide, and other factors. Transport of contaminants
in ground water is influenced by porosity and permeability of the media, which
are random. Studying the influence of various uncertainties on the geophysical
flows considered here helps us better understand the behavior of the flows.
