
* 0607953
* Mathematical Structure in Fluid Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2006,08/11/2006
* Alexis Vasseur,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 120,000.00

Vasseur Dms-0607953

The investigator carries out a qualitative study of partial differential
equations arising as models in fluid mechanics and chemistry. Understanding the
properties of these models is a fundamental challenge both in mathematics and
science. The regularity and stability of solutions are issues strongly related
to nontrivial physical phenomena like turbulence and phase transitions that are
complex multiscale problems. Analyzing mathematical models of these phenomena
often requires the development of novel tools encompassing techniques from
analysis, applied mathematics, and stochastics. This project, which addresses
both theoretical and applied issues, spans from conservation laws to Navier-
Stokes equations, kinetic equations, and motion of particles in fluids. It
requires tools from the theories of nonlinear partial differential equations,
asymptotic analysis, probability, and stochastics.

The discovery of mathematical structure in physical models is of great
importance for a deeper understanding of the physical phenomena themselves. It
gives also some hints of the range of validity of the models. In this project,
the investigator develops and studies new models involving couplings between
fluid mechanics and physics far from equilibrium. This field has important
applications in science and engineering. For example, it models pollutants in a
river or combustion of gasoline in an engine. The applied and mathematical
challenges stem from the complexity of the phenomena.
