
* 0607345
* AMC-SS: Statistical Analysis and Modeling of Complex Physical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/15/2006,06/28/2006
* Andrei Torok,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2010
* USD 269,868.00

The project will investigate key statistical properties such as large deviation
estimates, extreme value statistics and the local central limit theorem for
dynamical systems with some degree of hyperbolicity. The dynamics and
statistical properties of coupled non-uniformly hyperbolic maps will be studied.
Non-stationary random walk models, and related Fokker-Planck equations, will be
developed to describe time-inhomogeneous systems such as currency-exchange
markets and highly turbulent flows. In addition, characterizations of spatio-
temporal patterns will be exploited to study epitaxial and domain growth in
magnetic materials.

Complex systems - examples range from weather systems and turbulent fluids to
financial markets and animal populations - are often best understood in terms of
their statistical properties, that is, by trying to provide estimates of the
probability of certain types of behavior. A good statistical understanding of
many of these systems is lacking because the usual modeling assumptions, for
example independence, are not satisfied. The proposal aims to deepen our
knowledge of the statistics of a broad range of complex systems, to enhance our
ability to predict their behavior and assess the risk of certain events. In
addition the proposal will develop mathematical models to describe financial
markets and turbulence as well as provide improved statistical characterizations
of disordered patterns in magnetic materials.
