
* 0608663
* Collaborative Research: Heavy Traffic Limit Models and Control Analysis for Wireless Queuing Systems - incorporating Long-Range Dependence and Heavy Tails
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2006,06/02/2006
* Vladas Pipiras,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 43,381.00

Buche, DMS-060608669 Ghosh, DMS-0608634 Pipiras, DMS-0608663

The investigators study the heavy traffic analysis in wireless systems under
novel phenomena of long-range dependence and heavy tails. These phenomena are
characteristic of current wireless systems driven by data-intensive applications
such as multimedia, WWW, and real-time interactions. The heavy traffic approach
is a powerful way to analyze queuing systems at near capacity, yielding complex,
yet tractable limit models that retain the essential features of the actual
queuing system. But most of the existing literature on heavy traffic analysis,
including wireless systems, is based on short-range dependent (Markovian-like)
models and light tails. In the case of heavy tails only, the focus is on
extending the perturbed test function method, based on the martingale problem,
for showing weak convergence to a queuing model expected to be driven by stable
Levy motion. When long-range dependence characteristics are also present, the
focus is on developing a powerful alternative approach based on the Poisson
random measure representation of traffic processes. In this case, weak
convergence to a queuing model driven by fractional Brownian motion is expected.
The power control problem associated with wireless systems is studied along with
the convergence analysis to the limit queue model. This is done for given
controls, as stochastic control analysis for stable Levy motion or fractional
Brownian motion is currently undeveloped.

The focus of the project is on analyzing wireless systems characterized by high
capacity applications such as multimedia. Such systems are ever more relevant
with an increasing number of wireless users (personal and military) and their
demand for data-intensive applications. For example, military applications
include the use of video in battlefield settings for conferencing and providing
information to troops. Personal applications include movies, real-time
interactions, and WWW data. In particular, extensions of a developed approach,
the heavy traffic method, are used in the analysis. This approach supposes that
the wireless system is near its capacity, which is the case in practice where
applications make high demands on a limited bandwidth. This assumption allows
obtaining good models that retain the essential features of the actual system
while being tractable. The models are useful for obtaining an understanding of
system characteristics that is needed for the design of an efficient wireless
network. Furthermore, obtaining these models is an important first step toward
developing stochastic control methods for these emerging applications to
optimize resource allocations (for example, power) to the queues for
transmissions.
