
* 0608693
* Dynamical systems Methods and Geometric Integrators for Nonlinear Wave Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2006,03/03/2008
* Constance Schober,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2011
* USD 175,745.00

This project focuses on two main topics: (1) the development of dynamical
systems methods to analyze the generation of large amplitude transient (rogue)
waves in deep water, and (2) the development and analysis of geometric
integrators for nonlinear wave equations. This will be accomplished by a
synthesis of numerical, physical and theoretical studies investigating the
nonlinear phenomena. One mechanism for generating rogue waves in deep water is
the Benjamin-Feir (BF) instability and nonlinear focusing. In an earlier
numerical study of a higher order nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) equation we found
that a chaotic background greatly increases the likelihood of rogue wave
formation and that enhanced focusing occurs due to chaotically generated optimal
phase modulations. In this research project we investigate the following
questions: (1) persistence of large amplitude homoclinic structures in the HONLS
equation; (2) whether the notion of "proximity" to instabilities and homoclinic
data of the NLS can be used to develop a robust criterium for predicting the
occurence of rogue waves; (3) whether coalesced modes and rogue waves can be
linked to the presence of higher order phase singularities; (4) the effect of
damping on the early developmentof rogue waves; (5) their experimental
validation. These issues will be addressed using the Floquet spectral theory of
the NLS equation and by extending Mel'nikov theory for PDEs andphase singularity
analysis. The other focus of our research is on the qualitative properties of
multisymplectic schemes.Several of the main questions to be addressed are: (1)
the topological stability of multisymplectic integrators; (2) backward error
analysis to obtain error bounds on the approximate preservation of the local
conservation laws and validity regions for such estimates in the space-time
domain of the system; (3) development and analysis of multisymplectic finite
element methods with application to the Heisenberg magnet model.

The research on modeling rogue waves and structure preserving algorithms is
strongly interdisciplinary and relevant in many areas of application, e.g. water
waves, nonlinear optics (where large amplitude structures are also releveant),
engineering and physics. The proposed work on rogue waves is expected to
simultaneously impact modeling and predicting capablilities as well as to
require further development of the relevant mathematical tools. The study of
multi-symplectic integrators is expected to lead to improved structure
preserving algorithms, providing enhanced resolution of the long time behavior
of such systems with a reduction in the required computational time. Key
features of this project are the combined use of theoretical, computational and
experimental methods and the involvement of graduate students. The students will
be trained from a synergistic viewpoint across disciplines from theory to
modeling to implementation and validation. Research articles based on the
proposed work will be published in journals in mathematics, scientific
computing, geophysics and fluid dynamics (oceanography).
