
* 0612807
* Conference on Optimal Control and Nonsmooth Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2006,05/19/2006
* Peter Wolenski,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2007
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports U.S. participants in the conference entitled, "Geometric
Control and Nonsmooth Analysis," to be held June 2006 in Rome, Italy. This is an
interdisciplinary conference that is comprised of over thirty talks by prominent
researchers in control theory and nonlinear analysis from seven countries.
Topics include Hamilton-Jacobi equations, controllability of nonlinear partial
differential equations, set-valued differentials, stabilization, and variational
analysis. The conference features cutting edge research topics that were
pioneered and greatly impacted by H. Hermes and R. T. Rockafellar, who will be
featured speakers. The meeting is held over four days and includes plenary talks
by prominent mathematicians and control engineers, shorter lectures by young and
emerging researchers, and moderated discussions on open problems.

The research themes of the conference are control theory and optimization, which
provide the theoretical foundations that underlie many modern technologies
including aeronautics, biomathematics, communications, manufacturing, models of
climate change, and many others. They lie at the interface between real-world
applications and abstract mathematical theory required for the development of
effective models. This conference actively promotes interdisciplinary
opportunities for young researchers and graduate students interested in applied
controls and optimization to interact with the established control and nonsmooth
analysis communities. A sizable portion of this award provides support to
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and members of under-represented
groups without other means of travel support that allows them to participate in
the conference. The intellectual merit is the placement of an intellectual
landmark in the advancement of knowledge, comprehension, and interaction between
the engineering and mathematical control theory communities. Broad dissemination
of the conference papers will be assured through the publication of proceedings
by a major publisher.
