
* 0635983
* Center for Nonlinear Analysis: Research and Training in Applied Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI, PIRE- Prtnrshps Inter Res & Ed
* 04/01/2007,06/02/2011
* Irene Fonseca,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Pearl
* 03/31/2014
* USD 2,149,101.00

Proposal ID: 0635983 PI: Irene Fonseca Institution: Carnegie-Mellon University
Title: Center for Nonlinear Analysis: Research and Training in Applied
Mathematics

Abstract

The Center for Nonlinear Analysis (CNA), founded in 1991 in the Department of
Mathematical Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University, is a center for research
and training in applied mathematics supported by the National Science
Foundation. The continued funding of the CNA from the RTG program will allow it
to recruit strong US graduate students and postdocs and expose them to the
wealth of expertise in nonlinear analysis, computation, and interdisciplinary
activity that exists across Carnegie Mellon research units. The goals of the CNA
include: -- To identify cutting-edge mathematical questions in science and
engineering, including materials science and biotechnology, to highlight
emerging and new areas in mathematics deriving from applications, and to develop
new applications of mathematical sciences; -- To maintain and sustain its
leadership in the areas of Calculus of Variations and PDEs; -- To promote
collaborations between applied mathematicians and allied scientists; -- To
continue to develop international partnerships and cooperation agreements, which
play a vital part in the CNA program and in the enhancement of the scientific
training and research activities of the Center; -- To maintain its position as a
worldwide asset in the education of young investigators cognizant of research
opportunities at the broad interface between mathematics and physical sciences
and engineering; -- To continue the valuable work of the Summer Undergraduate
Applied Mathematics Institute (SUAMI), which targets minorities and women with
the goal of recruiting them to pursue graduate study in applied mathematics.

Over the past 15 years the CNA has trained more than 52 postdoctoral fellows.
The CNA is very proud of its trainees: Several former CNA postdocs are now
scientific leaders in their own right at research institutions in the US and
abroad, and many others are ripe to assume leadership roles in the near future.
The imprint of the CNA in the mathematical and scientific community is large and
growing. The collaborations of CNA members with experimentalists, theorists,
physical scientists, and bioscientists, render this group one of the strongest
research and training groups in applied mathematics in the US and in the world.
Investigators associated with the CNA have been in the front ranks in
integrating the discovery of new mathematics and mathematical ways of
understanding with other modes of scientific investigation, particularly in
materials science. The aim is to develop first-rate mathematical science in ways
that have a healthy and exciting relation to emerging areas of importance in the
physical and biological sciences.
