
* 0638481
* Dynamics of Unstable Thin Liquid Films and Coarsening
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2006,08/04/2006
* Dejan Slepcev,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2009
* USD 92,746.00

This project is devoted to investigating dynamical behavior of thin liquid films
and, more generally, systems driven by energy reduction. Thin liquid films can
be described by a single equation for the fluid height --- the thin-film
equation. Intermolecular forces can destabilize fluid films and lead to complex
dynamical behavior. In some systems, droplet configurations that form coarsen
over time; the average size of droplets grows, while their number is decreasing.
In others instabilities lead to singularity formation. We will investigate these
processes using a combination of novel analytical techniques, asymptotic
analysis and computational methods. We will also investigate formation and
dynamics of interfaces in models of biological aggregation. Large-scale and
long-time behavior will also be investigated. Unifying theme of the above
systems is that they are driven by energy dissipation. We intend to both use and
further develop modern analytical techniques that utilize the underlying
geometric structure of these systems.

The project will generate experimentally verifiable predictions about behavior
of thin liquid films. With continuing miniaturization trends, applications in
which thin liquid films play a role are becoming more widespread (industrial
processes, microfluidic devices). Thus understanding the multitude of phenomena
that thin films exhibit becomes ever more important. Systems driven by reduction
of the energy are ubiquitous in nature. Many such systems share the common
structure of the equation that describes them. We will use recent advances on
geometry of such equations to gain direct insights into the syste
