
* 0645369
* CAREER: Model Fluid-Solid Interactions, Networks REUs, and BioCalculus
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,06/03/2011
* Peter Mucha,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 417,500.00

This project includes a collection of activities spanning research in low
Reynolds number fluid dynamics, mentoring of undergraduate research in networks
science, and curriculum development for improved presentation of mathematics to
biology undergraduates. The project explores the computational modeling of
fluid-solid interactions from suspensions phenomena obeying simple rules between
interacting solids, to flows where key features can be effectively approximated
by distributed Lagrange multiplier (DLM) techniques. In studying suspensions,
the "sort-and-sweep" simulation method developed by the PI will be employed and
extended to investigate sedimentation instabilities, including some analogous to
classic fluid instabilities (e.g., the Rayleigh-Taylor heavy-over-light
instability) and others that appear to be special to suspensions (e.g., in
electrophoretic levitation and breakup of particle-laden drops). A main goal is
testing macroscopic models of sedimentation processes. Model DLM calculations
will be extended to explore important hydrodynamic phenomena at the scale of
interaction between small numbers of rigid, jointed, or deformable solids,
including investigation of natural and artificial modes of propulsion in liquids
at small but non-zero Reynolds numbers. Research and mentoring activities are
bridged in this project through Research Experiences for Undergraduates in
networks science, including tools for identifying hierarchical community
structures and the application of such tools to novel datasets, including the
potential of investigating effective networks of hydrodynamically-interacting
components. The project also includes extensive curriculum development aimed at
optimizing the set of mathematical tools covered in courses for undergraduate
students majoring in biology and the health sciences.

Continuing advances in capabilities for developing micro- and nano-systems and
machines lead to design questions about fluid dynamics at small scales that must
be addressed with different tools than those used at large scales. At small
scales viscosity plays an increased role (an air pump doesn't do a good job
pumping more viscous maple syrup), and external boundary conditions become more
important (the walls of blood vessels). Also important are interactions between
solids and the complex viscoelastic fluids in which they are suspended, a common
occurrence in biological situations. Developing computational tools for more
efficiently and effectively handling such interactions is a goal. Other
fundamental fluid-dynamic phenomena are further investigated, both for their own
importance and for the validation of the proposed computational approaches to
these regimes. For instance, the investigation of general questions about
propulsion of small-scale objects through liquids leads to computational
techniques that can be used to study scenarios of potential biological and
medical importance.
