
* 0645266
* CAREER: Computing Information in Image Processing and Stochastic Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,02/27/2007
* Hao-Min Zhou,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2013
* USD 401,824.00

The goal of this research is to develop new methodologies and their mathematical
theory for problems in two areas: digital image processing, and stochastically
perturbed differential equations in physical and engineering systems. The common
theme is computing and extracting desired information embedded or hidden in the
problems and use it in the applications. In image processing, the investigator
and his colleagues develop a novel multi-channel image denoising strategy based
on cross channel information. Several high level mathematical tools including
geometrical partial differential equations (PDE's), multiresolution harmonic
analysis and calculus of variation are integrated together with some statistical
methods and computer vision theory such as color spaces to remove noise from
images while retaining salient geometrical features such as edges and corners.
The investigator and collaborators also study a rigorous error analysis theory
for wavelet based PDE techniques in image processing. In stochastic differential
equations, the investigator and colleagues analyze the phase noise and time
jitter for electric oscillators including an Analog Digital Conversion (ADC)
model. The key is to use a moving coordinate system based on a vector bundle
theory to completely decompose the phase noise and amplitude noise, and then
study the associated Fokker-Planck equations which separate the deterministic
statistical properties such as mean and variance from the randomness. A novel
numerical method based on the Fokker-Planck equations is designed to compute
Shannon's entropy which can be used to evaluate the performance of the
oscillators.

Computing information has become one of the fastest growing aspects in many
areas of science and technology. For instance, digital image processing analyzes
and extracts useful information from digital images. Many images, including
satellite, radar or sonar images and medical images, are polluted by noise from
the environments like air, water, lighting conditions and dust on lens when they
are acquired, or damaged during transmission processes such as wireless
communications. Image denoising, which removes the noise, becomes one of the
most important tasks in applications. A key objective in this research is to
design new strategies removing noise in images while restoring important and
useful information such as edges and shapes, which are often hard to be
separated from the noise. Stochastic differential equations are commonly used to
describe complicated physical or engineering systems with uncertainties.
Examples include composite materials, turbulence, circuit design and optics. For
instance, electric oscillators are the key circuits used in many electric
devices such as antennas, and are often modeled by systems of stochastic
differential equations. Phase noise, which causes channel interference in
wireless communications, is one of the most important factors for designing
oscillators. One objective of this study is to develop mathematical theory and
methods to analyze and compute useful statistical information from random
processes in oscillators so that they can be used in designing or evaluating the
performance of oscillators. In addition, another major objective is to integrate
the research activities with education and training of undergraduate, graduate
students and postdocs through seminars and courses.
