
* 0652427
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Dynamics of elastic biostructures in complex fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,05/31/2007
* Joseph Teran,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Kostova Vassilevska
* 06/30/2010
* USD 103,416.00

Problems in biological fluid dynamics typically involve the interaction of an
elastic structure with a surrounding fluid. Mucus transport by cilia in the
respiratory tract, sperm penetration of the oocyte in fertilization, and
peristaltic contractions of the oviduct are examples of such interactions. Many
biological fluids are actually complex; that is they are not liquids or mixtures
of a simple molecular structure that yields Newtonian responses, but instead
have complicated non-Newtonian mechanical responses that arise, usually, because
they have suspended microstructure. While much progress has been made in the
development of mathematical models and numerical methods for fluid-structure
interactions in a Newtonian fluid, much work needs to be done in the case of
complex fluids. This focused research group will use a combination of
analytical, computational and experimental tools to investigate the dynamics of
elastic structures coupled to a complex fluid. Accurate and robust numerical
methods for viscoelastic fluids coupled to moving and flexible boundaries will
be developed that build upon classical immersed boundary methods and particle
methods previously designed for Newtonian fluids. Continuum descriptions of the
viscoelastic fluid will be implemented, as well as models that track discrete
viscoelastic microstructure of the fluid. While the methods developed will be
widely applicable, the team will focus upon the biofluidmechanics of
reproduction, nematode motility in microfluidic chambers, as well as mucus-
ciliary transport. Computational models will be coordinated with physical and
biological experiments performed at the Applied Mathematics Lab at the Courant
Institute.

Mathematics has had a huge impact on engineering and the physical sciences
through its development of theoretical analyses and numerical methods for
Newtonian fluid flows. The dynamics of complex fluids is emerging as another
such opportunity, and is one which draws some of its richest problems from new
areas in biophysics and engineering, medicine and reproductive health, and from
core biology. The integration of mathematical and computational analysis into
biological science presents educational challenges and great opportunities. This
research project embraces these challenges, and is based upon collaborations of
investigators at four institutions - Tulane University, New York University,
Washington State University and the University of California, Los Angeles. A
central component of this project is the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers. This FRG project will sponsor two summer programs,
where the postdoctoral researchers and graduate students will spend six weeks at
the Applied Mathematics Lab at Courant Institute. This will provide
opportunities for all the students and postdocs involved in the project to work
together side by side, develop a comprehensive understanding of the various
aspects of the research, and experience and participate in the life of a working
fluids lab.
