
* 0701126
* Collaborative Research: Topological Fluid Mechanics of Stirring
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATH PRIORITY SOLICITATION
* 09/15/2006,03/05/2007
* Mark Stremler,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2010
* USD 213,818.00

Stremler DMS-0607606 Boyland DMS-0604570

The broad objectives of this work are to develop the theory of topological
chaos and to advance the application of this theory to fluid stirring. The main
focus is on fluid systems for which a unique top-level periodic orbit of pseudo-
Anosov type has been "built in." This work is accomplished using an integrated
program of theoretical, numerical, and experimental research. In particular, the
investigators (1) advance the rigorous mathematical theory underlying
topological chaos; (2) use the theory to develop an understanding of the
fundamental mechanisms of mixing in several canonical fluid flows of practical
interest; and (3) leverage these developments to advance current laminar mixing
technology. The mathematical/theoretical and numerical/experimental components
of this project are mutually supporting. The theory provides ideas and a basic
framework for the design and analysis of fluid mixing, while the fluid
applications provide evidence for or against the posed conjectures and suggest
ideas for additional development of the theory. The intellectual merit of this
work includes its extensions of the Thurston-Nielsen theory, its contributions
to the fundamental understanding of fluid stirring and the role of topological
methods in global predictions of chaos, and its detailed analysis of fluid
systems of interest for practical mixing enhancement.

Laminar fluid flow systems are at the center of numerous major advances in
medical, biological, chemical, and material processing applications that are
important for improving human health, advancing scientific discovery, and
maintaining national security. Fluid mixing is known to play a significant role
in these applications, and mixing enhancement is most often achieved through
efficient stirring. Further advances in laminar mixing enhancement are limited
in part by the tools used to model, analyze, and predict efficient stirring in
laminar flows. A topological method based on a deep mathematical theory due to
Thurston and Nielsen has recently been applied to fluid stirring enhancement by
the investigators and others with quite dramatic results. The mathematical
theory, when properly applied, provides a means to "design for chaos"
predictively. The broader impacts of this work include promoting teaching and
learning at the undergraduate and graduate levels, seeking to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in research, enhancing interaction
between the engineering and mathematics communities, and benefiting society by
developing the techniques for mixing enhancement in laminar flow.
