
* 0703521
* Dynamics of Singularly Perturbed Evolution Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Bixiang Wang,NM,New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2011
* USD 158,040.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the dynamical behavior of ion flow
through membrane channels in living cells. The membrane channels are three-
dimensional tubular-like structures whose radii are much smaller than their
lengths. The ion flow is modeled by the Poisson-Nernst-Planck (PNP) system,
which consists of at least two nonlinear parabolic equations for the sodium and
calcium ion concentrations, coupled with an elliptic equation for the electric
potential. The PNP system is singularly perturbed by the presence of small
physical parameters multiplying the highest-order derivatives. This project
focuses on the effects of the singular parameters on the global dynamics of the
PNP model. It combines approaches from the theory of singular perturbations,
dynamical systems, and partial differential equations. The PI will (i) identify
the one-dimensional limiting system of the original three-dimensional PNP system
when the radius of the membrane channel approaches zero; (ii) justify the
limiting system by examining the relationship between the dynamics of the
limiting system and the perturbed system; (iii) study the existence and
stability of the steady state solutions of the systems; and (iv) explore the
dynamics of the perturbed three-dimensional system based on the dynamical
information of the one-dimensional limiting system.

Ion channels exist in the membranes of all cells and control a variety of
biological functions. Each channel has some specific physiological function; for
instance, the movement of sodium and calcium ions through the channels plays a
crucial role in conducting electrical signals down the nervous system and
activating muscle contraction. Any defects in this physical chemistry process
may cause human muscle disease. Hence, studying the mechanism of ion flow
through membrane channels is of importance for the practice of medicine. The
objective of this project is to establish a practical mathematical model which
can be justified theoretically as well as experimentally. The new system will be
effective to capture the essential physiological information of charged ions and
can be used by biologists to study the complicated behavior of ion flows by
numerical as well as experimental approaches. The results of this research are
expected to provide new treatments for diseases and hence help life. It is
interesting to note that the transport process of charged particles in
semiconductor devices and plasma physics is governed by the same model as ion
flow through membrane channels. This suggests that the results of this project
will also have potential applications in semiconductor technology and plasmas.
In particular, the results can be used to design transistors and integrated
circuits and control the physical behavior of these devices. Another objective
of this project is to provide opportunity for training students in the related
research areas.
