
* 0703145
* Asymptotic problems and Well-posedness results in Fluid Mechanics and Plasma Physics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/15/2007,05/19/2011
* Nader Masmoudi,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2013
* USD 551,210.00

This project is to continue working on some asymptotic problems in Fluid
Mechanics, Gas Dynamics and Plasma physics, as well as to study some well-
posedness questions arising in free boundary problems and non-Newtonian fluids.
These asymptotic problems arise when a dimensionless parameter (such as the
Reynolds number or the ratio between the electron thermal speed and the speed of
light) goes to zero or to infinity. In studying these problems, many
mathematical difficulties arise. These difficulties are mainly due to the change
of the type of the equations, the presence of many temporal and spatial scales,
the presence of resonances, the presence of boundary layers, ... . Many tools
have been developed to circumvent these difficulties such as the introduction of
different types of measures to describe the defect of strong convergence, the
use of compensated compactness type arguments, the use of averaging lemma, the
use of energy methods and relative entropy methods, ... . New tools will be
developed in this work. Hopefully, they can be applied to other areas of
mathematics.

The study of these problems is very important to get a better understanding
about the behavior of complicated systems in different limiting cases. This also
allows an improved understanding of the real physical phenomena taking place. It
also gives a better knowledge about the domain of validity of each simplifying
model. This is very important for engineers and physicists who are looking for
the simplest model that captures the phenomena to implement numerically or to
apply in real life. One of these problems is the hydrodynamic limit of the
Boltzmann equation when the Knudsen number goes to 0 especially in bounded
domains. Formally, the limit equation (Euler system, Navier-Stokes, ...) depends
on additional parameters such as the Mach number, the Reynolds number and the
time scaling. In particular, one of the goals of the project is to understand
fluid boundary conditions from kinetic ones. This is a step towards
understanding the coupling at the boundary between fluid equations and kinetic
equations. Of course this is a very important question for numerical simulations
when we have to go from a domain where a kinetic model is being used to a domain
where a fluid model is being used. Besides, another goal of this project is the
study of some non-Newtonian fluids and especially polymeric liquids (egg white,
blood or dough for example). These systems require a coupling between fluids and
polymers and are of great interest in many branches of applied physics,
chemistry and biology.
