
* 0704216
* Applications of frames to speech recognition, distributed processing, bio-medical engineering and more
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2007,11/16/2009
* Peter Casazza,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2011
* USD 350,386.00

Casazza DMS-0704216

The investigator and his colleagues work on designing Hilbert space frames for
applications. This involves working directly with the groups needing such frames
such as Siemens Corporate Research, the Bio-Medical Engineering Center at
Carnegie Mellon University, and the Digital Signal Processing Center in the
Electrical Engineering department at Rice University. One project involves
designing frames and algorithms for doing signal reconstruction without phase.
This project is designed to remove certain background noises from a signal so
that the voice signals are clearer. Another project involves answering the
question: What is the role and what can imaging do for systems biology? The goal
is to have distributed yet integrated large bioimage databases that would allow
researchers to upload their data, have it processed, share the data, download
data as well as having platform-optimized code, all in a common format. A third
project involves doing signal reconstruction with erasures. The investigator has
designed a system that accounts for erasures without any extra coefficient
calculations, which is both fast and accurate. This method needs to be custom
designed for the myriad of applications where there are transmission losses or
erasures. Another project involves designing "fusion frames" for problems in
distributed processing. This requires designing localized frames that globally
fuse data both quickly and accurately -- especially in the face of losses. These
are used for a variety of problems including sensor networks. Another project is
geared to finding equal-norm equi-angular Parseval frames and mutually unbiased
bases. These frames are used in quantum state tomography, quantum cryptography
and foundational issues in quantum mechanics.

The signal reconstruction project is designed to clean up certain types of
audio signals that have noise embedded in their phase to present a clearer
signal. Another project involves sensors that are used to observe the world
around us. The amount of sensed data that is currently being collected is more
than can be collected in one place for analysis. The investigator and his
colleagues are designing intelligent ways to reduce the amount of raw data that
is analyzed, and this necessitates understanding the nature and role of the
redundancy in the measurements. Making mathematical contributions to our
fundamental understanding of redundant information could advance the engineering
solutions to problems in environmental monitoring (including agricultural
technology), military surveillance, understanding the operation of sensory
neural systems, and improving general data collection methods that efficiently
turn the analog events in the natural world into digital signals ready for
analysis. Bioimaging has a serious need for accurate classification, some of
which involves life and death decisions and are currently very sensitive to
misclassification (such as false negative decisions in detecting cancer). The
goal here is to design systems that are able to classify with close-to-perfect
accuracy.
