
* 0705563
* Stability of Nonlinear Waves and Spectral-Scattering Problems Using Krein Signature and Pontryagin Spaces
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/20/2007
* Richard Kollar,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2010
* USD 89,033.00

The goal of this project is to study existence and stability of nonlinear waves
and spectrum of scattering problems arising in integrable systems. Particular
problems studied are: extension of the Evans function technique for detection of
unstable eigenvalues to three-dimensional and non-local problems in Bose-
Einstein condensates; stability of nonlinear waves in strongly coupled Korteweg-
de Vries (KdV) equations in a regime when local perturbation techniques fail;
and application of Krein signature and Pontryagin spaces to the theory of
integrable systems, particularly the study of spectral problems originated in
the inverse scattering theory associated with the nonlinear Schrodinger and the
Sine-Gordon equations.

Mathematical analysis of existence and stability of nonlinear waves in
mathematical models in nonlinear optics, condensed matter physics, or chemical
processes in human brain, has far-reaching consequences for applications as
analytical results often guide future experiments in physics, chemistry, or
medicine. A typical feature which distinguishes the field of nonlinear waves
from many other fields of pure mathematics is a case study, many problems
demonstrate very similar features but they do not rely on any common theory. In
the recent years a particular theme appeared recurrently in two close fields -
nonlinear waves and integrable systems. It is useful to consider a problem in a
space which allows existence of states with 'negative' energy. These states then
may lead to instabilities of coherent structures. For stable structures these
negative energy states must be either not active or completely eliminated. The
aim of the project is to gain more insight into this topic by solving
interesting particular applied problems and apply it to build and simplify the
general theory.
