
* 0705247
* New Stochastic Processes, Partial Differential Equations, and Control Problems Arising in Models of Mechanical Structures Subjected to Vibrations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/15/2007,09/16/2008
* Alain Bensoussan,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2011
* USD 320,520.00

This project concerns the study of randomly excited nonlinear dynamical systems
with memory. Such systems represent viable models for predicting the response of
mechanical structures when stressed beyond the elastic limit. A new mathematical
approach is considered: stochastic variational inequalities (SVI). The
stochastic process solutions of the underlying SVI are essentially continuous
diffusion processes with degeneracies and state constraints, for which governing
equations can be formulated to describe the evolution in time of their
probability distributions. Dissipativity of the system can be used to show
existence of the corresponding invariant measure. The uniqueness of this
invariant measure and the ergodic property are conjectured to be true for
classes of hysteretic systems appearing in applications. Based on the
availability of the probability distribution as the solution of the SVI, many
practical issues concerning reliability of structures modeled by hysteretic
systems can be answered in a systematic fashion. Control problems for SVI are
also considered, such as finding the lowest energy input excitation (the so-
called critical excitation) that drives the system between prescribed initial
and final states within a given time span. Obtaining necessary conditions is a
non trivial problem in view of lack of differentiability of the state equations,
i.e., optimality conditions are needed for non-smooth dynamical systems. The use
of approximate penalty techniques (to remove the constraints) leads to the
consideration of degenerate diffusion processes on infinite domains, with
challenging questions concerning ergodicity of the corresponding process.

The nonlinear behavior of mechanical structures subjected to vibrations is a
major concern in designing buildings or plants that must resist earthquakes,
ocean waves, the wind, and other random excitations. Many attempts have been
made in the past decades, with some successes, in defining universally
acceptable safety standards corresponding to potentially occurring environmental
loadings. However, the analysis of the underlying mathematics of models involved
in these problems is far from complete. The accumulated fatigue that explains
the ruin of structures is a nonlinear phenomenon with memory. By providing a
thorough understanding of stochastic processes related to the responses of
nonlinear systems described by stochastic variational inequalities, this
research will establish a solid theoretical foundation for the study of system
reliability.
