
* 0706951
* Computational modeling of sequence-dependent DNA curvature using hydrodynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2007,06/07/2007
* Oscar Gonzalez,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2011
* USD 166,898.00

Gonzalez 0706951

The investigator develops a computational method for estimating local,
sequence-dependent curvature parameters for DNA from hydrodynamic data on short,
relatively stiff fragments. The method consists of minimizing a least-squares
functional which quantifies the difference between theoretical and experimental
sedimentation speeds for a given collection of fragments, and its numerical
implementation requires the repeated solution of an exterior Stokes-type problem
around various slender, three-dimensional domains. The research effort is
centered on three areas: (1) the study of the theoretical sedimentation speed of
a stiff polymer in a Stokes-type fluid with thermal fluctuations in different
asymptotic limits, (2) the design and analysis of fast, provably convergent
boundary element methods for computing the theoretical sedimentation speed based
on the novel idea of a kernel-adapted Nystrom method, and (3) the design and
analysis of fast, reliable methods for minimizing a least-squares sedimentation
functional over a space of sequence-dependent curvature parameters.

The sequence-dependent curvature and flexibility of DNA is critical for its
packaging into the cell, recognition by other molecules, and conformational
changes during biochemically important processes. However, few experimental
methods are available for probing these properties at the basepair level. The
objective of this project is to exploit the stiffness of DNA at short length
scales and develop a method for estimating local, sequence-dependent curvature
parameters from hydrodynamic data on short fragments. The method is based on the
observation that small, relatively stiff fragments of different shape typically
travel at different speeds when forced through a viscous fluid or through a
dilute gel. The investigator seeks to develop a sufficiently refined
mathematical relation between shape and speed and further use this relation to
develop a computational method to estimate shape parameters from measurements of
speed. Results from this research lead to new tools for quantifying the
intrinsic sequence-dependent curvature of DNA, which in turn may lead to an
enhanced understanding of important genomic regions and of how DNA interacts
with other molecules.
