
* 0706026
* Slow Motion, Rare Events, and Sharp Bounds in High-Dimensional Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/15/2007,08/10/2007
* Maria Westdickenberg,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2011
* USD 157,847.00

Nonlinear, random, and multi-scale phenomena dominate the physical world. This
project investigates: (1) dynamic metastability, (2) rare events and action
minimization, (3) logarithmic Sobolev inequalities, and (4) scaling bounds in
thermal convection. Via the analysis of specific model problems such as heat
transport in thermal convection or stochastically induced phase transformation,
the project seeks to develop new tools and identify general trends in the areas
of coarsening/decay rates and random nucleation.

Dynamic metastability refers to systems that appear to be stable, although in
fact they are far from equilibrium and will change dramatically after a long
period of time. There are many problems in which the physically observed
coarsening timescales are controversial, for instance certain epitaxial growth
experiments; a better understanding of the connection between the statics and
dynamics of complex energy landscapes can lend insight into these problems. Rare
events, on the other hand, are in some sense the opposite extreme: How and at
what rate does thermal noise drive systems away from energy minimizers? This
work applies to problems in nanoscale magnetic memory devices, as well as
diverse problems in chemistry and biology. Logarithmic Sobolev inequalities
describe the trend to equilibrium in spin systems, and may be useful in the
analysis of certain multi-scale numerical algorithms. Finally, thermal
convection processes are important in a wide range of areas, including
engineering, meteorology, oceanography, and astrophysics. The project
investigates the scaling law for the Nusselt number (a nondimensional measure of
heat transport), attempting to reconcile differences between the rate predicted
analytically and the rate observed numerically.
