
* 0707281
* Mathematical Problems in Liquid-Particle Interaction
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,07/09/2009
* Giovanni Galdi,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2010
* USD 159,500.00

Abstract

Over the past decades, the study of the motion of small particles in a viscous
liquid has become one of the main focuses of applied research. The presence of
the particles affects the flow of the liquid, and this, inturn, affects the
motion of the particles, so that the problem of determining theflow
characteristics is highly coupled. It is just this latter feature that makes any
fundamental mathematical problem related to liquid-particle interaction a
particularly challenging one. The goal of this project is twofold. On the one
hand, it aims at furnishing a mathematical analysis of some important and still
not completely understood aspects of this fascinating subject, like the
transport of solid particles in the three-dimensional shear flow of a Navier-
Stokes fluid in a pipe ad the orientation of symmetric particles at higher
Reynolds numbers. On the other hand, it will investigate some fundamental
mathematical problems arising from this analysis,including steady and Hopf
bifurcation of steady flow past an obstacle, and long-time behavior of unsteady
flow past an obstacle. This latter study is also expected to give new
information about regularity of solutions to the initial-value problem.

The motion of homogeneous symmetric rigid bodies in the flow of liquids of
different nature is a fundamental issue in many problems of practical interest.
In particular, their orientation with the flow and, more generally, the nature
of the forces exerted by the fluid on them are the key to understand the nature
of a number of significant phenomena, on both small and large scales. The
orientation of particle is crucial, for example, in the following problems. In
composite materials, the addition of short fiber-like particles to a polymer
matrix will enhance the mechanical properties of the material. The degree of
enhancement depends strongly on the orientation of the fibers and the fiber
orientation is in turn caused by the flow occurring in the mold. Another
important application occurs in separation of macromolecules by electrophoresis.
Modern applications include weight determination of proteins, DNA sequencing,
and diagnosis of genetic disease. Electrophoresis involves the motion of charged
particles (macromolecules) in solution, under the influence of an electric
field. The transport of particles in a shear flow plays a basic role in several
applied problems, including suspension of particles in the flow of slurries,
sand transport in fractured reservoirs and, on a larger scale, removal of drill
cuttings in the oil industry. A final, but not less important application of
particle transport, occurs in blood flow, where the blood cells, under certain
flow conditions, tend to chain themselves along the artery at certain preferred
equilibrium positions.
