
* 0707949
* Regularity and Critical Thresholds in Nonlinear Transport-Diffusion Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,05/04/2009
* Eitan Tadmor,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2010
* USD 398,059.00

We will use modern mathematical tools complemented by novel computational
simulations to examine the phenomena of regularizing effects, critical
thresholds, time decay, entropy stability, and scaling. The project will address
the following questions: (i) Transport-diffusion equations: How do diffusion and
entropy dissipation dictate the regularizing effect in such equations? (ii)
Eulerian dynamics: How does the competition between rotation and pressure
forcing determine the overall stability? (iii) Chemotaxis and related bio-
related transport-diffusion models: How should we interpret the solutions beyond
their critical time? (iv) Hierarchical decompositions of images: How can the
inverse scale space be adapted to the data for effective image processing? The
principal investigator and his collaborators plan to pursue the development of
new analytical and computational tools to explore transport-diffusion models,
which are expected to contribute to understanding of the dynamics of realistic
models in a variety of applications.

The goal of this project is to study the persistence of global features in
nonlinear transport-diffusion equations, which arise in a wide variety of
applications. Examples include nonlinear conservation laws with degenerate
diffusion, which model sedimentation, traffic flows, and data-driven
applications in image processing; the ubiquitous Eulerian dynamics governing a
range of phenomena from the small scale of semi-conductors through the largest
scale of star formation; and chemotaxis models found in biological applications.
We focus our attention on the unifying mathematical content of the underlying
transport-diffusion equations. Of primary interest are problems with critical
regularity properties that hinge on a borderline balance between the nonlinear
convection mechanisms, the nonlinear diffusion processes, and the possibly
nonlinear forcing driving such a system.
