
* 0707421
* Reconstruction of faults from surface displacements
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Darko Volkov,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2011
* USD 83,557.00

The goals of the proposed research are (1) to measure surface displacements and
use the measured surface displacements as data for the inverse problem of
locating faults and portraying their geometry, and (2) to develop criteria for
deciding whether a fault system is in its nucleation phase, which would suggest
that an earthquake is imminent. First, the mathematical framework for a
stability analysis of displacement fields near equilibrium will be developed,
and the Green's tensor for the half-space fault eigenvalue problem will be
derived. Next, using rigorous mathematical analysis, questions of convergence
will be addressed as the depth of the medium increases, and convergence rates
will be verified by high-order numerical schemes for hypersingular boundary
integral equations. Finally, closed form recovery formulas hinging on the
dominant term of the depth asymptotics will be derived and combined with a fast
minimization method. The PI will infer robust algorithms for solving the fault
inverse problem. Reconstruction methods will be tested first on synthetic data
and then used on data coming from field measurements of surface dislocations.

This research project is expected to impact the advancement of scientific risk
assessment for areas prone to devastating earthquakes. Earth science is seeking
to understand the physics involved in seismic activity. It has established that
most earthquakes occur near faults. If we knew the approximate geometry and
location of faults, we could perform computer simulations of seismic activity,
thus assessing risk in given areas. Unfortunately, the approximate location of
faults is not always known. Due to recent developments in GPS technology, minute
surface displacements can now be measured with remarkable accuracy. The proposed
research will use these measurements to build methods for locating faults more
precisely and for portraying their geometry. The PI will also investigate the
exciting prospect of making progress in addressing a long-standing problem: is
there a way to confidently assert whether an earthquake is imminent? For this
question too, our work will be based on adequate data processing of surface
displacements.
