
* 0707404
* Collaborative Research: (RUI) Analysis of Optimal and Suboptimal Controls for Mathematical Models Arising in Novel Cancer Therapies
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, International Research Collab
* 07/01/2007,04/24/2009
* Urszula Ledzewicz,IL,Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2011
* USD 158,297.00

In a continuation of ongoing research, geometric methods in modern optimal
control theory will be applied and developed as needed to analyze emerging
mathematical models for novel cancer treatments with a focus on anti-angiogenic
treatments and immunotherapy. Tools that go beyond an application of necessary
conditions for optimality will be utilized aiming at a full synthesis of optimal
controls to gain qualitative insights into the structure of optimal protocols
for these novel treatments. Based on the knowledge of optimal solutions, a
quantitative assessment of simpler and potentially more practical suboptimal
protocols will be given. Combinations of these novel treatment approaches with
conventional ones, like chemotherapy, will also be addressed in the hope of
harnessing synergistic effects. Here challenges arise both in the modeling and
analysis and will need to be resolved. In this context pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of the drugs become an important aspect and generally models
will be made more realistic by including these features. Mathematical complexity
and biomedical relevance give double merit to this research: it enriches the
understanding of important biomedical problems while it at the same time
contributes to optimal control theory by developing and employing new techniques
aimed at significant applications.

A major limiting factor in traditional cancer treatments like chemotherapy is
drug resistance. Consequently there exist strong efforts in cancer research to
find treatments that would not be prone to drug resistance. Two prominent new
directions that are actively being pursued nowadays, both in experimental stages
and clinical trials, are anti-angiogenic treatments and immunotherapy. Because
of the great complexity of the underlying medical problem, in clinical trials
the scheduling of drugs is typically pursued in scientifically guided exhaustive
trial-and-error approaches. But more complex protocols are relatively difficult,
if not impossible, or at least very expensive to test in a laboratory setting,
particularly if more than one drug is involved. In this project mathematical
models for these newly emerging therapies will be analyzed with the tools of
modern optimal control to shed some light into the structure of theoretically
optimal protocols. While these may not yet be medically realizable with current
technologies, this analysis provides theoretical benchmarks to which realizable
protocols can be compared and thus aids the design of more effective suboptimal
therapy protocols. This is of particular importance for novel therapies for
which no specific guidelines have been established yet and even more so in
combination with traditional approaches like radiotherapy or chemotherapy which
are being pursued in an attempt to harness synergistic effects. Due to its
applied and interdisciplinary character, the project contains a substantial
educational component of interest to students from various fields including
Mathematics, Biology and Engineering. Existing efforts to attract women and
minorities to the project will be continued.
