
* 0707659
* Chaos and Bifurcations in Volume-Preserving Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,06/01/2011
* James Meiss,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 511,485.00

Abstract

Regular, quasiperiodic motion is ubiquitous in dynamical systems with sufficient
symmetry. A prominent example occurs in the Hamiltonian or symplectic case,
where these "invariant tori" persist---even for nearly-integrable motion, as is
explained by "KAM theory." The destruction of tori in the two-dimensional case
is explained by Aubry-Mather theory and renormalization results. However, a
concomitant understanding of the destruction of tori upon perturbation in higher
dimensions has proved elusive. In this proposal, the implications of
integrability, due to symmetries and invariants, of volume-preserving dynamics
will be investigated. The loss of integrability under perturbation will be
studied by a combination of analytical (Aubry's anti-integrable limit, Fourier
series) and numerical (invariant manifold and continuation) techniques. Tori are
both created and destroyed by bifurcations, and a study of the normal forms for
codimension-one and two bifurcations of fixed points will lead to classification
possible phenomena. Transport will be investigated numerically with the goal of
developing analytical measures of flux and transport distributions. In a second
project, the PI will investigate bifurcations in nonsmooth systems appropriate
to the modeling of chemical reactions, the systematic simplification of these
systems by center manifold reduction, as well as the study of transport caused
by weak coupling of chaotic motion to regular motion.

Conservative dynamical models are used in designing particle accelerators,
obtaining rates for simple chemical reactions, calculating confinement times in
plasma fusion devices, understanding the spectra of highly excited atomic
systems, and designing efficient spacecraft trajectories. Dynamics in such
systems is often chaotic and prediction of individual trajectories is difficult;
nevertheless, chaos can be profitably utilized, for example, to improve
efficiency of spacecraft trajectories, by judiciously applying small course
corrections, or to enhance the lifetimes of particles in confinement devices and
the rates of chemical reactions. Volume-preserving dynamics models the flow of
incompressible fluids and magnetic fields and a quantitative understanding of
chaos in these systems is crucial for the development of efficient mixing in
microscale bioreactors as well as of predictive planetary scale weather models.
Most of our current theoretical understanding is limited to the two-dimensional
case that is appropriate for flows in rapidly rotating or thin layers of fluid.
While this has been useful in the understanding of such phenomena as the
trapping of nutrients in gulf stream rings, the formation of the ozone hole and
the creation of vortex-induced mixing in sinuous tubes, even in these systems,
three-dimensional, chaos-induced transport needs to be understood. The PI seeks
to develop analytical and computational methods for the study of regular and
chaotic volume-preserving motion both to contribute broadly to our fundamental
understanding of the richness of the behavior of low-dimensional deterministic
evolution, and, to relate it to mixing and transport.
