
* 0707476
* Titchmarsh - Weyl m-function and integrable nonlinear partial differential equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,05/26/2009
* Alexei Rybkin,AK,University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2010
* USD 155,447.00

This project investigates an extension of the inverse scattering transform (IST)
method of solution for integrable nonlinear partial differential equations to
handle initial data in a larger class. The scattering data used in connection
with short-range potentials will be replaced by data involving the Titchmarsh-
Weyl m-function to develop an inverse spectral transform that extends the range
of validity of the method to initial conditions that include long-range and
oscillatory functions. The work will establish a properly regularized Marchenko
equation that permits reconstruction of the potential. Computational simulations
to guide the analysis are planned.

The main goal of the proposed research is to extend methods for explicit
solution of certain nonlinear evolution equations to accommodate more realistic
classes of initial data. This will be achieved by linking together two
remarkable theories, Soliton Theory and Titchmarsh-Weyl Theory. Soliton theory
originated in the striking discovery of an unexpected link between the Korteweg-
de Vries equation in nonlinear hydrodynamics and quantum scattering theory. It
is regarded as a fundamental breakthrough in mathematics, connecting different
branches of pure mathematics and theoretical physics, with numerous applications
ranging from hydrodynamics and nonlinear optics to astrophysics and elementary
particle theory. Titchmarsh-Weyl theory was developed in the connection with the
Sturm-Liouville problem, which has become a cornerstone of the spectral analysis
of ordinary differential operators. This project is devoted to developing an
approach to soliton theory that takes advantage of Titchmarsh-Weyl theory. The
work will provide improved mathematical understanding of integrable nonlinear
evolution systems, which can stimulate new developments in the study of
nonlinear waves in hydrodynamics, fiber optics communication, and plasma theory.
