
* 0707715
* Multiphase Problems of Nonlinear Elasticity
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2007,08/08/2007
* Timothy Healey,NY,Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2011
* USD 363,116.00

Healey 0707715

The investigator studies several multi-phase problems of nonlinear elasticity,
with applications to lipid-bilayer membranes, shape-memory alloys and thin
films. A common thread running through these problems is the following
mathematical structure: a non-convex potential energy in the lower-order terms,
which includes the loading, in addition to a small, higher-order regularization
(or singular perturbation), characterized by a small parameter e > 0. The main
goals of this work are: (1) to provide classes of rational models --
particularly in the case of multi-phase lipid-bilayer membranes -- for
understanding the often exotic behavior of such structures; (2) to
systematically find equilibria corresponding to local minima of the total
potential energy or meta-stable solutions. In addressing (1), observe that
mechanical experiments on real materials often begin with a homogeneous specimen
that progressively develops increasingly complex patterns or micro-structure
under steady, quasi-static changes in loading. The investigator employs rational
continuum models, characterized by general constitutive functions, and looks for
thresholds of bifurcation and exchange of stability to compare with experiment.
In particular, meta-stable solutions are the ones presumably observed in quasi-
static experiments. Accordingly for (2) he considers a new methodology based
upon: (a) rigorous existence of solutions for arbitrarily small e > 0 via
symmetry-breaking global bifurcation methods and a-priori bounds; (b) efficient
and reliable global numerical path-following to find meta-stable states.

The project focuses on fundamental modeling and predictive mathematical
analysis for the quantitative characterization of shape and deformation patterns
of certain micron-scale structures under applied loading, namely, lipid-bilayer
membrane vesicles, shape-memory alloys and thin films. Each of these has direct
and important connections to basic science and technology. Lipid-bilayer
membranes are ubiquitous in bio-molecular systems; understanding and predicting
their mechanical behavior is crucial for understanding cell function. The
project focuses on simple, man-made membranes or liposomes. The future promise
of liposome vesicles (closed membranes) as vehicles for drug delivery demands a
fundamental understanding of their mechanical behavior under loading. Likewise
for phase transitions in shape-memory alloys and wrinkling/blistering of thin
films -- a fundamental understanding and the mathematical prediction of their
behavior are important for characterizing the mechanical properties of novel
materials and for potential sensing and actuation at the micron scale.
