
* 0707445
* Pattern Formation and Nonlinear Dynamics in Reaction-Diffusion Systems Modeled by Anomalous Diffusion, and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATH PRIORITY SOLICITATION, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Bernard Matkowsky,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2010
* USD 388,415.00

Proposal: DMS - 0707445 PI: Matkowsky, Bernard J Institution: Northwestern
University Title: Pattern Formation and Nonlinear Dynamics in Reaction-Diffusion
Systems Modeled by Anomalous Diffusion, and Applications

Abstract

The goal of the proposed study is to develop a theory of pattern formation and
nonlinear dynamics in reaction-diffusion systems with anomalous diffusion. A
characteristic feature of most of the reaction-diffusion systems that have been
studied to date is that diffusion is normal, i.e., the dependence of the mean
square displacement of a randomly walking particle on time is linear. In some
cases, however, a more general dependence is observed, in which the mean square
displacement behaves as a power function of time, and the diffusion of the
reactants is anomalous. If the exponent is less than one the diffusion process
is slower than normal diffusion and is called subdiffusion. In contrast, if the
exponent is greater than one it is faster than normal and is called
superdiffusion. Both types of anomalous diffusion have been recognized to play
important roles in various physical, chemical, biological, geological, and other
processes. For anomalous diffusion the reaction-diffusion system of partial
differential equations is replaced by a system of fractional partial
differential equations which have been derived from appropriate continuous time
random walk models at the molecular level. The fractional equations are
equivalent to systems of integro-differential equations which are the objects of
our investigation. The proposed studies will involve both general reaction-
diffusion systems with anomalous diffusion, and specific applications.
Investigations of general reaction-diffusion systems will help elucidate the
universal mechanisms of pattern formation and nonlinear dynamics under anomalous
diffusion conditions. The specific models will include the famous chemical
dynamics models such as the Brusselator, Oregonator, Gray-Scott, Gierer-
Meinhardt, Fitzhugh-Nagumo, and other models, as well as models for combustion,
polymerization, and controlled drug delivery. The effects of both sub- and
superdiffusion will be considered.

Reaction-diffusion systems are ubiquitous in many branches of science and have
been attracting the attention of scientists, engineers and mathematicians for
decades. Since the ground-breaking discoveries of Turing who showed that
diffusion in a mixture of chemically reacting species could cause instability of
a spatially uniform state leading to the formation of spatio-temporal patterns,
and Belousov and Zhabotinskii who discovered oscillating chemical reactions,
reaction-diffusion systems have become one of the paradigms for the formation of
spatio-temporal patterns in systems far from thermodynamic equilibrium. The
formation of such fascinating structures as spiral waves, spatially-regular,
stationary patterns with different symmetries (hexagonal, stripe, etc.) as well
as chemical turbulence have made reaction-diffusion systems the subject of
numerous ongoing investigations. In many systems, however, the transport process
is not via normal diffusion but rather via anomalous diffusion which can be
slower (subdiffusion) or faster (superdiffusion) than normal diffusion.
Subdiffusion often occurs in biogels, porous media and polymers, while
superdiffusion is typical of some processes in plasmas, semiconductors, surface
reactions and many others. Although many aspects of anomalous diffusion have
been studied, nonlinear dynamic and pattern formation aspects were the subject
of only a very limited number of works. These preliminary studies demonstrate
the significance of anomalous diffusion and the necessity for its systematic
investigation. The PIs will conduct systematic studies of the effect of
anomalous diffusion on the formation of Turing patterns and spatially nonuniform
oscillating patterns as well as spiral waves in reaction-diffusion systems, with
specific applications to combustion waves, isothermal frontal polymerization
waves, and controlled drug delivery.
