
* 0707488
* Wave-breaking and Resonant Phenomena
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 09/01/2007,08/11/2011
* Stephanos Venakides,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 480,000.00

In the first part of the project, wave-breaking will be studied in the context
of the focusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation (NLS), a well-known model of
amplitude-dependent beam self-focusing. NLS wavetrains may come to a sudden
break at nonlinear caustic points and rearrange themselves into more complex
wave structures. These structures, which may be visualized conceptually as
nonlinear wave interference, may go through successive breaking; moreover, they
display modulational instability. Controlling the instability and understanding
mechanisms of the wave-breaking are the focus of the project. The steepest
descent method for Riemann-Hilbert problems (RHP) in the semiclassical limit
will be used to peel off the dominant contribution to the waveform from the RHP
that linearizes NLS. The steepest descent method will itself be refined for this
purpose. A numerical component is also involved in our approach. The second part
of the project addresses resonant behavior in wave propagation through media
that have a repetitive structure. In previous work, anomalies in transmission
through slabs of such media were observed and linked to resonant phenomena
through a mathematical formula describing the transmission anomaly accurately in
2D. The current project will develop formulae for the effective density of
states near resonance and make a firm link between the resonance in question and
the resonance introduced by Fano in a seminal 1935 quantum mechanics paper (in
both cases, following a symmetry breaking perturbation, a real eigenvalue
imbedded in continuous spectrum moves into the lower complex half plane as a
resonance). The project will also resolve a question in physics on the pulse
response of linear materials by an elaborate use of the method of steepest
descent for integrals.

The understanding of the propagation of waves in natural and in man-made
materials is crucial to the utilization of these materials. The first project
(wave-breaking) applies to wave propagation in technologically significant
materials, described to a good approximation by the focusing nonlinear
Schroedinger equation. Such materials are optical fibers in which the
modulational instability acts adversely to fiber-optical communication. With
current technology, the breaking phenomena researched are beginning to be
observable at the nanoscale and will play a role in the development of a theory
of propagation in nanowires. The second project (resonant behavior) refers to
the propagation of light through photonic crystals, whose repetitive structure
may guide, block, or even trap light. The transmission anomalies studied consist
of a sharp dip followed by sharp rise of the transmission coefficient as the
frequency is varied in an experiment in which light is incident nearly normally
onto a slab of photonic crystal material. Both projects will involve students in
interplay between mathematical analysis, numerical experiments, and physical
experiments bridging the significantly different types of intuition in the
mathematics and physics communities.
