
* 0707953
* Free Boundary Problems in Mathematical Finance
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2007,06/20/2007
* John Chadam,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 05/31/2011
* USD 253,027.00

In this project a new set of mathematical tools for studying, in a unified
manner, a wide class of free boundary problems that are of current interest in
modern Finance will be developed. In particular, variational and viscosity
solution methods will be adapted to treat the fundamental questions of existence
and uniqueness that remain open for many of these problems. The free boundaries
will be obtained as the solutions to a new set of integral and integro-
differential equations whose structures are motivated by the original financial
problem. A full spectrum of methods from mathematical analysis (functional,
asymptotic and numerical) will be developed to study the solutions. Of special
interest will be the development of accurate analytical approximations, and fast
robust numerical schemes, for the location of the free boundaries. In many
cases, basic properties of the free boundaries such as regularity, monotonicity,
convexity, etc., are open. These issues will be addressed not only because they
are of fundamental mathematical interest but also because they play a key role
in making rigorous, and in simplifying, the proofs of the results mentioned
above. Because of the wide variety of financial applications of interest in the
equity, bond, mortgage, credit, and energy markets, special attention will be
paid to ensure that the development of these methods will apply to all of the
various stochastic processes that might arise as underliers: Uhlenbeck-Ornstein,
geometric Brownian motion, mean reversion, jump-diffusion, stochastic
volatility, variance gamma, etc.

The prototype, and most widely studied, free boundary in Finance is the early
exercise boundary for an American put option; i.e., for any time before expiry
of the option, the free boundary is the stock price below which it is optimal to
exercise the option early. In spite of the enormous amount of attention already
paid to this problem, the convexity of this early exercise boundary, and its use
to obtain a global analytic estimate for its location, is still lacking when the
stock pays a dividend. Also under study is the free boundary problem that arises
in determining the optimal interest rate for prepaying a mortgage or for
converting a variable rate mortgage to a fixed rate one. Existing strategies are
based on using only today's yield curve whereas this free boundary approach
incorporates one's anticipation of future yields. Not only will this provide a
more accurate decision tool for individual mortgage holders but also lead to
more accurate pricing in the mortgage backed securities (MBS) sector. Energy
prices are modeled using jump-diffusion and stochastic volatility processes and
the methods will be extended to this framework in order to price financial
derivatives like options on forward contracts and swing options. Free boundaries
arise in the credit sector in a completely different manner. A firm defaults
when its total value decreases below a prescribed barrier. Matching a firm's
time-dependent default barrier to the probability of default assigned to the
firm by a rating agency leads to another type of free boundary problem for its
default barrier. This provides a context for the rigorous comparison of default
correlation among several firms in this value-of-firms model with the other,
currently popular, copula approach and hence will lead to a better understanding
and pricing of credit debt obligations (CDOs). By changing the underlying risky
process to a pure jump or an extreme value model, a similar analysis will lead
to a better understanding of the catastrophic risks associated with high impact
/ low probability weather or terrorist related events. A strategically important
goal is to use this information to develop insurance products in this
catastrophic insurance sector.
