
* 0707280
* Graduate Education and Development: The GSMM Camp and MPI Workshop
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/20/2007
* Donald Schwendeman,NY,Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 176,346.00

Proposal: DMS - 0707280 PI: Schwendeman, Donald W Institution: Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute Title: Graduate Education and Development: The GSMM Camp
and MPI Workshop

ABSTRACT

This proposal describes a program for graduate student education and career
development consisting of the Graduate Student Mathematical Modeling (GSMM) Camp
and the Mathematical Problems in Industry (MPI) Workshop. The GSMM Camp is a
week-long meeting held annually in June and is designed to promote problem-
solving and scientific communication skills. At the Camp, graduate students work
together in teams, with the guidance of a faculty mentor, on highly
interdisciplinary problems typically inspired by industrial applications. The
problems span a wide range of areas of application and are carefully selected to
promote a broad set of problem-solving skills. The MPI Workshop is held during
the week following the Camp, and its focus is on a set of problems brought by
representatives from industry. At the Workshop, the graduate students from the
Camp are joined by postdocs and faculty, all working together in teams on the
problems presented. While the general organization of the Workshop is similar to
that of the Camp the emphasis is different. The Camp is a vehicle for graduate
student education, whose aim is to build strength in problem-solving and
scientific communication skills. The problems brought to the Camp are intended
to challenge, but not overwhelm, the students, and to provide a warm up for the
difficult problems considered at the Workshop. The Workshop also provides a
learning experience for graduate students, but its primary goal is to promote
links between applied mathematicians at universities and scientists and
engineers in industry. The two meetings compliment each other, and the combined
program is highly valuable for graduate students and unique amongst universities
in the U.S., and in the northeast in particular.

The proposed activity builds on a successful program already in place under the
direction of the Principle Investigator. The first three GSMM Camps were held at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute starting in the summer of 2004, and a fourth
Camp is scheduled for June, 2007. These Camps have attracted over one hundred
outstanding graduate students, including many women and students from
underrepresented groups, from top-tier universities across the U.S. and Canada.
The present grant will support the organization and graduate student
participation in three more GSMM Camps beginning in the summer of 2008. As a
result of this support, the program will continue to grow and to have a broad
impact on graduate student education and development. The Camp, and the Workshop
that follows, promote both depth in mathematics and the ability to understand
and communicate across a variety of areas of science and engineering.
Accordingly, the Camp-Workshop combination provides a valuable experience that
has a strong impact on the interdisciplinary research efforts of the
participating graduate students. The intellectual merit of the activity centers
around the problems considered at the Camp and Workshop. Some of these problems
have led to follow up research and new mathematical results, and it is expected
that this will continue to be an outcome of the combined problem-solving
experience. In sum, the aim of the program is to help build a stronger workforce
of applied mathematicians who are both skilled in interdisciplinary research and
are able to communicate effectively across a variety of areas of science and
engineering.


