
* 0708140
* AMC-SS: Theory and Modeling of Rare Events
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 08/01/2007,07/16/2012
* Eric Vanden-Eijnden,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 366,748.00

The present proposal focuses on the study of rare events as they arise from real
applications in computational chemistry, material sciences or molecular biology
(for details on the latter, see the second paragraph below). Examples of such
rare events include phenomena as diverse as nucleation events during phase
transitions, chemical reactions, conformation changes of biomolecules, or
bistable behaviors in genetic switches. The study of these rare events requires
going beyond Freidlin-Wentzell theory of large deviations, which in mathematics
has been the traditional tool to analyze rare events. It also requires
integrating the theory within a computational perspective, which is necessary
since traditional numerical tools such as Monte Carlo or direct simulation of
SDEs are highly ineffective for rare events. Here the PI proposes to do so by
(i) generalizing the theoretical framework of Transition Path Theory (TPT),
which allows one to describe the statistical mechanics of rare events in
situations when large deviation theory does not apply, and (ii) developing
associated numerical algorithms such as the String Method for the effective
computation of the various objects in TPT (like the probability density of
reactive trajectories, their probability current and flux, and the rate of the
reaction).

The excitement of using molecular dynamics as a tool to do biology stems for the
fact that it would enable us to understand the behavior of biomolecules such as
protein, enzymes, ion channels, etc. from the "jiggling and wiggling" of the
atoms they are made of (to quote Richard Feynman). This would allow for a much
deeper understanding of their function and one that goes beyond what is
currently achievable via experiments (in which it is hard or impossible to
resolve the actual dynamics of the atoms). But this objective comes with
tremendous challenges. While biomolecules are tiny objects from our perspective,
they are also huge in that they are typically made of thousands of atoms
(hundreds of thousands if one accounts for the molecules of solvent surrounding
them). Since these atoms move very fast, the equations of motion governing their
evolution must be integrated on the computer using a very small time step--
typically of the order of one femtosec (1 femtosec = 1e-15 sec =
0.000000000000001 sec). Every such time step takes some time because it involves
updating the position of so many atoms. As a result, it is only possible to
simulate directly the motion of a typical biomolecule such as Hemoglobin over a
few nanoseconds (1 nanosec = 1e-9 sec = 0.000000001 sec). Such a calculation
already takes several days on a large computer. This, however, is a problem
because the motion of these large molecules which governs their actual function
only arise on a much slower time scale, typically of the order of the
microseconds or even more (1 microsec = 1e-6 sec = 0.000001 sec). This is
because such motion typically involves reactive events, e.g. large-scale
reorganization of the shape of the molecule, which are very rare on the time
scale of the molecule (though obviously, they are not on our own daily time
scale). The direct simulation of any such reactive event would typically require
years of computations, which is neither affordable nor practical. On the other
hand, various techniques have been designed recently to bypass this difficulty
and describe statistically (rather than on a one to one basis) the reactive
events. This proposal is about developing these techniques, first at a
theoretical level then by exploiting the theory to design efficient numerical
algorithms for the computation of the reactive events which are so important in
molecular biology.


