
* 0708083
* Almost Conjugacy
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/29/2009
* Erik Bollt,NY,Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 380,000.00

Abstract

We address a broadly fundamental modeling issue in science as related to the
field of dynamical systems by considering the question: when is a model of a
physical system a "good" representation. While conjugacy provides a means to
determine whether two systems are dynamically equivalent, there is no sufficient
mathematical technology to decide when the dynamics of a "toy" model are like
(although not identical to) the dynamics of the physical system. The concept of
conjugacy is too rigid and cannot be applied in the typical situation of applied
dynamical systems, where me might say that the model only "reminds us" of the
true system. We propose here methods based on a fixed point iteration scheme,
and some variants which we will develop for broader practical numerical
application, to produce a function which we call a "commuter." The commuter is
the conjugacy function between two equivalent dynamical systems, but a non-
homeomorphic change of coordinates translating between dissimilar systems. This
translation is natural to the concepts of dynamical systems in that it matches
the systems within the language of their orbit structures, and our practical
computation is related to the concept of orbit equivalence from the field of
symbolic dynamics. Our key method is based on measuring failure of this commuter
function to be a homeomorphism - which we call homeomorphic defect. The central
point is that we compare nonequivalent systems by quantifying how much the
commuter functions fails to be a homeomorphism, an approach that respects the
dynamics better than the traditional methods of comparison based on Banach space
norms.

Experts in many given fields of science will often have little difficulty in
forming opinions of model quality. For example, a cardiac specialist may agree
that a certain equation may make a good model of the human heart, or the
meteorologist may believe that a particular low-dimensional simulation may
produce what "looks like" realistic weather. Clearly there is a need to put this
notion of "approximate" modeling on a clear mathematical footing, particularly
when the models provide qualitative descriptions of real world phenomena. Our
work provides a computational method to allow researchers and scientific experts
to assess which model is most suitable for their work, what modeling parameters
are appropriate, or why certain models might better fit a certain physical
situation. At the heart of the work is that we provide a means to "quantify the
quality" in a model. This research has direct application to problems in the
public health sphere, such as the development of a real-time EKG monitoring
systems to detect abnormal cardiac heart rhythms, to better characterizing
models of the weather, to improve our understanding of turbulence in fluid flow
systems, and to finer design of structural mechanical systems such as those
found in aircraft wings and bridges.


