
* 0708026
* Atomistic and Continuum Models of Solids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2007,08/28/2007
* Weinan E,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2011
* USD 170,000.00

E 0708026

The investigator continues work on developing a systematic mathematical theory
of crystalline solids starting from first principles, with emphasis on
understanding the connection between atomistic/electronic structure models and
continuum models. He and his collaborators study the continuum limit of
electronic structure models such as models in Kohn-Sham density functional
theory. They also study numerical algorithms that combine Kohn-Sham density
functional theory and continuum models. In particular, they study the accuracy
of these algorithms and find strategies for achieving uniform accuracy. These
issues are critical for understanding the electronic structure models and making
them powerful and practical tools for material science. The project helps to
provide the microscopic foundation of the continuum mechanics of solids.

From a broader perspective, the project serves as an example of the kind of
work that needs to be done in order to establish the foundation for multi-scale,
multi-physics modeling. It is now generally recognized across a wide spectrum of
scientific disciplines that the next major advances will come from multi-scale,
multi-physics modeling that integrates models from quantum mechanics with models
from classical or continuum mechanics. However, due to the lack of a solid
foundation, much of the current activities in multi-scale, multi-physics
modeling are ad hoc in nature. Such a practice defeats the original purpose of
multi-scale, multi-physics modeling. This project is aimed at establishing the
necessary foundation for the case of crystalline solids. In addition, interest
in nanotechnology and first-principle-based material design demands a much
better understanding of the connection between the mechanical properties of
solids and their electronic structure. Traditional concepts that are often used
in continuum theory will have to be modified in order to take into account the
effects at the electronic structure level. Establishing such a connection is a
major focus of the proposed project.
