
* 0708039
* Modern methods in the Calculus of Variations with applications to materials science and hydrodynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/19/2007
* Giovanni Leoni,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2011
* USD 131,877.00

Leoni 0708039

The central theme of this project is the application of modern Calculus of
Variations to materials science and hydrodynamics. The investigator undertakes
the following specific projects: -Heteroepitaxial thin films. The investigator
studies from the variational point of view a mathematical model for the
epitaxial deposition of a film onto a relatively thick substrate in the case of
a mismatch between the lattice parameters of the two crystalline solids. -Strain
gradient plasticity. The investigator derives, in a mathematically rigorous way,
a strain gradient theory of plasticity starting from a variational formulation
of the equilibrium problem for a finite number of dislocations in a plane
domain. -Water waves. An alternative approach for the existence of regular water
waves and of Stokes wave of greatest height is undertaken. Other projects
include image segmentation problems and micromagnetics.

The central theme of this project is the application of modern techniques in
mathematics to various problems in materials science, mechanics, and
hydrodynamics. When a thin film of a crystalline solid is deposited on a
substrate, a common industrial process, difficulties can arise if the crystal
lattice structures of the film and the substrate do not match. The investigator
studies this problem. A fundamental question in materials is the effect of
dislocations in the material microstructure on larger-scale behavior. Classical
plasticity theory does not address this issue well. The investigator develops a
theory of strain gradient plasticity that incorporates dislocations and their
interactions. He also considers problems in water waves, image processing, and
micromagnetics. The results and methods developed in the project will be
incorporated in new graduate courses, and some will be included in a series of
books that the investigator is writing in collaboration with I. Fonseca,
