
* 0708470
* Approximation and Learning in High Dimensions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2007,06/14/2007
* Guergana Petrova,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2008
* USD 15,000.00

Petrova 0708470

The investigator and her colleagues organize a workshop on learning theory to
stimulate interactions between the disciplines of probability, approximation
theory, and numerical algorithms as they affect the development of learning
theory and learning algorithms. The workshop emphasizes the following topics:
concentration of measure inequalities and their application to probability
bounds in learning, kernel methods of approximation and their role in support
vector machines and other learning algorithms, and fast algorithms for the
sparse approximation of high-dimensional data.

Understanding intelligence and how it manifests itself in learning and in
assimilating information is one of the great scientific challenges. It is a key
to designing systems that efficiently analyze data and extract essential
information. The scientific discipline that studies this aspect of intelligence
is called learning theory. Central tasks in analyzing data are regression, which
describes the relationship between variables whose sampled values are part of
the data (for example, the locations and speeds of an object and the times when
these are observed), and data classification, which categorizes each element of
the data set in terms of the values of components of the datum. This workshop
emphasizes particular aspects of learning theory: probabilistic bounds to help
select good representations of scattered data, particular approximation methods
and their relation to a general family of classification techniques called
support vector machines, and fast computation methods for the sparse
approximation of high-dimensional data. The workshop advances the nation's
capabilities in scientific learning theory by bringing together researchers from
diverse disciplines to consider these topics. Learning theory sits at a
crossroad between aritificial intelligence, statistical inference, and
mathematical data analysis. It has a myriad of existing and potential
applications in both the defense and civilian sectors. Typical of these are the
navigation of unmanned vehicles, the fast classification of data for such
applications as homeland security, and modeling the human visual system.
