
* 0708977
* Analysis and numerical computations of free boundaries in fluid dynamics: surfactant solubility and elastic fibers
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,09/06/2009
* Michael Siegel,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 298,851.00

This proposal is for the investigation of fundamental free boundary problems in
fluid mechanics that are motivated by different applications but share similar
mathematical features. The first class of problems concerns the effect that the
solubility of a surfactant in the bulk flow of immiscible fluids can have on the
deformation and breakup of liquid drops, bubbles, and jets. A significant
difficulty is introduced by the slow diffusion (or large Peclet number) of
surfactant in the bulk flow, which causes a large gradient in concentration of
surfactant to occur across a thin layer adjacent to the interface between
immiscible fluids. Resolving the surfactant gradient near the interface must be
accomplished with great accuracy to determine the interface's dynamics but
presents a significant challenge for traditional numerical methods. In this
project, the slenderness of the layer will be used to develop fast and accurate
'hybrid' numerical methods that incorporate a separate analytical reduction of
the layer's dynamics into numerical solution of the interfacial free boundary
problem. The second class of problems concerns the deformation of a slender
elastic fiber or filament when it is influenced by capillary forces at a fluid
interface. This project will develop a robust and efficient numerical method
that uses one-dimensional integral equations from slender body theory to
describe the fiber's dynamics and takes into account the interaction between
fluid, filament, and free surface.

Surfactants, such as alcohols, sulfates, and detergents, are widely used to
control the dynamics of emulsification or blending of fluid systems in
applications in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. At a fundamental
level, the emulsification process occurs via the behavior of single fluid drops
and jets as they break up by bursting or tip-streaming in a straining flow. This
project seeks to determine details of the mode of breakup that are important in
practice but have so far been difficult to capture accurately by traditional
numerical methods. Similarly, sticking and stiction of slender elastic filaments
and cantilevers is important in the proper operation of specific micro-
electromechanical devices, and filament-fluid interfacial forces are being
investigated as a means to assemble filaments into larger structures, such as
nanotube rings and biological filamented structures. This project seeks to
elucidate fundamental effects that occur in such processes by incorporating
analytical techniques for the resolution of small-scale structures into fast and
accurate, robust numerical methods.
