
* 0708832
* Collaborative Research: Analytical Study Of Certain Turbulence And Large--Scale Geophysical Models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2007,08/12/2009
* Edriss Titi,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2011
* USD 276,832.00

Reliable long time numerical simulations of the exact equations that govern the
climate dynamics are still out of reach, even for the most powerful state-of-
the-art computers. This is because of the wide range of spatial and time scales
involved in the dynamics of these models. Taking advantage of the shallowness of
the atmosphere and the oceans, as well as the rotation of the earth,
geophysicists have introduced more simplified models - the so-called primitive
equations and their variance - to be implemented in the simulations of global
climate models. This project is to justify rigorously some of these simplified
models, and to prove existence, uniqueness and continuous dependence on the
initial data of their solutions; and to investigate the long-term behavior for
these models. This is the first and the most crucial step in justifying the
derivation of these models and their consistency with physical observations for
the relevant spatial and time scales. This project involves the development of
novel and sophisticated mathematical techniques for the analytical study of
these models and of new sub-grid scale models of oceanic turbulent flows. The
latter are being proposed as new analytical parametrization models for ocean
circulation dynamics. Furthermore, we propose to investigate the qualitative and
statistical approximation behavior of a new class of inviscid regularizing
schemes/models for oceanic and atmospheric dynamics, and to implement them
computationally. The advantage of these new schemes, which are globally (in
time) regular, is that they do not require addition boundary conditions, unlike
the standard hyper-viscous regularization, which is commonly used in geophysical
computations to suppress the numerical, non-physical, small scale instabilities.

Due to the developments in modern technology, the ever increasing computational
power, and the sophisticated mathematical analysis of the ocean and atmosphere
dynamics models we are able predict the weather only for a few days. Reliable
long time numerical simulations of the exact equations that govern the climate
dynamics are still out of reach, even for the most powerful state-of-the-art
computers. Geophysicists have introduced more simplified models for climate
dynamics to be implemented computationally. It is therefore essential to
justify, rigorously, the validity of these models. Development of computational
and theoretical tools to further understanding of the climate system and its
predictability will be the major focus of this project. The approach of this
project involves a combination of mathematical, numerical and statistical tools.
