
* 0709046
* Highly effective representations for surface and solid spherical studies
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2007,04/13/2009
* Pencho Petrushev,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2010
* USD 143,907.00

Various practical applications require effective representation of functions on
the sphere or on the ball. Examples include the gravitational field modeling,
geomagnetism, helioseismology, astronomy, cosmology, and seismology. In most
applications the functions on the sphere have been traditionally represented in
terms of spherical harmonics. The nature of spherical harmonics as global
functions, however, creates problems. The spherical harmonic representations
rely on delicate cancellation/interference of spherical harmonics and are slowly
convergent. The existing representations on the ball using orthogonal
polynomials or other methods have the same drawbacks or are even worse. The
primary objective of this project is to develop innovative multiscale data
representations on the sphere and on the ball based on newly created wavelet
type systems, called "needlets". The needlet system on the sphere consists of
almost exponentially localized radial band-limited functions, which are
automatically extendable to harmonic functions in the exterior of the sphere and
thereby enabling needlet representations to provide a highly effective framework
for representation and analysis of harmonic functions such as the gravitational
potential. The needlet compatibility with spherical harmonics permits for fast
conversions between needlet and spherical harmonic representations. This makes
them easy to integrate into the existing models based on spherical harmonics.
Furthermore, the superb localization of needlets at fine scales makes needlet-
based models highly amenable to efficient local updates, which is a significant
advantage over traditional models based on spherical harmonics. The needlet
system on the ball has a similar structure and consists of almost exponentially
localized algebraic polynomials. Theoretical results show that the new
representations are superior to the existing mono- and multiscale methods used
in these areas. An important element of the proposed research is the employment
of nonlinear approximation methods for effective representation and
approximation of functions from needlets. These are multilevel techniques which
allow control of the uniform (or other) norm of the error of approximation.
Another step forward will be the development of anisotropic elements on the
sphere and ball (e.g. curvlets) for better extraction of curvlinear features of
the data.

The targeted applications of this research are mainly in the domain of geodesy.
Most geodetic applications rely on the ability to compute accurately the
gravitational (disturbing) potential. This project will pursue the
implementation of multiscale needlet representations for modeling of the
gravitational potential. Other potential applications of the new representations
are in geomagnetism, helioseismology, astronomy, cosmology, seismology, where
spherical harmonic representations are widely used. An important goal of this
project is to promote the broad utilization of the new representations in other
diverse disciplines (from geophysics to high-speed videoendoscopy) and to
stimulate interest in younger mathematicians to this area. This research project
offers an excellent opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of South Carolina to participate in testing ideas for further
development.
