
* 0709232
* Bifurcation theory and delay equations: applications to controlling pattern formation and modeling protein translation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 07/01/2007,07/22/2009
* Mary Silber,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 383,366.00

Proposal: DMS - 0709232 PI: Silber, Mary Institution: Northwestern University
Title: Bifurcation theory and delay equations: applications to controlling
pattern formation and modeling protein translation

ABSTRACT

The proposed research addresses two applications of bifurcation theory and delay
differential equations: (1) autoadjusting feedback control of oscillatory
patterns, and (2) mathematical modeling of cellular protein translation. The
proposed research on controlling patterns investigates an autoadjusting feedback
control scheme aimed at stabilizing oscillatory patterned-states. The feedback
control method exploits symmetries of the targeted pattern in such a way that it
becomes noninvasive when control is achieved. Two related case studies will be
pursued: (A) stabilization of traveling plane wave solutions of the two-
dimensional complex Ginzburg-Landau equation in the Benjamin-Feir unstable
regime, and (B) control of chemical traveling wave patterns of the photo-
sensitive Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction in the oscillatory regime. The
mathematical relationship between these two case studies will be elucidated by
the proposed analysis. The proposed research on mathematical modeling of protein
translation is aimed at deriving, by systematic approximation, a delay equation
model of protein translation that could then be used as a component in simple
models of synthetic gene networks involving more than one protein. The delay
model is obtained from a continuum description of the elongation process, which
ultimately shows up as a delay time in the reduced mathematical model. The
proposed research will extend the model to incorporate the degradation of mRNA.
The fidelity of the delay model to the mechanistic one, in the case of simple
gene switches and oscillators will then be investigated using bifurcation
theory, aided by a numerical continuation package that was developed for delay
differential equations.

The proposed research will contribute to the training of graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows in interdisciplinary, applied mathematics research. It will
aid the development of feedback control schemes for eliminating spatio-temporal
chaos in chemical reaction-diffusion systems, as well as other pattern-forming
systems. Delay differential equations frequently arise in the modeling of
biological processes, such as cellular protein translation, the process whereby
ribosomes assemble proteins, one amino acid at a time, using the information
encoded in the messenger RNA (mRNA). The proposed research will contribute to
the development of a systematic mathematical framework for deriving reduced
delay models from complex, biologically-detailed mechanistic models. The
proposed projects represent important applications of delay differential
equations and their analysis using bifurcation theory. The analysis of these
proposed case studies are essential to the development of these mathematical and
computational tools.
