
* 0709197
* Flows of Free Liquid Fibers and Sheets
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2007,08/03/2007
* Thomas Hagen,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2010
* USD 38,199.00

This project is concerned with the formation and evolution of free liquid
filaments, jets and sheets of viscous, viscoelastic, and viscoplastic fluids
under the influence of internal and external forces. The formulation of these
fluid flows involves an unknown free surface that describes the region in an
ambient medium occupied by the fluid. Understanding how these free surfaces
evolve, what flow scenarios and material parameters are prone to trigger flow
instabilities, and how the transition to flow catastrophes such as capillary
breakup proceeds is a fundamental challenge in mathematics and the sciences.
Capillary, inertial and viscoelastic forces or balances thereof are known to
stabilize or destabilize fluid filaments. In the case of highly viscous fluids,
liquid filaments thin uniformly before breakup occurs and drops are formed,
while in contrast viscoelasticity is expected to induce a beads-on-string
morphology of the liquid filaments. The inherently nonlinear nature and the high
degree of complexity of the cascade of events leading to thinning, necking,
breakup or other transient patterns are topics that this project addresses. It
encompasses a rigorous derivation and justification of averaged lower-
dimensional equations for thin filaments and sheets indicating boundaries of
validity of these models, a discussion of capillary thinning and breakup of
viscoplastic fluid jets, and stability studies in the context of fiber spinning
and film drawing for viscous and viscoelastic liquids. Analyzing and justifying
mathematical models of fiber and film flows and explaining observed flow
phenomena arising in capillary thinning and engineering applications requires
the development of new mathematical tools, combining machinery from partial
differential equations, stability theory, asymptotic analysis and multiscale
analysis. A variety of high-tech applications, including food processing, ink-
jet printing, atomization of paints and aerosols, jet stabilization, fiber
spinning, and electrospinning of nanofibers, are all characterized by similar
objectives: to either induce breakup of thin fluid filaments (or sheets) in a
controlled manner, to suppress it or to keep flow instabilities from occurring.
To reach these objectives, a deep mathematical understanding of the physical
mechanisms and rheological parameters governing the onset of instabilities and
the transition to flow catastrophes is necessary. The investigator develops the
mathematical framework to derive, analyze, and justify flow models describing
the evolution of free liquid filaments and sheets. Under examination are the
occurrence of flow instabilities, the transition to breakup, and novel
rheological phenomena in several exemplary flows. This research has the
potential to significantly enhance our knowledge of the physical principles and
limitations governing flows in these vital areas of engineering and science. The
project also serves the purpose to train both graduate and undergraduate
students in mathematical fluid mechanics and applied analysis in general and
fiber/sheet forming flows in particular.
