
* 0739387
* Collaborative Proposal: SouthEastern Atlantic Mathematical Sciences Workshop
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,08/25/2011
* Annalisa Calini,SC,College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2011
* USD 36,324.00

This award supports a three-year series of series of regional workshops designed
to enhance the professional development of advanced undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows interested in pursuing careers in applied
mathematics or related scientific fields. This workshop series, which has become
known as Cha-Cha Days (after the founding institutions Charleston and Chapel
Hill) is an annual two-day meeting designed to expose students to graduate and
postgraduate research activities, in an environment that promotes dialogue and
inquiry.

The workshop locations will be the College of Charleston, the University of
Central Florida, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Speakers
are primarily advanced graduate students and postdoctoral fellows from
universities and research facilities located in the southeastern United States.
Attendees also present research through poster sessions. Keynote speakers are
selected from among senior members at the organizers? institutions, scientific
laboratories, and technical companies in the southeastern region.

The workshop series promotes networking of young applied mathematicians with
industry, laboratories, and universities in the southeastern United States,
helps to create a more inclusive and diverse community of young scientists, and
informs young researchers of regional opportunities in scientific research, both
academic and industry based.

Workshop series web site: http://www.chachadays.org
