
* 0753050
* Collaborative Research: Special Meetings: The MPI Workshop
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/2008,04/30/2008
* Joseph Fehribach,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 04/30/2012
* USD 62,712.00

This proposal is a collaborative effort amongst researchers at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute, the University of Delaware, and Worcester Polytechnic
Institute to expand and strengthen the Mathematical Problems in Industry (MPI)
Workshop, an annual meeting run each June in cooperation with the Graduate
Student Mathematical Modeling (GSMM) Camp. The MPI Workshop is a five-day
meeting which attracts leading applied mathematicians, scientists and engineers
from industry, universities and national laboratories. The focus of the Workshop
is a set of problems brought by contributing participants from industry. These
problems span a wide range of application areas, often in fluid and solid
mechanics but also in mathematical biology, data analysis, and mathematical
finance, among others. Work on the problems is done in vertically integrated
teams consisting of the representatives from industry, senior and junior
faculty, postdocs and graduate students. The main objective of the Workshop is
to provide links between mathematicians at universities and scientists and
engineers from industry for the mutual benefit of both sides.

The MPI Workshop has run for many years, starting at RPI in 1985, but now run at
other universities as well, including the University of Delaware and Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, among others. For the past four years, the educational
mission of the Workshop has grown significantly with the introduction of the
GSMM Camp, another NSF-supported program. This four-day meeting, held during the
week preceding the Workshop, is designed to promote problem solving and
scientific communication skills. At the Camp, graduate students work together in
teams, with the guidance of invited faculty mentors, on interdisciplinary
problems typically inspired by industrial applications. The problems span a wide
range of areas of application, and are carefully selected to promote a broad set
of problem-solving skills. Students from the Camp also attend the Workshop, and
the combined program exposes graduate students to real-world problems of current
scientific interest, and provides them with a valuable educational and career-
enhancing experience outside of the traditional academic setting. The
interdisciplinary program consisting of the MPI Workshop and GSMM Camp is unique
amongst universities in the United States. The present collaborative proposal
addresses several ways in which the program can be expanded to improve links
with industry and to enhance the research and educational opportunities provided
by the Workshop. This expansion involves increased participation in the Workshop
amongst early-career mathematicians (upper-level graduate students, postdocs and
junior faculty) and invited high-impact faculty with targeted expertise, and
increased participation from new industries in emerging areas. Additional plans
include dissemination of mathematical results from the Workshop at other
national meeting, and seminars with industry to promote contacts for future
Workshop participation. The expanded program will have a broad impact on the
education and development of early-career mathematicians, and on the
interdisciplinary research of participating faculty. The Workshop also promotes
collaborations with industry and will have an impact on the development and
analysis of new technologies in industry. The intellectual merit of the program
centers around the problems considered at the Workshop. Many of these problems
have led to follow up research and new mathematical results, and it is expected
that this will continue to be an outcome of the expanded problem-solving
experience.
