
* 0758242
* Eighteenth International Symposium on the Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems - MTNS 2008, July 28 - August 1, 2008, Blacksburg, VA
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 07/01/2008,06/20/2008
* Christopher Beattie,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2009
* USD 12,600.00

The International Symposium on the Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems
(MTNS) has met biennially since 1973 in ten countries spread across North
America, Europe and Asia as a forum for a wide range of topics in mathematical
system theory, networks and control theory. The primary objective of MTNS is to
bring together established and new researchers, including advanced graduate
students, for the exchange of ideas and the discussion of recent developments in
the general area at the border of engineering and mathematics encompassed within
the title ?mathematical system theory?. These areas of focus are of critical
importance in the analysis and control of the behavior of complex systems as
manifested in nature, science, and industry. The MTNS meetings provide an
opportunity for the global community of established and beginning researchers in
this area to meet with and learn from one another through both formal
presentations and informal interactions.

The next MTNS Symposium will be held July 28?August 1, 2008 at Virginia Tech in
Blacksburg, Virginia. This occasion provides a unique opportunity for US
graduate students, young PhDs, and others that may have restricted resources to
make contact with a vibrant international community of researchers active in
research areas related to systems theory. The objective of this proposal is to
secure funding for the financial support of advanced graduate students, recent
PhDs, and members of traditionally under-represented groups (including in
particular, women and members of minority groups) so that they might have the
advantage of participating in a major international conference which comes to
the United States only once or twice a decade. For many of the prospective
beneficiaries, this will be a first opportunity to engage in professional
activity beyond their home institutions. For all of them it will be a unique
opportunity to present their work to an expert audience and to further their
knowledge of the field by interacting with established researchers in both
engineering and mathematics - interactions that are crucial to their development
as young researchers and educators.
