
* 0804380
* Nonlinear Fokker-Planck Equations and Hybrid Stochastic Deterministic Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2008,06/23/2009
* Peter Constantin,IL,University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2012
* USD 431,912.00

The project is to study variational problems, nonlinear partial differential
equations, and stochastic differential equations that describe the active
interactions between stochastic microscopic systems with finitely many degrees
of freedom and macroscopic deterministic fields. The study of melts of
interacting particles with finitely many degrees of freedom leads to Onsager
equations on metric and pseudometric spaces. A first part of the project is to
elucidate the structure and classify the zero temperature limits of such
systems. The suspensions in fluids of these systems lead to nonlinear Fokker-
Planck equations coupled to Navier-Stokes equations. The PDE analysis of global
existence for these systems is a second part of the project. In addition to this
analysis, the existence of traveling waves, documented numerically, will be
further investigated. The connection between deterministic models and hybrid,
stochastic-deterministic models, nonlinear in the sense of McKean, is the third
aim of this project.

This project addresses fundamental problems that arise in the theory and
computation of models of complex matter. Complex matter includes biological
fluids such as blood and also synthetic matter such as foams and gels. Complex
matter is characterized by the presence of complex, interacting networks of very
small objects being embedded, influenced, and in turn influencing a matrix or a
solvent. The basic understanding of these interactions is crucial for progress
in applications such as the manufacturing of materials with extreme properties
or the delivery of drugs at the cellular level. The project is aimed at
uncovering fundamental principles that guide the modeling and computation of
such systems.
