
* 0806304
* Novel techniques for cardiac imaging
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 09/01/2008,09/20/2009
* Alexander Katsevich,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2013
* USD 220,981.00

Cone beam computer tomography (CT) is a common medical imaging modality. The
main principle of CT is based on transmitting a cone beam of x-rays through the
patient from various directions. This is achieved by moving the x-ray source
along some trajectory. For each source position a detector measures the
intensity of the beam as it exits the patient. Then the data are inverted
according to a mathematical algorithm. Prime examples of cone beam CT are
helical and C-arm scanning. At present, cardiac imaging is arguably the most
important challenge facing CT. Mathematically the difficulty of image
reconstruction in this case comes from the fact that the object being scanned
changes with time. Thus, for each source position the projection data
corresponds to a different object. In this project the PI plans to concentrate
on the following three directions: 1) Development of exact and efficient
reconstruction algorithms for multi-source helical CT; 2) Development of exact
and efficient reconstruction algorithms for the types of source trajectories
used in C-arms; and 3) Development of local tomography algorithms for dynamic
and motion compensated CT.

The intellectual merit of the proposed activity will be the development of new
reconstruction algorithms for cone beam CT and deeper understanding of the
mathematics involved in reconstructing objects that change during the scan. It
is expected that the broader impacts will include improved quality of cardiac
imaging, potentially resulting in replacing an invasive diagnostic tool with a
non-invasive one. The obtained results can also be used in other medical
applications, such as nuclear medicine and Intensity-Modulated Radiation
Therapy.
