
* 0806401
* AMC-SS: Transition Pathways and Free Energy Calculations in Complex Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2008,05/31/2010
* Weiqing Ren,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 138,515.00

Ren DMS-0806401

In this project, the investigator develops numerical methods for the study of
complex energy landscapes and barrier-crossing events (rare events) as well as
free energy calculations in multiple-dimensional spaces. In the past few years,
he and his collaborators developed a theoretical framework and numerical methods
(the string method) for dealing with barrier-crossing events in complex systems.
In the first part of the project, he applies the string method to problems
arising from material sciences. In particular, the dislocation motions and the
energy landscapes of silicon will be studied at the atomistic scale. The minimum
energy paths at low temperature and the minimum free energy paths at finite
temperature are investigated. In the second part of the project, the
investigator studies the problem of mapping free energy landscapes in multiple-
dimensional spaces. For problems arising from theoretical chemistry and
structural biology, very often the interesting dynamics can be characterized by
a number of collective variables. For example, conformation changes of bio-
molecules are usually characterized by several torsion angles or distances
between different chemical groups. The computation of the free energy associated
with these collective variables is of great practical interest. Unfortunately
such a calculation has been limited to situations when there are only a few
collective variables (typically no more than 3), mainly due to the enormous
number of grid points or bins involved in the calculation based on a regular
grid. In this project, the investigator uses a sparse representation for the
free energy function based on sparse grids. This to a certain extent overcomes
the difficulty and allows the mapping of the free energy landscape in spaces up
to about 30 dimensions.

Many problems from structural biology, theoretical chemistry, and material
sciences can be abstractly formulated as a system navigating over a complex
energy landscape. The system spends most of time in metastable states (the local
minima of the energy landscape), with thermally activated transitions from one
metastable state to another. The questions of interest are the mechanism of such
transition and the transition rates. These transitions happen on a time scale
specified by Arrhenius' law, which is much longer than the intrinsic time scale
of the dynamical system. For example, the individual atoms in a bio-molecule
vibrate on the scale of femtoseconds (1e-15 s); in contrast, conformation
changes of the molecule (which is the interesting event) typically happen on the
scale of milliseconds (1e-3 s -- a trillion times longer than a femtosecond) or
even longer. The disparity in the time scale makes traditional approaches (e.g.
the direct simulation of molecular dynamics or Langevin dynamics) prohibitively
expensive. In this project, the investigator develops efficient numerical tools
(the string method) for the study of such transition events and the associated
energetics. The numerical method is applied to investigate the dislocation
motions in crystalline solids at the atomistic scale. The mapping of free energy
landscapes of biological systems in multiple dimensions using sparse
representations is studied as well.
