
* 0806321
* Dynamics of Coupled Cell Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2008,09/20/2009
* Michael Field,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 11/30/2012
* USD 196,353.00

The project aims to advance the understanding of the dynamics of networks of
interacting differential equations and maps. The project focuses in particular
on the ways oscillatory and other complex dynamical behavior, such as
heteroclinic cycles and chaotic dynamics, can be forced by the network
architecture. Many physical, electrical and biological systems can be modeled by
networks of interacting differential equations and maps. Models of this type,
which can involve a mix of continuous and discrete dynamical systems, possibly
with time delays and filters, are called hybrid systems. A high priority of the
project is the development of a mathematical theory of hybrid systems, with a
special focus on engineering and computer applications. The project will use
mathematical techniques originally developed for the study of symmetric
dynamical systems, work on statistical and stochastic properties of dynamical
systems, and develop new methods for the construction of relatively simple
dynamical systems (modules) which satisfy specified dynamical and structural
properties.

Systems of coupled differential equations are used as models in a wide range of
physical applications such as neuronal networks, speciation, gene dynamics,
arrays of Josephson junctions, and mechanical, electrical and computer systems.
The project aims to develop an improved mathematical understanding of the
dynamics of these systems. It is a natural development and continuation of past
research undertaken, notably in an NSF-sponsored project on "Synchrony and
Structure in Coupled Cell Systems.? Part of the research will be undertaken in
collaboration with groups in the United Kingdom (Manchester and Exeter) and
Portugal (Porto). The Manchester group has a strong focus on applications in the
areas of electrical and computer systems and biology, and these applications
will help give a framework for the development of the theoretical aspects of
networks. At least two graduate students will be directly supported by the
grant. More generally, the research will directly impact the mathematical
education of graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Houston
through seminars, the development of graduate course in the area of differential
equations, and undergraduate research projects in the area of networks. The
investigator has shown a long-term commitment to the development of outreach
programs for the professional development of mathematics and science teachers,
notably through the Houston Teachers Institute and the Yale National Initiative.
The proposed research will impact the development and content of these programs.
The investigator will continue to work towards improving the understanding of
mathematics and its applications among the general population by means of public
lectures, educational publications, and popular scientific writings.
