
* 0806789
* Variational Methods for Some Problems in Materials Science
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,07/31/2008
* Marian Bocea,ND,North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2011
* USD 66,500.00

Bocea DMS-0806789

The project is motivated by several questions in two distinct areas of
materials science. The first part of the project undertakes the development of a
general theory that allows for efficient characterizations of the yield set of a
polycrystal by means of suitable variational principles in L-infinity. A new
variational formalism leads naturally to several problems in the emerging area
of calculus of variations in L-infinity for the case where the functionals to be
optimized are the essential supremum of some expression involving divergence-
free fields. Here the natural approach is to minimize the maximum of certain
relevant quantities instead of their average. The investigator studies selected
issues in this direction, with an emphasis on those that can have an impact on
our understanding of plasticity. Among these, the study of the systems of
partial differential equations that arise as Aronsson equations associated to
the new variational principles in L-infinity is of particular interest. The
second part of the project deals with the derivation of nonlinear membrane
theories from three-dimensional elasticity, seeking to better understand the
formation of interfaces in thin films of martensitic materials. The project
sheds light on the structure of the minimizers for a new effective thin film
energy, and indicates appropriate minimizing sequences.

The project aims to set on rigorous mathematical grounds some of the
traditional models used by engineers and material scientists and, on the other
hand, to explore new variational principles in the case where one wants to know
how big some quantity can be at its maximum value, not merely on average. This
question arises in many areas of science and engineering and is of fundamental
importance in such applications as elasticity, image processing, damage and
fracture mechanics, and plasticity. The investigator studies this question in
the first part of the project. In the second part he deals with the derivation
of nonlinear membrane theories from three-dimensional elasticity. This is
motivated in part by the need, originating from important technological
applications, to better understand and predict the formation of interfaces in
thin films of martensitic materials. The project sheds light on the structure of
the minimizers for a new effective thin film energy recently proposed by the
investigator, and indicates appropriate minimizing sequences that are expected
to provide some insight into the design of technologically useful active
material structures, more complex than those suggested by existing thin film
theories.
