
* 0807395
* Collaborative Research: Time-Dependent and Inhomogeneous Flows of Entangled Polymeric and Micellar Networks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2008,07/03/2008
* L. Pamela Cook-Ioannidis,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/2011
* USD 205,633.00

Cook DMS-0807395 McKinley DMS-0807330

In this collaborative project, the investigators and a colleague study the
motion of complex fluids, especially flows of wormlike micellar fluids and of
monodisperse polymer solutions in a variety of geometries and under a variety of
forcings. Surfactant systems consist of amphiphilic molecules with hydrophilic
heads and hydrophobic tails. Under suitable chemical conditions these molecules
can self-assemble in aqueous solution into long aggregates known as worm-like
micelles. These long flexible structures entangle to form a network and lead to
viscoelastic properties similar to those of polymer melts and concentrated
solutions, but with the added complexity that the worms continuously break and
reform (i.e. they are "living polymers"). External deformations can enhance the
local rate of micellar breakage, thus the macroscopic flow affects the
microscopic structure which in turn further modifies the global velocity field.
Due to these multi-scale interactions these fluids exhibit flow inhomogeneities
even in simple geometries. Development and analysis of new constitutive models
and comparison with experimental results is generating new insight and
understanding into the multi-scale nature of these flows and of the influence of
the evolution in the microscopic structure on the macroscopic measurables. The
governing mathematics is that of a nonlinear system of partial differential
equations describing conservation of mass and linear momentum, coupled to
equations governing the number densities of the entangled molecules and
constitutive (stress) equations for each species. Specifically, the
investigators study a pair of two-species network models that they recently
proposed: a two species model with chain scission and reforming effects (the VCM
model) physically appropriate for wormlike micellar solutions, and a simplified
non-interacting model (PEC+M model) appropriate to monodisperse entangled
polymer solutions. The investigators study the time evolution of the solutions
in strong extensional flow and in rapidly time-varying flow using a combination
of asymptotics and computation as well as experiments. Approximate closed form
solutions are generated to enable an understanding of the flows and of sharp
spatial transitions (microstructural boundary layers).

The investigators study the material properties of complex fluids such as those
constituting shampoos, liquid detergents, molten plastics, and fluids utilized
in enhanced oil recovery. On the microscopic scale these polymeric fluids
consist of large aggregates or macromolecules and the shape and orientation of
these molecules control the properties of the fluid and how it performs in the
desired application. It is very difficult to characterize these fluids
experimentally because their flow properties, unlike those of Newtonian fluids
such as water, become inhomogeneous even in simple geometries. This means that
the usual types of measurements (in which the fluid properties are measured at
the flow boundaries) are not sufficient to understand and characterize the
material response. The investigators have formulated a new equation of state --
a mathematical model -- that more fully describes the microstructural properties
of these fluids and how they flow. They now investigate the predictions of this
model in various complex flows and compare this with experimental findings. This
in turn enables them to develop new means to probe and characterize the
properties of the fluids. The complex fluids listed above are used commercially
in a variety of geometries that may involve both stretching flows (such as the
motion of a jet, flow out of a nozzle) as well as shearing flows (for example
pumping of the fluids in a pipe). To ensure that their analytical and
experimental results are relevant to researchers in industry, the investigators
investigate both steady and time-dependent examples of both types of flow
conditions.
