
* 0807811
* Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Multiscale Problems Governed by Geometric PDE
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,08/28/2008
* Ricardo Nochetto,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 510,119.00

Nochetto DMS-0807811

The adequate numerical treatment of continuum phenomena exhibiting disparate
space-time scales is a formidable mathematical and computational challenge.
Modern algorithms should be able to resolve fine scales for certain physical
quantities without overresolving others, thereby optimizing the computational
effort and making realistic 3d simulations feasible. Mathematical models in
biophysics (such as biomembranes in both fluid and gel state), in materials
science (such as crystal surface morphologies and bilayer actuators), and in
shape optimization (including both fluid and solid mechanics) are typical yet
quite distinct examples addressed in this project. Their multiscale structure
manifests in rapid transients and slow motion regimes in time, as well as point
and line singularities (interfaces) and thin layers in space. Large domain
deformations, perhaps leading to topology changes, is another intriguing
feature. The goal of this project is to design, test, and analyze reliable and
efficient adaptive finite element methods for these multiscale problems, most
governed by geometric partial differential equations, with space-time error
control based on a posteriori error estimation. This project builds upon, and in
fact extends and enhances, the work of the prior NSF Grant DMS-0505454. It is
organized in a number of small but interrelated topics permeated by the roles of
geometry and adaptivity throughout, from issues in numerical analysis and
computation to applications.

This project blends quite delicate analytical, computational, and modeling
issues in several areas of research of strategic importance such as
nanotechnology, materials and manufacturing, biotechnology, and high performance
computing. Designing smart electro-mechanical devices as well as understanding
key functions of lipid membranes in living organisms, both at the nano and
microscales, require powerful and flexible computational algorithms capable of
dealing with large shape variations. This project develops such tools. It is a
collaborative and interdisciplinary project involving a number of scientists in
the US (four of them engineers and physicists) and abroad, as well as several
students and postdocs. Because a substantial effort is devoted to education and
human resource development, most resources are used to partially support
students and postdocs.


