
* 0807033
* Analysis and Synthesis of Scattered Data on Surfaces via Radial and Related Basis Functions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2008,08/04/2008
* Joseph Ward,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2011
* USD 224,900.00

Ward DMS-0807033

The main object of this project is to develop new methods and tools for the
analysis and synthesis of scattered data by means of radial and related basis
functions. Very recently, the investigators Ward and Narcowich and a
collaborator introduced a new tool for fitting a divergence-free vector field
tangent to a 2D orientable surface contained in 3D to samples of such a field
taken at scattered sites on the surface. The method, which involves a kernel
constructed from radial basis functions (RBFs), has applications to problems in
geophysics -- for instance, the nonlinear flow of an incompressible fluid in a
single hydrostatic atmospheric layer. Mathematically, incompressibility
translates to the velocity having vanishing surface divergence. Fitting
divergence-free tangent vector fields to data taken in these cases would help in
modeling the incompressible velocity fields involved. In addition to handling
scattered data, it has the advantage of avoiding special treatment for the
poles. The investigators study the approximation properties of this tool, with a
view towards estimates on its data-fitting errors as well how robust it is. For
certain cases, numerical experiments suggest both a good fit of data and
robustness. In addition, unstructured scattered data -- i.e., clumped, or
clustered, or nonuniformly distributed data -- present problems for any method,
including the traditional RBF-type algorithms based on translates of one
conditionally positive definite function. These clustered data occur naturally
in learning theory, neural nets, meshless methods, and other situations. To deal
with clustered data, the investigators initiate the study of the construction of
new bases, preconditioners, and in general a new RBF-type paradigm.

Problems that involve analyzing data taken from scattered sites -- that is,
irregularly placed sites -- in space or on the surface of the earth arise
frequently in diverse fields: computer-aided design graphics, data mining,
medical imaging, learning networks, and geoscience, in addition to many other
areas. Such problems present difficulties for traditional methods, which are
based on collecting data at uniformly placed sites. For example, weather
prediction is based on a mathematical model where the earth's surface is assumed
to be a surface of a sphere. The investigators develop new methods and tools to
help in analyzing such phenomena via so-called radial basis function methods.
