
* 0807825
* Damage and Fracture Evolution
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2008,08/14/2008
* Christopher Larsen,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2012
* USD 162,228.00

Larsen DMS-0807825

The investigator develops and studies models for the evolution of elastic
damage (i.e., regions of weakened elastic properties) and fracture. Difficulties
come from, among other things, the irreversibility of these phenomena, and the
fact that existing models are essentially variational (static). The general
strategy is to first develop quasi-static models that are consistent with these
variational principles, and prove existence and approximation results. Next, the
goal is to extend these results to the fully dynamic setting. The first step has
been essentially completed for damage and brittle fracture, and the investigator
works on developing corresponding methods for cohesive fracture. Dynamic models
and their analysis are major open problems for all these phenomena, and are the
main focus of this project.

Material damage and fracture prediction are of fundamental importance in the
areas of materials and manufacturing, civil infrastructure, etc., yet in the
most physically realistic setting (dynamics) there is no sound mathematical
footing, making engineering models largely ad hoc. The investigator works on
developing this mathematical support, as well as creating and rigorously
justifying algorithms for computing approximate solutions. The project includes
training mathematics Ph.D. students through work on important interdisciplinary
problems.
