
* 0807897
* Quasilinear evolution and periodic orbits in Hamiltonian systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2008,06/14/2010
* Vadim Zharnitsky,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2013
* USD 161,998.00

This study will improve the understanding of finite and infinite dimensional
Hamiltonian systems. A somewhat counter-intuitive quasilinear evolution in
nonlinear dispersive wave equations of Hamiltonian type will be investigated and
a general criterion of quasilinear behavior developed. The study will begin with
specific equations such as the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam system, the Korteweg-ed Vries
equation, the Majda-McLaughlin-Tabak model, etc. The nonlinear dynamics becomes
linear for high frequency initial data because of a subtle averaging effect due
to the dispersion. Besides purely nonlinear dynamics interest, understanding the
quasilinear phenomenon is important for engineering systems design, since
designing linear systems is easier for a number of reasons. A second area of
study is the structure of the set of periodic orbits in Hamiltonian systems of
billiard type. The approach is based on the methods of geometric control theory
and exterior differential systems. It is expected that analyticity of the large
(two parameter) families of periodic orbits will be proved. While being an
important problem in theoretical dynamics, the structure of the set of periodic
orbits is of great value to other areas of science. In particular, zero
probability occurrence of periodic orbits implies high accuracy of Weyl's
asymptotics for eigenvalues in the Dirichlet problem. In physics, the structure
of the set of periodic orbits plays an important role in the study of quantum
chaos and in optical microcavities.

Optical communication systems provide the most effective way of data
transmission over long distances. The information is usually transmitted by
light pulses of short duration. In an ideal world, the incoming data stream
would appear undistorted at the other end of the transmission line, so the
information would not be corrupted. In reality, two major effects distort the
light pulses: dispersion and nonlinearity. Dispersion characterizes how much the
speed of the wave depends on the frequency, and nonlinearity forces larger
amplitude waves to move differently from the smaller amplitude ones. The
distortion due to nonlineariy is especially undesirable. Recently, optical
system engineers have discovered the remarkable fact that by packing pulses more
and more tightly, nonlinear effects become smaller. In earlier work this
?quasilinear? phenomenon was explained for a simple model problem by
demonstrating that it occurs under certain precisely formulated conditions. One
part of the proposed research aims to develop general criteria of quasilinear
behavior in other important systems, such as shallow water dynamics, solid state
physics, and water waves. The second part of the project deals with the study of
periodic orbits in mechanics. Periodic orbits produce recurrent behavior and
their study is of great importance for basic systems, such as the classical
billiard problem. Here one should think of an oval cavity in which a light ray
(or a point mass) travels along straight lines, suffering reflections at the
boundary. It is believed that the probability is zero that a given ray will
produce a closed (i.e., periodic) trajectory. This issue has deep connections to
other fields, and it is proposed to understand when this probability is zero and
when it is positive.
