
* 0807653
* Asymptotic Problems in Nonlinear Waves and Beyond
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/23/2008
* Peter Miller,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2012
* USD 300,000.00

This project concerns the development of tools for the asymptotic analysis of
integrable nonlinear wave equations. There are two complementary aspects of this
work: asymptotic analysis in the scattering theory of linear differential
equations, and asymptotic analysis of the corresponding inverse problems. The
particular application problems to be studied along the way include (i) the
semiclassical limit of the focusing nonlinear Schrodinger equation, (ii) the
corresponding semiclassical limit of the modified nonlinear Schrodinger
equation, (iii) the semiclassical limit of the sine-Gordon equation in
laboratory coordinates, (iv) the continuum limit of the Ablowitz-Ladik
equations, (v) singular limits for multicomponent integrable equations, and (vi)
several asymptotic problems in approximation theory with applications to random
matrix theory.

This work is interesting and important because it will promote understanding of
singular limits leading formally to ill-posed dynamical systems. Indeed, the
motivating problem of the semiclassical limit of the focusing nonlinear
Schrodinger equation with general smooth but nonanalytic initial data remains
one of the most important open problems in applied analysis, and the tools
developed as part of this project will directly address this problem and other
similar ones. Furthermore, while the basic aim of the project is the development
of methods of analysis, the methods will also be applied to several specific
integrable equations and also to open problems beyond the field of nonlinear
waves. For example, we intend to apply specialized asymptotic methods developed
in the context of nonlinear wave theory to the problem of the asymptotic
analysis (in the bulk scaling limit) of the correlation functions of the normal
random matrix model, with its coincident connections to the theory of Laplacian
growth (also known as Hele-Shaw flow) and conformal mapping. Many of the
problems addressed as part of this project have a universal character, arising
in the modeling of diverse physical phenomena, and it follows that analytical
techniques applicable to these problems have far-reaching consequences. This
project also has an educational component, stressing the training of postdocs
and graduate students through collaborative research and course development.
