
* 0807815
* On the Dynamics, Structure and Stability of Certain Nonlinear Systems in Applied Sciences
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,05/27/2010
* Konstantina Trivisa,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2011
* USD 365,781.00

This research project investigates problems on the interface between continuum
physics and applied partial differential equations, with emphasis on analysis of
physically relevant solutions of the nonlinear systems that arise in the
description of fluid flow and continuum mechanics. The project has three primary
components: (a) The investigation of hydrodynamic models for compressible and
incompressible fluids. Issues to be addressed include large-data existence
theory for physical systems, issues of stability and asymptotic analysis, and
singular limits in hydrodynamics. (b) The analysis of material structures with
focus on fluid-solid interaction problems as well as fluid-particle models
arising in biology and environmental sciences. (c) The investigation of inviscid
models with emphasis on hyperbolic balance laws.

The enormous range of spatial and temporal scales that arise in the description
of compressible fluids, nonlinear materials, multi-phase flows, astrophysical
systems, and biological systems makes analysis of the associated models
challenging. Use of explicit integration or even numerical approximation for
generic solutions to the governing equations is impractical for the majority of
applications. This research explores alternative approaches that will contribute
to the further investigation of a wide variety of important physical systems and
to the design of high performance computational algorithms. One of the goals of
this project is to contribute to the development of the scientific workforce by
providing mentoring and advanced training for young researchers and by
organizing a framework for interdisciplinary interactions with researchers from
related fields.
