
* 0807600
* Multiscale Analysis of Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,09/20/2009
* Jeffrey Rauch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2013
* USD 285,001.00

The research supported by this award concerns the qualitative behavior of
solutions of linear and nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential equations.
Such equations describe wave propagation in situations when signals travel at
finite speed, e.g. acoustics, electromagnetism, compressible fluids, ... etc.
The first set of problems concerns nonlinear internal layers. Such layers
represent waves which have wave fronts occupying a very thin region about a
smooth surface in space time. The wave front separates regions where the values
of the solution are quite different. The examples of propagating flame fronts
and reaction fronts give the idea. The mathematical results will lead to
algorithms for approximations whose error tends to zero as the width decreases.
The problem proposed is the behavior of planar layers at times which are large
relative to the reciprocal of the width. One expects to see diffractive effects
and there are virtually no known mathematical results for this type for layers.
It is likely that there will be analogous results for weakly dissipative
boundary layers. The second problems concern Berenger?s perfectly matched layer
algorithms for the computation of wave propagation in unbounded domains. Careful
analysis indicates that the layers are not perfectly matched. The detailed
analysis of this phenomenon and its consequences is important given the wide use
of these methods. The third family of problems concern situations where
stability estimates are derived with the aid of pseudodifferential operators.
Such operators spread supports which makes them seemingly inappropriate for the
study of supports. The project proposes the study of sharp finite speed and
uniqueness of the Cauchy problem at space like hypersurfaces for symmetrizable
hyperbolic systems. Finally the propagation of short wavelength waves through
perturbed periodic media will be studied when the period and wavelength are of
comparable size. The interest is in propagation for long distances on which
diffractive effects are expected to take place.

This research project addresses questions that arise in mathematical models for
wave propagation phenomena, i.e. physical situations in which signals can travel
at finite speed and interact with one another and with the medium that they
traverse. Such signals can take the form of wave fronts (such as the spherical
light flash from a camera, sound waves made by clapping hands, or a flame front
in a combustion engine) or of rays (as in optics), among others. There is a
common class of mathematical models for such phenomena that has been employed
very successfully in applications as diverse as chemical engineering, the design
and use of radar equipment and ultrasound transceivers, computer graphics, and
fiber optics. There are four parts to this project. The first will add to the
understanding of models for wave fronts that interact. The second part will
examine a very widely used computational method for wave phenomena in unbounded
spatial regions (e.g. radar signals bouncing off a plane) and try to explain
some anomalies that make this method less reliable than is generally assumed. In
the third part, the proposer will establish that a wide class of models does
indeed exhibit the finite signal speed in all possible situations. Finally, the
fourth project aims at a better understanding of light signals that travel
through photonic materials over long distances. The PI will continue his
educational efforts through lecture series, published notes, counseling,
mentoring of thesis students, and close contact with laboratories in engineering
schools and industry.
