
* 0807347
* Mathematical Problems from Materials Science and Finance
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2008,09/01/2012
* Robert Kohn,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2014
* USD 928,818.00

Kohn 0807347

The first two thrusts of this project are topics at the interface between
mathematics, physics, and materials science, namely (a) modeling the evolution
of a crystal surface below the roughening temperature, and (b) designing new
schemes for "cloaking" regions of space from electromagnetic measurements. A
third thrust lies at the boundary between mathematics and finance, namely (c)
examining the impact on markets of heterogeneous beliefs or "irrational
investors." Concerning (a): the PI seeks a unification of two widely-used but
apparently distinct approaches -- one based on step dynamics, the other using a
fourth-order partial differential equation. Concerning (b): the PI continues his
recent work on a change-of-variable-based cloaking scheme; in particular he
explores the design of "near-cloaks," obtained using regular rather than
singular changes of variables, at finite frequency. Concerning (c): the PI
explores how the heterogeneity of investors' beliefs can lead in some settings
to speculation and market "bubbles."

The project addresses topics where mathematics can have great impact on other
areas of science. Thrust (a) -- involving the evolution of a crystal surface --
addresses a core topic in materials science, of great importance for the design
and manufacture of electronic devices. Moreover, its goal is the linkage of
models with different length and time scales -- a recurring issue in many areas
of modern science. Successful treatment of this example establishes a paradigm
that could also be useful in other settings. Thrust (b) -- involving schemes for
"cloaking" regions of space -- addresses a current frontier in optics. If the
proposed cloaking schemes can be realized in practice, they will provide a means
for making objects difficult to "see" using, for example, radar. But the PI's
focus is not on device design; rather it is on the fundamental correctness of a
specific "cloaking" scheme recently proposed by other investigators. Thrust (c)
-- involving of heterogeneous beliefs or "irrational investors" -- addresses a
central problem of modern economics. Real-world markets are complicated, but
many of their key features can be understood using simple models. The recent
"internet bubble" is a reminder that, even in the most efficient markets, the
market price of an asset can greatly exceed its intrinsic value. The PI explores
models in which this type of behavior is explained by the heterogeneity of
investors' beliefs.
