
* 0807325
* Waves and Resonance in Photonic Structures
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/15/2008,08/07/2008
* Stephen Shipman,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2011
* USD 218,080.00

The research supported with this award will develop the mathematical foundations
of the physical phenomena that drive the functionality of photonic devices.
Specific objectives include the development of (1) models, for example in slab
structures, that allow a prediction of detailed outcomes of resonant
electromagnetic scattering behavior based on certain measurable data for the
device, (2) algorithms for optimization of certain output of devices, as the
energy transmission or density of photonic states, and (3) exploration of new
directions, in particular, waves in composite materials with negative-index
components. These problems will be approached with rigorous mathematical
methods, including perturbation theory, the theory of partial differential
equations, homogenization, and complex function theory.

The research funded by this award is inspired by topical problems and challenges
arising in the engineering and fabrication of existing and future opto-
electronic devices, including imaging devices, lasers, and antennas. Many of the
problems deal with physical phenomena that have been known for over a hundred
years but which, because of recent recognition of the potential of photonic
crystals and related structures to control the path of light, manifest
themselves in new and largely unexplored ways. Other problems are concerned with
the development of novel materials, or meta-materials, which have the capacity
to maneuver electricity and magnetism in ways that cannot be achieved using
naturally-occuring materials. The involvement of graduate students in the
research agenda is an integral part of the project. Three students will be
supported as research assistants as they are trained for careers in mathematical
research. An undergraduate student mentored by the PI is involved as well in the
investigations pertaining to meta-materials. The investigations will be
strengthened and enriched through the PI's collaboration with scientists in the
Physics and Electrical Engineering Departments at LSU, as well as with
colleagues affiliated with the Center for Computation and Technology at LSU.
