
* 0807265
* Multi-scale analysis of field behavior inside heterogeneous media for local and nonlocal continuum theories
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2008,06/20/2008
* Robert Lipton,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2012
* USD 322,529.00

Lipton DMS-0807265

The investigator develops new mathematical and computational tools for the
quantitative description of multi-scale phenomena seen in composite structures.
The effort focuses on properties related to failure initiation. Failure is often
precipitated by extreme excursions of the local fields at the level of the
microgometry. Three projects are carried out that seek to make new connections
between the excursions of local deformation, strain, and stress fields as
functions of applied boundary loads and initial conditions. The first project
examines load transfer between length scales for hierarchical structures when
the substructure is known only in a statistical sense. The goal is to provide
new variational tools for teasing out relationships that connect the local field
response to the applied long wavelength loads. The objective is to use these
relationships to discover explicit criteria on the applied loads that are
necessary for failure initiation inside composite media. The second project
seeks to understand how field fluctuations inside heterogeneous media depend on
the boundary data in the presence of residual stress. The goals of this project
are to: i) quantify the roles of boundary data, microgeometry and residual
stress on the penetration of high stress zones inside statistically defined
media and ii) understand the effect of residual stress on the decay of high
frequency boundary data inside the composite domain. Understanding these
phenomena facilitates the design of tough composite structures for use in
aviation and infrastructure. The third project investigates the dynamics of
heterogeneous media using nonlocal models for elastic interactions. The goal is
to develop a multi-scale peridynamic formulation for modeling deformation fields
inside fiber reinforced laminates. This formulation provides the mathematical
framework and associated numerical methods necessary to capture the dynamic
interactions between small and large length scales. It is anticipated that the
basic mathematical work and subsequent numerical investigations can resolve new
dynamic phenomena that contribute to the delamination and failure of fiber
reinforced laminates.

The investigator develops new mathematical and computational tools for the
quantitative description of multi-scale phenomena seen in composite structures.
Composite materials are rapidly becoming the materials of choice for structural
applications. This is due to their light weight and superior stiffness
properties. In order to accelerate their deployment an improved understanding of
their strength properties based upon their microstructural geometry is required.
This proposal focuses on properties related to failure initiation. Failure is
often precipitated by extreme excursions of the local fields at the level of the
microgometry. The proposal consists of three projects that make new connections
between the excursions of local deformation, strain, and stress fields as
functions of applied boundary loads and initial conditions. The projects are
chosen to address issues of practical interest that if solved can accelerate the
use of light weight composite materials for applications in aviation and
infrastructure.
