
* 0808131
* Idempotent Analysis and Curse-of-Dimensionality-Free Methods in Nonlinear Control
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2008,08/22/2008
* William McEneaney,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2011
* USD 190,000.00

This project has two components. The first is the development of max-plus based
curse-of-dimensionality-free algorithms for solution of nonlinear deterministic
optimal control problems, and the second is determination of fundamental
solutions for ordinary and partial differential equations with quadratic
nonlinearities. In the former, we rely on the max-plus linearity of the
semigroup associated to the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman partial differential
equation associated with the control problem. In the latter, we develop new
fundamental solutions and associated exponentially fast numerical methods for
such equations, which are obtained through an exponentiation operation on an
idempotent semiring.

This project is concerned with nonlinear optimal control, of which auto-pilots
for air and space vehicles, stock portfolio management, and manufacturing
control are examples. Mathematical models of optimal control problems typically
involve partial differential equations, whose solution must be obtained
computationally. The difficulty is that the dimension of the space over which
one must solve the equations is the dimension of the state of the system. For
example, the absolutely simplest model of the motion of an object relies on a
six-dimensional state vector, with three components describing position and
three describing velocity. Thus one would solve the partial differential
equation over six-dimensional space. Realistic models typically have say ten or
more dimensions. When one begins putting a grid over space, the number of points
needed per dimension is on the order of 100. Consequently, to solve a partial
differential equation in two dimensions one would need 10,000 grid points, and
for three dimensions, 1,000,000 grid points. For a six-dimensional problem one
requires a trillion grid points; this is the "curse-of-dimensionality" and it
has been a severe obstacle to nonlinear control for over a half-century. We are
developing methods for solution of such problems, and these methods are not
subject to the curse-of-dimensionality. There is no free lunch, and there are
other prices to be paid. Nonetheless, we are already solving problems which
would have been intractable for many decades, even if Moore's law were to
continue indefinitely. Further, this is just the beginning, and more major
advances should follow.
