
* 0818785
* Dynamics and synchronization of biochemical oscillators
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY
* 08/15/2008,08/07/2008
* Tomas Gedeon,MT,Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2012
* USD 156,770.00

This project concerns the development of mathematical models of biochemical
oscillations and the analysis required to understand their underlying behavior.
While the list of molecular systems that exhibit oscillations is growing, the
grasp of the common principles is challenged by the variety of underlying
network structures. The presence of negative feedback is the only feature shared
by all oscillatory networks; beyond this each system seems to be unique. The
goal is to formulate a common principle that is shared by all oscillatory
networks. It is expressed in terms of broad tendencies of the dynamics, rather
then the detailed structure of the supporting networks. Cells constantly
communicate with their environment and their neighbors. This mutual
communication often results in synchronization of their behavior. A theory will
be developed to explain synchronization of periodic signals in cell communities.
The synchronization of biochemical oscillators will be studied via the nearest
neighbor coupling, and the coupling with a communally produced and sensed
molecule.

A recent unprecedented explosion in our knowledge of structure and function of
genetic regulatory networks promises revolutionary changes in how human disease
is viewed and treated. Many biological processes ranging from the cell cycle to
the human 24 hour circadian rhythm are periodic in time. This periodicity is
driven by oscillations in the concentration of chemicals in individual cells. In
many cases these signals synchronize across populations and the periodic signal
can be detected on a macroscopic level. The regulatory networks that are
responsible for production and maintenance of these rhythms are being discovered
every day. While the structures of these networks vary, they often produce
similar periodic signals. This project will study the underlying broad dynamics
principles behind the oscillations, emphasizing the function of the network over
its implementation. Further, it will study synchronization of the periodic
rhythms in population of cells. The lack of synchronization in the population
can result in developmental and functional defects. This project will develop a
theory that will be able to predict collective dynamics, as well as suggest
repair mechanisms in the case of failure.
