
* 0855011
* FRG: Collaborative Research: Mathematical Modeling of Rechargeable Batteries
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2009,05/29/2009
* Martin Bazant,CA,Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2009
* USD 724,863.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project will develop a new framework for mathematical modeling of
rechargeable batteries, taking into account statistical thermodynamics,
concentrated-solution reaction rates, elasticity, crystal anisotropy, stochastic
effects, and composite microstructures. Existing engineering models simply fit
the open circuit voltage empirically and postulate dynamics by linear diffusion
of intercalated lithium, but recent experiments contradict this picture for
phase-separating materials. In contrast, the team will develop robust
mathematical models to predict the voltage and current response over the full
range of operating conditions. The basis for modeling at the single-crystal
level will be Cahn-Hilliard partial differential equations with nonlinear
boundary conditions, expressing chemical-potential dependent reaction reactions.
The goal will be to provide the first mathematical description of emerging high-
rate materials, where phase transformations occur via nonlinear intercalation
waves, coupling anisotropic diffusion and electrochemical reactions. This effort
will also raise basic mathematical questions in linear and nonlinear stability,
degenerate wave solutions, and numerical methods.

In spite of extensive engineering over the past few decades, the performance of
rechargeable batteries has improved only incrementally. Power density
(charge/discharge rate per unit mass) and cycle life must still improve
drastically for applications such as electric vehicles and renewable energy
storage, and this will require a better fundamental understanding of how ions
are inserted and extracted from porous electrodes. To meet this need, the
project creates a Focused Research Group from mathematics, chemical engineering,
and materials science to develop a new theoretical paradigm for Li-ion
batteries. The group will guide the engineering of new ultrafast Li-ion
batteries, capable of charging and discharging in seconds rather than hours,
while opening fruitful directions for applied mathematics. The group will train
graduate and undergraduate students and postdocs, organize annual workshops, and
develop a course on mathematical modeling of electrochemical energy systems.
