
* 0906160
* Analysis of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Conservation Laws and Related Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2009,08/07/2009
* Dehua Wang,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 154,939.00

This project is devoted to the study of multi-dimensional conservation laws
arising in fluid dynamics and related applications. In particular, the study
focuses on the following topics from the theory of two-dimensional compressible
isentropic Euler equations and related partial differential equations: (a) the
steady and unsteady transonic flows past an obstacle, (b) a fluid dynamic
approach for the Gauss-Codazzi equations of isometric embedding/immersion, (c)
two-dimensional solutions with special data of the Euler equations, and (d) the
two-dimensional problems arising in magnetohydrodynamics, elastodynamics, and
radiation hydrodynamics. The goals of the research are: (a) developing novel
analytic methods and numerical schemes to construct multi-dimensional solutions,
(b) exploring global structure of solutions, (c) understanding long-time
behavior, for example, evolution of singularities and stability, and (d) gaining
insights into the multi-dimensional problems, in particular identifying the
functional spaces of multi-dimensional solutions.

The project is devoted to a mathematical study of some nonlinear partial
differential equations governing the motion of compressible fluid flows and
related applications. Compressible fluids are ubiquitous in nature, the most
common examples being gases. Their study is crucial for understanding
aerodynamics, atmospheric science, astrophysics, plasma physics, etc. While the
one-dimensional problems are rather well understood, the general theory for the
multi-dimensional case is mathematically underdeveloped. The project is to
advance the mathematical understanding of the multi-dimensional equations of
compressible flows. The aim of the project is to advance knowledge in this
fundamental area of mathematics and mechanics, and to provide education and
training to students in this important field.
