
* 0906257
* AMC-SS: Problems in Mathematical Finance
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,08/26/2009
* Erhan Bayraktar,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2013
* USD 282,175.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Quantifying, managing and pricing risk is not only important for the big players
in the economy but has become increasingly important for every individual, who
are trying to reduce the risk of outliving their wealth through their retirement
funds, and the institutional investors representing them. The financial markets
provide the necessary liquidity for the rest of the economy to function well,
and not understanding the nature of the risk taken, the mispricing of the risk
and an inadequate oversight, can have dramatic impacts on the welfare of our
society, as the latest crisis demonstrated one more time. Consequently there has
been an intense research effort, which is embodied in the field of financial
mathematics, to solve the new mathematical challenges. This new field takes its
roots in stochastic analysis and also frequently interacts with other fields of
mathematics such as the theory of partial differential equations and functional
analysis. This project resolves some fundamental questions concerning the
important models of the field that remain unanswered. Additionally, new models
which take into account the discrete, asynchronous and non-stationary nature of
the observations will be developed and the mathematical and computational
challenges for new problems of interest will be resolved. Optimization problems
from a retiree's perspective (with an objective criterion) and an institutional
investor perspective (with risk constraints imposed by regulators) are to be
analyzed. Developing parsimonious models and analyzing the inverse problems for
structured credit products, which were developed to provide insurance against
(correlated) default of issuers, is another goal.

More specifically, the first part of the proposed project will settle open
problems in the theory of Optimal Stopping and related free boundary problems
that arise in Financial Mathematics. The solutions in the second part have
direct applications to many practical control problems since the nature of
observations in many applications is discrete, asynchronous and non-stationary
(i.e. the nature of the source of observation change with time). In the third
part utility maximization problems with probability of lifetime ruin, occupation
time, or other optimization and/or risk constraints will be considered. Optimal
control/stopping problems with non-linear expectations will be discussed. These
lead to new mathematical challenges which will lead to new methodological
developments. The effects of uncertain investment environment and learning on
the optimal investment strategies will also be investigated. The dramatic losses
in the credit derivative markets last year shows that appropriate modeling and
pricing of credit derivatives is a challenging open problem. In the fourth path,
the investigator will develop effective models, solve the corresponding inverse
problems and price over the counter options.
