
* 0907844
* Calculus of variations on rigid elastic structures
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,09/01/2009
* Mohammad Reza Pakzad,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2012
* USD 126,828.00

Pakzad DMS-0907844

This work is a part of a long-term project of the investigator and his
collaborators to study the elasticity properties of materials through methods of
calculus of variations. Here, the focus is on situations when the elastic bodies
exhibit some sort of rigid behavior. In this manner, the study of geometric
properties of structures, e.g. the properties of various spaces of isometries
and infinitesimal isometries of 2-dimensional surfaces, comes to the fore. This
differs from classical differential geometry in the weaker regularity of the
given surface or of the deformations. A first objective is to identify and
rigorously derive variational theories for thin shells from the 3-dimensional
theory of nonlinear elasticity through Gamma-convergence methods. The derived
theories naturally depend on the scaling regimes of the elastic energy or body
forces in terms of shell thickness. In this context, the investigator works on
problems involving various spaces of weakly differentiable isometries. In
parallel, properties of the derived theories, such as multiplicity and
regularity of solutions, or their dependence on the geometry of the shell, are
investigated. Another line of investigation is the study of non-stress-free
configurations observed e.g. in the growth of leaves. A tangentially
heterogeneous 3-dimensional nonlinear elastic model is studied and the Gamma-
limit approach is used to reduce the dimension and analyze the model.
Quantitative rigidity estimates also are studied as a strong analytical tool in
tackling these variational problems.

The investigator studies different mechanical phenomena under the unifying
umbrella of the nonlinear elasticity theory. Elastic materials exhibit
qualitatively different responses to different kinematic boundary conditions or
body forces. This fact has given rise to many interesting questions in the
mathematical theory of elasticity. The main goal of this theory is to explain
various, apparently different, phenomena in terms of some shared mathematical
principles. The variational approach to the nonlinear theory has been very
effective in dealing with these questions. It has also been helpful in
rigorously deriving models for elastic shells or plates pertaining to different
scaling regimes of the body forces. In the latter context, the strength of this
approach lies in the fact that it can predict the appropriate model together
with the response of the elastic plate for the given scaling of forces or
kinematic boundary conditions without any a priori assumptions other than the
general principles of the 3-dimensional nonlinear elasticity. Another feature of
this approach is that it can lead to new models that were not previously
considered.
