
* 0907927
* Computational Analysis of Large Dynamical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2009,05/21/2009
* Kevin Lin,AZ,University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James Curry
* 07/31/2013
* USD 249,272.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

This work consists of three projects related to the computational analysis of
dynamical systems with many degrees of freedom. The first concerns networks of
coupled biological oscillators and excitable elements driven by fluctuating
external stimuli. The goal is to elucidate, within a class of biologically-
relevant architectures, the relation between a network's structure and the
reproducibility, or reliability, of its response. The second project concerns
the emergence of macroscopic transport processes when an open system is coupled
to unequal heat reservoirs at its boundaries. This project focuses on a
prototypical class of models that includes both deterministic and stochastic
microscopic dynamics. The aim here is to gain insights into the properties of
nonequilibrium steady states in a concrete class of model systems. The third
project aims to develop efficient numerical algorithms for computing statistical
averages, e.g., Lyapunov exponents, that are frequently used to characterize
nonlinear dynamical systems. The algorithms to be developed are based on
exploiting approximate prior knowledge of the quantity to be computed, e.g.,
approximate knowledge of the system's invariant measure. This will be done via
coupling multiple simulations of the system in question, and to use such
couplings to produce unbiased estimators with potentially significantly smaller
variance. The efficacy of the algorithms in various biological and physical
settings, including the projects outlined above, will be investigated.

Dynamical systems with many strongly nonlinear degrees of freedom arise in many
scientific and technological problems. Their analysis and simulation is often
difficult because of the complexity of their interactions and their often
chaotic dynamics. The projects comprising this work seek to understand such
large dynamical systems in some specific settings, and to develop general,
efficient numerical algorithms for computing relevant statistical properties of
nonlinear dynamical systems. The expected outcome of this research may lead to
deeper insights into a range of phenomena, including the ability of biological
neural networks to encode information and the emergence of macroscopic energy
and matter transport in spatially-extended systems with complex microscopic
interactions. The algorithms to be developed are potentially applicable to other
application domains, e.g., stochastic chemical kinetics. It is expected that the
projects will lead to interdisciplinary collaborations, e.g., with biological
scientists, and to opportunities for graduate student training.
