
* 0907968
* Graphs in spectral analysis of complex systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2009,05/27/2011
* GREGORY BERKOLAIKO,TX,Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 120,034.00

The project focuses on several inter-related questions of spectral analysis of
graphs and the use of graphs in spectral analysis of more complicated system.
Most questions draw inspiration from the use of quantum graphs as models for
quantum chaology, a branch of mathematical physics concerned with the properties
of quantum systems that in the classical limit exhibit chaotic dynamics. The
project addresses several open problems on quantum graphs and related systems
that can be tackled within a 3-year time frame. Using graphs as models has
already resulted in some notable successes, in particular in studying the
universality of spectral statistics and in studying the nodal statistics of
graph eigenfunctions. There remain, however, many important unanswered questions
and some extremely promising direction that are addressed by the project. The
first is a foundation-type question of whether the spectrum of a generic graph
is simple. Further, recent results on the number of nodal domains of graph
eigenfunctions hint at the existence of a trace formula, connecting this number
with the properties of the periodic orbits of the graph. The PI studies the
dynamics of zeros on an open graph (a graph with infinite leads attached) when
the spectral parameter is varied. The aim is to quantify the events in which the
number of zeros changes. The PI also studies the correlations within the set of
long periodic orbits (longer than the graph size) using a special type of graphs
as a model. Finally the PI is looking at ways to extend the diagrammatic
summation schemes to new applied questions and also searches for algebraic
structures unifying several existing diagrammatic schemes. Possible direct
applications to questions in combinatorics and computational molecular biology
are considered.

The project addresses several questions of spectral properties of graphs where
our current understanding is insufficient. It also uses graphs as a model to
explore questions for which the experimental answer is known but mathematical
proofs are lacking and, furthermore, to explore questions for which even
experimental answers are yet unknown. Namely, the PI works on a highly promising
idea of establishing a "trace formula" for the nodal count on graphs. If
successful, this would be a break-through development, a first formula to tie
together the structure of the quantum state (microscopic structure) with the
structure of the classical closed trajectories on the graph (macroscopic
structure). So far, similar formulae were only available for the quantum
energies of a system, and any information about the fine structure of the
corresponding quantum state of the system is a great step forward. The PI also
builds on his experience in a wide variety of research areas (mathematical
physics, graphs and combinatorics) to search for the unifying algebraic
structures behind semiclassical evaluation of the quantities related to the
quantum transport. Algebraic structures can help to formalize calculations in
future questions and for different physical quantities; right now the
calculations are performed in each case starting from the first principles. The
PI uses graphs to achieve deeper mathematical understanding in questions that
are pertinent to other, more complicated systems, like quantum cavities. Thus
the questions studied in the project have direct relevance to mesoscopic physics
and engineering. Answering them holds the key to the quantum effects which
happen on the scales that are within reach of today's chip manufacturers.
Applications to combinatorics and computational molecular biology are also
considered in the project. Quantum graphs also serve as a perfect educational
medium for new researchers and students. The PI is writing an introductory text
on quantum graphs and uses easier tasks within the project as graduate and
undergraduate research projects.
