
* 0907788
* Computational study of drop deformation in systems with two immiscible liquids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2009,05/27/2009
* Yuriko Renardy,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 05/31/2013
* USD 247,880.00

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

The project is devoted to development and implementation of new algorithms for
the modeling and computational investigation of deformation and breakup of
interfaces that separate two immiscible liquids. The majority of the effort is
focused on the following four themes: (i) Differential constitutive models for
viscoelastic liquids such as the Giesekus model will be used to study drops
suspended in a matrix liquid and deformed by simple shear, cessation of shear,
and large strain jumps. (ii) The recent development of microscale apparatuses
has spawned new modeling and simulation challenges for droplet evolution in
physical devices that are as small as the droplet itself. The project will
investigate the effect of walls closing in on viscoelastic systems, for which
novel breakup scenarios have been discovered experimentally. (iii) The motion of
contact lines in liquid-liquid-solid systems will be investigated. A combination
of the phase-field formulation and the volume-of-fluid height function method
will be pursued. The former is more suited for resolving the physics of the
contact line, but too resource intensive for use in the entire flow field. A
challenge in contact line problems is how to obtain mesh independent results.
Recent work has suggested the existence of a 'master curve' which can be used to
determine a mesh dependent 'imposed' contact angle as a function of the desired
'macroscopic' contact angle. A specific computational application is
electrowetting, which is perhaps the most widely used technique for drop
actuation because of lower power consumption and because an applied voltage
moves the drop without the need for pumps and valves. In this context, moving
contact lines for the coupled system of hydrodynamic and Maxwell equations will
be studied. (iv) Magnetic drug targeting involves using a ferrofluid drop as a
drug carrier, which is guided through biological tissue to a specific location.
An important quantity for feasibility is the transit time. Direct numerical
simulations will be carried out for the motion of ferrofluid drops in viscous
media under non-uniform magnetic fields. This project involves the mentoring of
a postdoctoral research associate and the training of graduate students. Results
will be disseminated at national and international conferences on mathematics,
physics and engineering, and through journal publications. Cross-disciplinary
and international partnerships will take place with scientists who obtain
experimental data for comparison with numerical results.

The advantages in combining the desired properties of two different liquids to
produce a new blended mixture are well known. The quality of the blend is
strongly dependent on its microstructure, such as the size of the dispersed
droplets and their distribution in the final product. Therefore, it is of
practical importance to understand how a droplet evolves in the surrounding
liquid and to predict how this is influenced by the rheological properties of
each constituent fluid. This will be accomplished by performing direct numerical
simulations with in-house state-of-the-art parallelized algorithms that are
optimized for scalability and computational cost. The topics in this project
contribute to the understanding of complex multi-scale systems that arise in
recycling plastics, environmental sustainability, biomedical drug delivery, and
droplet manipulation in microfluidic devices. Intensive use of computational
infrastructures such as the TeraGrid will allow for quantitative comparison of
mathematical models with raw experimental data.
