
* 0907753
* Research on Stochastic Systems and Optimization: Analysis, Algorithms, and Computations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2009,09/13/2009
* Gang George Yin,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2013
* USD 301,435.00

Focusing on new algorithms design for stochastic optimization and investigating
basic properties of systems arising in emerging applications, this research
project encompasses the following four aspects. (1) It aims to develop
stochastic approximation algorithms with Markovian switching and examining
Markov modulated random sequences; it reveals asymptotic properties such as
limit switching diffusions, large deviations, strong invariance, and ergodicity.
(2) It presents numerical methods for solutions of regime-switching stochastic
differential equations with continuous-state-depend switching. In addition to
convergence, in the second phase, rates of convergence of the algorithms,
numerical methods for the related control problems, and their convergence rates
are to be investigated. (3) It carries out system identification with Markov
parameter and binary-valued or quantized observations. It facilitates the
understanding of tractability, complexity, and modeling capability under limited
sensor information. (4) It analyzes stability of switching jump diffusions with
state-dependent switching, and provides sufficient conditions for stability and
instability of nonlinear systems and necessary and sufficient conditions for
linearizable systems. Consisting of in-depth analysis and extensive numerical
experiments, our goals are to gain new insight, and to advance state of the art
of stochastic optimization methods and stochastic systems theory.

This research project is motivated by emerging applications arising in wireless
communication, adaptive signal processing, production planning, queueing
systems, biological, ecological, and economic systems, which are inevitably
involve uncertainty. In contrast to the usual models in the existing literature,
the systems are often influenced by random environment as well. For example,
when two or more species live in proximity and share the same basic
requirements, they usually compete for resources, food, habitat, or territory.
Traditional models use (either random or non-random) differential equations for
such scenarios. However, the systems are often subject to additional
environmental noise, which cannot be described by the traditional differential
equation setup. Other examples include insurance risk models and ion channel
(biological nanotubes) dynamics among others. The proposed project aims to take
into such random environment and other uncertain factors into consideration. It
presents novel algorithms for optimization tasks, designs numerical procedures
for solving systems of equations, carries out identification task for systems
with unknown parameters and limited sensor information, and obtains longtime
behavior of systems involving both continuous dynamics and discrete events. The
models to be examined, the numerical algorithms to be developed, and the insight
to be gained will jointly contribute to the field of stochastic optimization and
make impact on the aforementioned applications. Several graduate students are
involved in the research project. By integrating the proposed research with
teaching, the planned work contributes to the further development of stochastic
optimization and stochastic systems theory and the improvement of mathematics
education.
