
* 0908175
* Some Dynamical Problems in Fluids and Plasmas
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2009,08/04/2009
* Zhiwu Lin,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 124,965.00

This project studies dynamical structures in collisionless plasmas,
incompressible fluids, and surface water waves. Stability of a variety of
coherent structures including steady galaxies, periodic and solitary water
waves, and electromagnetic plasma equilibria will be further explored. Some of
these structures are unstable, which means that a small perturbation creates a
large disturbance. The goal is to determine which structures are stable and
which are unstable. Another focus is to understand what role these steady
structures play in the long time dynamics. The invariant structures near
unstable steady states, including unstable (stable) manifolds and heteroclinic
orbits, will be investigated. Particular emphasis will be on the inviscid limit
of these dynamical structures, which is important for understanding the
transition to turbulence and the observed structures. Nonlinear damping near
certain stable equilibria of non-dissipative fluids and plasmas will also be
studied.

The general goal of this research is to develop new and effective mathematical
methods for the analysis of dynamic behavior in fluids and plasmas. Mathematical
advances here will improve our understanding of the basic physical mechanisms,
and also can lead to better numerical methods for simulations of these complex
phenomena. Plasma is a gas composed of particles, each carrying a positive or
negative electrical charge. Most of the universe is plasma; examples include the
solar wind, the ionosphere, galactic nebulae, and comet tails. Plasmas also
arise in physics and engineering, for instance in nuclear fusion. The stability
and dynamical structures of fluids, plasmas and water waves are relevant for
such diverse applications as fusion energy research, satellite and radio
communications in space, wave motion in the atmosphere and oceans, and turbulent
behavior of fluids. The mechanisms of nonlinear damping in the non-dissipative
models are important for understanding how the large scale coherent structures
(such as galaxies) in the fluid and plasma turbulence develop and evolve.
