
* 0908267
* Applications of Variational Fracture: Enhanced Geothermal Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2009,07/23/2009
* Blaise Bourdin,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2013
* USD 314,139.00

Bourdin DMS-0908267

This award is funded under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
(Public Law 111-5).

Enhanced geothermal systems represent a virtually untapped, clean, renewable,
economically viable, and widely available source of energy. They rely on
harvesting heat by circulating water through artificially stimulated fracture
systems in deep hot dry rocks. This project provides a predictive understanding
of the mechanisms commonly used to generate these systems: pressure- and
temperature-driven fracture. The modeling and analysis are based on a
variational fracture formulation, which has been developed over the last ten
years or so and has strong mathematical and mechanical foundations. The
investigator extends this formulation to dynamic fractures and improves its
implementation on parallel supercomputers. He extends its scope by studying and
implementing two approaches to the penalization of material interpenetration
along crack lips. He develops variational models for the pressure- and
temperature-driven fracture problems, approximates them using the idea of Gamma-
convergence, implements the regularized models on parallel supercomputers, and
conducts large scale realistic validation experiments that are compared with
existing engineering literature. This project is a first step in a nascent
multi-disciplinary initiative fostered through the Center for Computation and
Technology at LSU, involving mathematicians, computational scientists, and
engineers. It supports the participation of two undergraduates and one graduate
student per year.

As the Nation strives to reduce its carbon footprint, protect its economy from
fluctuating oil prices, and increase its energy independence, Enhanced
Geothermal Systems (EGS) represent a virtually untapped, clean, renewable,
economically viable and widely available source of energy. They rely on
harvesting heat by circulating water through artificially stimulated, highly
connected fracture systems in deep hot dry rocks. A recent MIT-led
interdisciplinary assessment panel commissioned by the Department of Energy
estimates that even without major technical breakthroughs EGS could cover 20% of
the estimated US electricity needs by 2050, in an economically viable way and
with only marginal carbon emission and land use. A major technical issue
identified in this report is the creation of sufficiently connected fracture
systems. The investigator develops a predictive understanding of two mechanisms
commonly used to generate these systems: pressure- and temperature-driven
fracture, based on a mechanically faithful and mathematically sound variational
formulation of fracture developed over the last decade. This model is extended
to account for the specifics of EGS, then implemented on parallel
supercomputers. Large scale numerical simulations are performed using the
cyberinfrastructure provided by the TeraGrid, to allow EGS designers to devise
stimulation patterns maximizing the efficiency and sustainability of new
systems. This project is a first step in a nascent multi-disciplinary initiative
fostered through the Center for Computation and Technology at LSU, involving
mathematicians, computational scientists, and engineers. It supports each year
the participation of two undergraduates and one graduate student.
