
* 1007938
* Pricing, Hedging and Measuring Risk in Markets with Transaction Costs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/15/2010,09/15/2010
* Birgit Rudloff,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2014
* USD 180,000.00

The objective of this project is to solve problems of hedging and pricing in
markets where transaction costs are present. Closely related is the question on
how to measure risk in these markets. The difficulty lies in the fact that
transaction costs lead in a natural way to set-valued constructions. Set-valued
risk measures for random solvency cones are studied. An example is the
superhedging price of a multivariate claim under transaction costs. This link
makes it possible to study price bounds that are more reasonable from a
practical point of view like good deal bounds and indifference prices, which
have already proven to be a powerful pricing mechanism in frictionless
incomplete markets. Another goal is to solve a hedging problem in markets with
transaction costs when the risk of falling short a contingent claim is evaluated
by a set-valued risk measure. The above problems are solved by means of a recent
convex duality theory, particularly designed for set-valued functions.
Especially, dual problems for the main set-valued problem and its subproblems
are established and conditions for strong duality will be studied. The chosen
model itself, a set-valued optimization problem, as well as the proposed
solution methods are new in mathematical finance and beyond: The approach also
extends concepts from optimization theory.

Models for markets with transaction costs are more realistic than frictionless
models. The finance industry benefits from research in hedging, pricing and risk
managing techniques as there is a need to cope with bid-ask-spreads for traded
assets caused by transaction costs. In complex market situations it is an
advantage to have flexible tools for risk evaluation in terms of more than one
currency and corresponding risk managing techniques. Thus, this research project
leads to a better understanding of multivariate risks.
