
* 1007925
* Effects of Anomalous Diffusion on Pattern Formation and Nonlinear Dynamics in Reaction-Diffusion systems, and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/19/2010
* Bernard Matkowsky,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James Alexander
* 08/31/2011
* USD 100,000.00

The Principal Investigators and their colleagues develop a theory of pattern
formation, nonlinear dynamics and transport in systems with anomalous diffusion,
and apply it to a number of significant problems such as pattern-forming
reaction-diffusion problems and drug delivery problems. Unlike regular
diffusion, in which the dependence of the mean square displacement of a randomly
walking particle on time is linear, in anomalous diffusion the mean square
displacement behaves as a power function of time. If the exponent is less than
one the diffusion process is slower than normal diffusion and is called
subdiffusion, while if the exponent exceeds one it is faster than normal and is
called superdiffusion. A mathematical description of anomalous diffusion
involves integro-differential operators which have to be derived from
appropriate continuous time random walk models, and which are difficult to
study. Specifically, the investigators study (i) Pattern formation in growing
domains, both for normal diffusion and anomalous diffusion, focusing on the
singular perturbation case when some of the diffusion coefficients are
asymptotically small; (ii) Turing pattern selection in reaction-anomalous
diffusion systems, in particular, the selection of stripes or spots; (iii)
Localized states in reaction-superdiffusion systems that appear due to the
phenomenon of pinning of the front e.g. between the stripes and time periodic
cells; and (iv) Drug delivery problems which include the development of an
approximate analytic theory of subdiffusive problems with moving free
boundaries; the study of models of bioerodible controlled drug delivery devices
governed by subdiffusive transport of the chemicals, transdermal drug release in
the presence of an electric field i.e. accompanied by iontophoresis and others.

Controlled drug delivery has been attracting a great deal of attention in the
medical community for years as an efficient way of providing treatment for a
wide class of diseases. The common principle on which various drug delivery
devices are based is mass transfer of the given drug towards particular organs,
in which either the mass transfer rate, or place, or both are prescribed
according to certain medical protocols. Much progress has been achieved in the
design and development of various controlled drug delivery systems, and many
people routinely take medicine designed for controlled release. Mathematical
modeling of drug delivery systems is very important since it can provide a
better understanding of and a quantitative description of the physical, chemical
and biological processes governing the performance of the systems. On the basis
of this description, better controlled drug delivery systems can be designed.
There exists experimental evidence that drug diffusion toward the biological
target is not normal but rather very slow, so-called subdiffusion, as the drug
molecule has to diffuse through a very crowded environment. The investigators
study drug transport governed by subdiffusion in order to obtain a better
understanding of drug delivery processes. In addition, the investigators study
other types of problems in which subdiffusion as well as superdiffusion (which
is faster than normal diffusion) are important. This is pattern formation in
reaction-diffusion systems. Subdiffusion often occurs in biogels, porous media
and polymers while superdiffusion is typical of some processes in plasmas,
semiconductors, surface reactions and many others. Reaction-diffusion systems
are ubiquitous in many branches of science and have been attracting the
attention of scientists, engineers and mathematicians for decades. The formation
of such fascinating structures as spiral waves, spatially-regular, stationary
patterns with various symmetries (hexagonal, stripe, etc.) as well as chemical
turbulence have made reaction-diffusion systems the subject of numerous ongoing
investigations. Although many aspects of anomalous diffusion have been
extensively studied, nonlinear dynamic and pattern formation aspects have been
the subject of only a very limited number of works.
