
* 1007514
* Optimal Control Problems with Time-Inconsistency and Related Topics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 07/01/2010,11/13/2014
* Jiongmin Yong,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 07/31/2015
* USD 177,116.00

This project is to establish a general theory of continuous-time optimal control
problems (both deterministic and stochastic), for which the state equation and
the cost functional are parameterized by the initial time and/or the initial
state. For this type of problem, an optimal control/strategy, if it exists, will
also depend on the initial time and/or the initial state. Therefore, in general,
it will no longer be optimal immediately after the initial time. This feature is
referred to as the time-inconsistency. To find time-consistent solutions to the
time-inconsistent problem, the investigator will introduce a method of multi-
person hierarchical differential games. It is expected that the limiting game as
the number of players goes to infinity should lead to a time-consistent
equilibrium control/strategy to the original problem. With such a general
approach, this project will carefully investigate the following cases: (1) State
equation is a linear ordinary differential equation or stochastic differential
equation and the cost functional is convex. For such a case, the quasi-Riccati
equation technique will be applied/extended to find the time-consistent
equilibrium control; (2) State equation is a stochastic differential equation
with the cost functional containing some functions of conditional expectation of
the state. For such a case, the problem will be transformed to a controlled
forward-backward stochastic differential equation (FBSDE) parameterized by the
initial time and the initial state. Proper techniques involving maximum
principle and dynamic programming, including stochastic partial differential
equations, will be developed to solve the problem; (3) State equation is a
stochastic Volterra integral equation. For such a case, the theory of backward
stochastic Volterra integral equations (BSVIE) recently developed by the
investigator will play an essential role, and time-consistent solution will be
expected by combining the theory of BSVIEs and multi-person differential games.

In real world, as time goes by, it is common that people change their minds or
objectives in what can be described as an inconsistent way (due to, for example,
change of income and/or living standard, etc.). Similarly, various changes of
the environment (advances of technology, new limits of resources, etc.) lead
people to inconsistently modifying their ways of running business from time to
time. In both cases, one faces time-inconsistent problems, yet time-consistent
strategies are desirable. The above considerations served the main motivation of
the research in this project.

Mathematically, this project will substantially enrich the general theory of
deterministic and stochastic optimal control theory from a new aspect. It will
have impact on stochastic analysis, mathematical finance, optimal control
theory, and differential games. From the point-of-view of applications, the
theories developed in this project will provide useful insights for time-
inconsistency, nonlinear preferences, and dynamic cumulative prospect theory,
etc. Therefore, the results will provide principles for people who are handling
problems of optimal investment, asset pricing, risk management, resource (such
as oil, power, etc.) allocation, production planning, etc. The expected results
will be of interest to relevant theoretic researchers, practitioners in various
type industries, as well as a number of government agencies.
