
* 1008631
* Rapidly-convergent, high-performance PDE solvers for materials-science and engineering applications: theory, implementation and applications.
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/02/2010
* Oscar Bruno,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2014
* USD 550,000.00

Bruno DMS-1008631

The investigator develops and analyzes novel high-performance, highly accurate
numerical algorithms for computing solutions of partial differential equations
(PDE), with application to a wide range of problems in materials science,
engineering and medicine. The PDE solvers apply to problems involving: (i)
Various physical observables (elastic and electromagnetic fields, linear and
nonlinear acoustic fields, thermal fields, fluid-flow) within and around (ii)
Complex structures (photonic or electronic devices, singular geometries with
corners, edges or cracks, anatomic geometries, air, water or land vehicles built
from metals or modern composite materials), and containing (iii) Fluids or solid
materials -- including composite elastic media, dielectrics, perfect and lossy
conductors, compressible and incompressible fluids, as well as media leading to
dispersion and frequency-dependent absorption. The computational methodology
underlying the proposed work is based on a class of numerical solvers and
surface-representation and meshing methodologies developed in recent years under
the direction of the investigator. These are Fourier-based integral and
differential solvers that can produce solutions with high-order accuracy,
unconditional stability, and no numerical dispersion, for realistic engineering
geometries including features such as full aircraft, complex anatomic
configurations for medical applications, complex photonic or electronic devices,
etc. In practice, these types of solvers have demonstrated up to one-thousand
times faster numerics, for a given accuracy, than some of the most competitive
solvers otherwise available: the new methods can enable solution of previously
intractable problems.

The project impacts upon a variety of areas of societal interest, including
medicine (diagnostic and therapeutic ultrasound with application to, e.g., tumor
detection, kidney stone destruction, and targeted drug delivery), electrical
engineering (optics, electronics), military and civilian remote sensing and
communications (radar, sonar, stealth, antennas), design of efficient air, water
or land vehicles, etc. The new algorithms, which in a number of challenging case
studies have demonstrated up to one-thousand times faster numerics than previous
approaches, enable solution of previously intractable problems in areas such as
those mentioned above. The project also trains graduate and undergraduate
students and postdoctoral associates. Undergraduate students, for example, carry
out summer-long research projects in an integrative environment involving
graduate students and postdocs as well as the investigator and some of the
industrial and lab researchers who propose specific engineering problems.
