
* 1008183
* Applications of frames to problems in mathematics and engineering
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, SIGNAL PROCESSING
* 09/15/2010,08/24/2011
* Peter Casazza,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 368,999.00

Casazza DMS-1008183

The investigator works on several fundamental questions concerning applications
of Hilbert space frames. Much of the work concerns "fusion frames," which
provide a natural framework for performing hierarchical data processing. Recent
advances in hardware technology have enabled the economic production and
deployment of a large number of low-cost components, which in combination enable
reliable and efficient operation. Across many disciplines there is a fundamental
shift from centralized information processing to distributed or network-wide
information processing. Data communication is shifting from point-to-point
communication to packet transport over wide area networks where network
management is distributed and the reliability of individual links is less
critical. Radar imaging is moving away from single platforms to multiple
platforms that cooperate to achieve better performance. Wireless sensor networks
are emerging as a new technology that potentially enables cost-effective and
reliable surveillance. All these applications involve a large number of data
streams, which need to be integrated at a central processor. Fusion frames are a
recent development designed precisely for these applications. The investigator
develops concrete constructions of fusion frames and the algorithms needed for
their implementation. Working directly with engineers guarantees that advances
here have Immediate implementation. The techniques are also applied to produce
Grassmannian frames for quantum physics -- especially Quantum information
theory, quantum state tomography, and quantum cryptography. Finally, frame
theory has shown that the 1959 Kadison-Singer Problem is equivalent to
fundamental unsolved problems in a dozen areas of research in pure mathematics,
applied mathematics, and engineering. This project develops the needed frames
for resolving what is now one of the most significant open problems in
mathematics.

We have now entered a new era where the Defense Department, Homeland Security,
and industry must process amounts of data that overwhelm even current computer
capacities. Especially for defense, it is critical to be able to process these
data in real time, which is becoming more and more difficult. The problems
caused by this "information overload" are escalating rapidly every year and need
to be addressed immediately and quickly. Therefore, it is of vital national
interest to automate as much of the information fusion process as possible. But
at this time, in the area of information fusion the fundamental mathematics
necessary for such an automated system is far behind the current needs. The
investigator and his students develop the mathematics necessary for tackling
these critical needs. This includes methods for storing and processing
information in parallel -- i.e. dividing it into multiple subsystems for simpler
processing and then "fusing" the results to get the desired outcomes. It also
includes developing distributed sensing networks that can keep an area under
surveillance while taking into account severe physical limitations of the
systems such as low communication bandwidth, limited signal processing power,
limited battery life, or the topography of the surveillance area. Such an
automated system must be able to combine a large number of sources of quite
disparate information while leaving almost no room for error. The investigator
and his students address these needs as well as try to anticipate the next level
of difficulties that will arise.
