
* 1008852
* Quantifying long time statistical properties of a few fluid models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,08/30/2010
* Xiaoming Wang,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2014
* USD 271,525.00

Wang DMS-1008852

The principal investigator and colleagues study the issue of quantifying the
long-time statistical properties of a few prototype fluid systems via long-time
statistical properties of suitable discrete dynamical systems related to
temporal and/or spatial approximations. The physical problems considered are the
Rayleigh-Benard convection at large Prandtl number and/or small Ekman number
regime, and a few related simplified models. In particular, the methodology
developed is applied to numerically quantify an important physical long-time
statistical quantity, the averaged heat transport, in a few convection models.
The key issue here is the design, analysis and implementation of schemes that
are efficient and convergent (in the sense that the stationary statistical
properties of the discrete system converge to those of the underlying system).
Approximating long-time behavior of large complex systems is a well-known
challenge because small errors could accumulate and amplify. Additional
difficulties related to multiple scales (induced by large Prandtl number, small
Ekman number, large Rayleigh number), and generalised dynamical system (such as
the 3D Boussinesq system) are also addressed. Suitable random perturbations of
the fluid systems are considered in order to ensure convergence to the
physically relevant long-time behaviour.

Quantifying long-time statistical properties is of great importance in
applications. Besides well-known applications in classical turbulence theory, it
is also extremely important in climate studies because the predicted climate is
the long-time statistical behaviour of the underlying climate model. The models
to be investigated, although far from practical climate models, share several
important mechanisms that are crucial to realistic climate models, such as
energy-preserving nonlinear advection, rotation, convection, dissipation/damping
and forcing. A clearer understanding of long-time statistical behavior in this
setting helps us better understand many geophysical fluid phenomena, and
provides guidelines for accurate numerical study of climate changes. The project
also provides abundant opportunities for graduate students, including student
from underrepresented group, to participate in the modeling, analysis, and
computation of many physically motivated problems.
