
* 1008101
* Numerical Inversion of the Laplace Transform and its Applications to Evolution Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,08/11/2014
* Patricio Jara,TN,Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 02/28/2015
* USD 100,068.00

Jara DMS-1008101

The investigator studies the theory and applications of the numerical inversion
of the vector-valued Laplace transform. The objectives are (i) to extend the
investigator's results for the numerical inversion of the Laplace transform
beyond the noise-free case, (ii) to develop new approximation methods for the
numerical inversion of the vector-valued Laplace transform, (iii) to show that
the inversion of the Laplace transform together with the theory of finite
elements provide a solid foundation for the numerical approximation of solutions
of evolution equations of convolution type, (iv) to apply the approximation
methods to problems arising from transport in multiscale porous materials, and
(v) to provide research experience for undergraduate students. The main idea is
that approximation methods for the shift operator semigroup on the space of
continuous and exponentially bounded functions with values in a general Banach
space translates into approximation methods for the inversion of the Laplace
transform of these functions.

Evolution processes arise in many scientific problems, such as fluid flows,
image processing, mechanical systems, relativity, mathematical finance, and
mathematical biology. These processes are described by the solutions of certain
integro-partial differential equations. However, in most of these cases, the
solutions cannot be calculated explicitly because either they cannot be found or
they are not obtained in a plain algebraic form. Thus, in order to obtain an
accurate description of the evolution process, one needs to develop accurate
approximations to the solutions of these equations. The scalable methods
recently developed by the investigator and his collaborators concerning the
Laplace transform provide accurate approximations to solutions of integro-
partial differential equations of convolution type. The principal investigator
further develops and implements new approximation methods, and uses these
methods for the accurate description of different evolution processes.
Undergraduate research experience is provided to students by using the different
methods to approximate the solutions of problems related to transport in
multiscale porous materials, like oil and gas exploration, or controlling
underground sources of pollution such as high-level radioactive waste and
geologically stored carbon dioxide.
