
* 1008397
* Nonlinear Transport, Degenerate Diffusion, Critical Regularity and Self-Organized Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,08/30/2013
* Eitan Tadmor,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2016
* USD 424,211.00

The project is devoted to the following five aspects of nonlinear time-dependent
problems. (i) Critical regularity in Eulerian dynamics: we will use spectral
dynamics to investigate a new framework for vanishing viscosity solutions of the
pressure-less Euler equations, for global regularity of the Euler-Poisson
equations subject to sub-critical initial data, and the long-time regularity of
the shallow-water driven by irrotational forcing. (ii) Entropy stability and
well-balanced shallow-water schemes: we will develop, analyze and implement a
new class of well-balanced schemes for the shallow-water equations. (iii) Self-
organized dynamics: we will study the long-time behavior of models driven by
velocity-alignment and address two interrelated issues. When does flocking occur
with local interactions, depending on the connectivity of the underlying graph,
and how is it realized in hydrodynamic models of flocking? We will also explore
new models of self-organized dynamics in which inter-particle communication is
scaled by their relative distance. (iv) Regularizing effects in quasi-linear
transport-diffusion equations: we will continue our ongoing research on
regularizing effects using velocity averaging in the concrete setups of
nonlinear scalar conservation laws and certain systems which admit an entropic
kinetic formulation. (v) Integro-differential equations for multi-scale
decomposition of images: we will study the localization properties of new multi-
scale integro-differential equations for image de-noising and de-blurring.

The ultimate goal of this project is to construct, analyze and simulate time-
dependent problems which are governed by nonlinear Partial Differential
Equations (PDEs) and develop related novel computational schemes. The underlying
equations involve nonlinear transport models, self-organized dynamics, and
possibly different small scale decompositions into particle dynamics, kinetic
distributions, or intensity of pixels; they arise in diverse applications,
including fluid dynamics, collective behavioral sciences, and image processing
and de-noising. We will focus on the unifying mathematical content of the
equations, using a synergy of modern analytical tools and novel computational
algorithms, to study the persistence of global features in these equations. The
project provides a great educational experience through research for the
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows involved.
