
* 1008900
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and processing of multidimensional data using sparse directional multiscale representations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2010,08/08/2012
* Demetrio Labate,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 09/30/2014
* USD 340,696.00

Labate, DMS-1008900 Guo, DMS-1008907

Following the spectacular success of wavelets in signal and image processing,
several attempts have been made to adapt their optimal efficiency from the one-
to the multi-dimensional setting. In fact, in spite of their remarkable
properties, wavelets are not very efficient in capturing the intrinsic geometry
of multidimensional phenomena. In recent years, directional multiscale methods
such as the shearlet representation, introduced by the investigators and their
collaborators, have emerged as the most effective extension of the wavelet
framework to the multidimensional setting. Indeed, the shearlet representation
encompasses the mathematical theory of affine systems and, to date, is the only
method able to combine optimal sparsity and fast transforms through the power of
multiresolution analysis. The proposed research focuses on applications of the
shearlet approach to a number of challenging problems of analysis and processing
of multidimensional data. First, the shearlet representation is applied to
provide a precise geometric characterization of the discontinuities of
multivariate functions and distributions. Combining techniques from harmonic
analysis and differential geometry, this provides the groundwork for the
development of improved algorithms for edge detection and feature extraction.
Second, the shearlet framework is applied to develop a new generation of methods
for the regularized inversion of ill-posed problems. Building on the ability of
shearlets to provide sparse representations of Fourier integral operators,
efficient decompositions for the Radon and Ray transforms are computed. These
are used to develop algorithms for the Radon inversion from local and incomplete
data and for image deconvolution. Third, a novel mathematical and computational
approach for viewpoint-invariant texture retrieval is introduced. This is
achieved by jointly designing a framework for feature extraction and similarity
measurement in an appropriate statistical setting, and relies on the unique
ability of shearlets to capture local geometric information.

Over the past several years, there has been a continuously increasing pressure
to handle more efficiently the ever larger and higher dimensional data sets
generated from a wide range applications such as electronic surveillance, remote
sensing, and medical imaging. The challenge is to rapidly, accurately and
reliably extract the relevant information, so that it can be efficiently
processed, transmitted and stored. The project focuses on the applications of
the shearlet representation -- a method introduced by the investigators and
their collaborators that provides a unique combination of optimal sparsity and
computational efficiency, within an innovative mathematical and computational
framework. The notion of optimal sparsity, in particular, implies that this
approach has the ability to very effectively and reliably identify the most
relevant features contained in the data. Specifically, this project leads to
advanced techniques for edge detection, feature extraction, and texture
retrieval from medical, industrial and satellite imagery. This results in
innovative and improved computational algorithms for the analysis and processing
of high-dimensional data and facilitates technological advances in sensitive
applications such as remote sensing, medical diagnostics, data classification
and electronic surveillance.
