
* 1008221
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Optimal Control of Multi-Input Mathematical Models for Tumor Dynamics under Combination Therapies
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Urszula Ledzewicz,IL,Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 06/30/2014
* USD 189,733.00

One of the directions actively pursued in current cancer research is to combine
traditional treatments like chemotherapy and radiotherapy with novel approaches
such as anti-angiogenic treatment or immunotherapy in the hope of achieving
synergistic effects. The underlying biological mechanisms of these novel
approaches are not fully understood and several important questions including
how to best schedule these therapies over time still need to be answered. The
scheduling aspect becomes even more difficult and complex when several
therapeutic agents are involved. For these combination therapies no medical
guidelines are in place yet and mathematical modeling and analysis are able to
give valuable insights into establishing robust and effective treatment
protocols. Mathematical models for combination therapies are quite complex and,
due to the various therapies pursued, are described by multi-input control
systems. In this project, geometric methods from modern optimal control will be
applied and developed as needed to analyze these systems when chemotherapy or
radiotherapy are combined with anti-angiogenic treatments. Starting with
simplified, but biologically validated models, increasingly more realistic
medical features such as the pharmacokinetics of the agents and tumor immune
system interactions will be incorporated. For these models unconventional
mathematical structures arise that have not been analyzed in the context of
biomedical applications before and are worthwhile to be investigated on their
own merit. Our analysis employs tools that go well beyond the application of
standard necessary conditions for optimality and aims at a full synthesis of
optimal controls, i.e., a complete solution to the problem for arbitrary initial
data. These solutions will set theoretical benchmarks to which other - simpler
and practically realizable - protocols can be compared. The ultimate goal is to
design robust and effective realizable protocols for combination therapies. Due
to its applied and interdisciplinary character, the project contains a
substantial educational component of interest to students from various fields
including Mathematics, Biology and Engineering. Existing efforts to attract
women and minorities to the project will be continued.
