
* 1008861
* Collaborative Research: Analysis of incompressible high Reynolds number flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, International Research Collab
* 07/01/2010,06/25/2010
* Michael Jolly,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2014
* USD 21,560.00

The purpose of this project is to conduct international collaborative research,
between two teams of scientists from the USA and Brazil, in the mathematical
analysis and modeling of turbulent incompressible fluids. The topics to be
investigated are: small viscosity regime of second grade fluids; uniqueness of
weak solutions for certain linear perturbations of the two-dimensional Euler
equations; the vanishing viscosity limit of the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes
equations with helical symmetry; the search for hypotheses on the structure of
invariant measures or stationary statistical solutions of the two and three-
dimensional Navier-Stokes equations with anomalous dissipation; the search for
energy cascade for flows in domains with physical boundaries; two-dimensional
cascades with large gap bimodal forcing. Turbulence is a common phenomenon in
fluid motion, in which macroscopic quantities (velocity, pressure, temperatures,
etc.) no longer have a deterministic relation with global parameters of the
flow. Direct numerical simulations of turbulent flows at large Reynolds numbers,
that occur in practical applications, such as in geophysical modeling and mixing
in industrial processes, are out of reach even for the state-of-the-art computer
power. Therefore, there is an urgent need to pursue this challenging problem
analytically, by developing rigorous mathematical and statistical tools to
investigate it, and to test these tools computationally.

While turbulence is an everyday occurrence, our understanding is still lacking
in many aspects. Quantifying the effect of small scales on the dynamics of large
scales is fundamental in modern multiscale science. The goal of the project is
to enable a predictive analytical study of turbulent flows. This study will
impact wide-ranging applications, from geophysical modeling, such as dispersion
of pollutants in the ocean, to biological and industrial modeling, such as
design of polymeric materials. The project will consolidate the well-established
collaborative efforts of the principal investigators with their Brazilian
counterparts, and may lead to new collaboration, especially among the junior
research personnel. International collaboration among scientists is a key to
economic competitiveness in global markets. Four US and three Brazilian academic
institutions are involved in the project. The international dimension of the
project is further emphasized through two planned workshops. Training and
supervision of at least six Ph.D. students and postdoctoral fellows is also
achieved through planned summer schools and scientific workshops. Students and
postdoctoral fellows from the US will travel to Brazil to participate in the
workshops and the summer schools and interact with the US and Brazilian
researchers.

This project is co-funded with the Americas Program of the Office of
International Science and Engineering.
