
* 1008602
* Quasiconvex Functions and Nonlinear PDE's
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/15/2010,09/15/2010
* Robert Jensen,IL,Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Ann Horn
* 08/31/2014
* USD 249,996.00

This project is an in depth analysis of quasiconvex functions (a.k.a. level set
convex functions), including nonsmooth quasiconvex functions. It focuses on
their connections with second order, fully nonlinear partial differential
equations, and the application of these connections to diverse problems such as
worst case design, stochastic targeting, motion by curvature, and optimal
transport. The primary idea is to use the theory of viscosity solutions of
partial differential equations to characterize when a function has convex level
sets. From this point several branches of inquiry will be followed. For example,
the characterization of quasiconvex functions through a nonlinear partial
differential equation suggests a PDE construction of the quasiconvex envelope of
a given function ? analogous to the well known PDE construction of the convex
envelope of a given function. Another possible construction is the quasiconvex-
quasiconcave envelope of a function of several variables (which would have
significant application in continuous game theory). Interestingly, there is a
very strong connection between the characterization of quasiconvex functions
using partial differential equations and the characterization of surfaces
evolving by the motion of the boundary by mean curvature. This project could
yield a more stable type of approximate motion by curvature. This project will
also study of the connection between the quasiconvex characterizing differential
equation, stochastic target problems, and deterministic differential tug-of-war
games. Finally, quasiconvex functions arise naturally in the calculus of
variations with a worst case cost. This project will consider several of
problems of this type including an extension to optimal transport theory with
worst case cost of transfer, and variational problems with various constraints.

Quasiconvexity (a.k.a. level set convexity) is an important generalization of
convexity. Quasiconvex functions have been widely used for decades in economics
and management science, where they arise naturally as preference/objective
functions. A very important application and extension was found in optimal
control and differential games with a worst case cost. Significant applications
to structural engineering, materials science, image processing, semiconductor
design, aircraft landing strategies, and chemotherapy dosing for carcinoma
management all fall in the category of worst case design and involve functions
of the type considered in this project. Expansion of a region in space governed
by the physics at the boundary such as the edge of conflagration plasma (e.g.,
the front of a forest fire) is determined by equations which are derived and
studied in this project. The connection with stochastic target problems is an
important approach to control problems in which one seeks to reach an objective
with much more certainty than simply the average objective value. Such problems
have applications ranging from evolutionary biology to image reconstruction. In
classical optimal transport one tries to minimize the average cost of
transporting one distribution of particles to another while maintaining the
total mass. This project will study minimizing the maximum cost of
transportation of the particles. Such problems have applications in the physics
of the rearrangement of molecules, the construction of public transportation
networks, and in the biochemistry of how malignant tumors metastasize.
