
* 1009575
* Nonequilibrium Statistical Physics Description of Pulse-Coupled Dynamics on Complex Network Topologies
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,08/26/2012
* David Cai,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2014
* USD 299,977.00

The last few decades of accumulated experimental and theoretical evidence
indicate that, in order to understand network dynamics arising from the study of
complex information processing systems, such as the brain, one must first
understand dynamical consequences of the pulse-coupled interactions between and
amongst nodes. The dynamics of each individual node, such as a neuron, are
highly nonlinear, the underlying network topology is anything but homogeneous,
and the most relevant network phenomena exhibit structural features over a
multitude of spatiotemporal scales. To advance the understanding of pulsed-
coupled networks arising from the study of complex information-processing
systems, it is critical to develop a general conceptual framework capable of
formulating coarse-grained, statistical descriptions of large-scale pulse-
coupled network dynamics over complex network topologies. Current mathematical
tools, such as techniques from statistical mechanics, cannot be readily applied
to these pulsed-coupled systems, since most of the assumptions upon which these
techniques are based (e.g., stationarity, homogeneity of the interaction
network, etc.) simply do not hold. The aim of the proposed research is to take a
first step towards tackling these conceptual issues via: (i) The systematic
extension of kinetic theory formulations of uncorrelated homogeneous pulsed-
coupled network dynamics to incorporate pairwise correlations between pulse-
coupled nodes within the network, as well as fluctuations in network activity
that arise as a consequence of network topology (ii) The search for an
appropriate definition of entropy for pulse-coupled network systems that will
serve as a unifying principle to both (a) extend the maximum entropy principle
that has been successful in simplifying the dynamics associated with certain
idealized pulsed-coupled network systems, and (b) characterize the nature of
global fluctuations of network dynamics over realistic network topology.

A development of a theoretical framework of organizing principles that can
capture statistical behaviors of network dynamics over complex topologies is
potentially transformative in understanding of general information transmission
and processing over general network topologies. A successful implementation of
theoretical methodologies proposed here will have strong impact on how we model
large-scale, pulse-coupled network dynamics, in particular, neuronal network
dynamics, and on how we theoretically investigate brain dynamics from a new
coarse-grained perspective. This would be a first step towards undertaking the
scientific challenge of addressing how structural connectivity underlies
functional and effective connectivity in the brain. It is important to emphasize
that the general theoretical issues addressed in this proposal will have
ramifications in assisting the analysis and understanding of many other dynamics
on complicated networks, such as chemical reaction cascades, genetic networks,
traffic networks etc, in particular to systems neuroscience. The proposed work
will provide postdocs and graduate students with exciting research projects in
applied mathematics as well as in theoretical problems arising from systems
neuroscience.
