
* 1009517
* Collaborative Research RUI: Dynamics of Soliton Interactions and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,06/18/2010
* A. David Trubatch,NJ,Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2015
* USD 142,168.00

This research project combines analytical and numerical techniques to
investigate the solutions and soliton interactions for vector nonlinear
Schrodinger systems (both continuous and discrete), the short-pulse equation and
coupled Maxwell-Bloch equations. The nonlinear Schrodinger equation (NLS) and
its vector generalization are universal asymptotic models for quasi-
monochromatic waves in nonlinear media. Both NLS and vector NLS are completely
integrable and can therefore be solved by the Inverse Scattering Transform (IST)
method. However, this method for vector NLS in the normal dispersion regime
(defocusing regime) is not yet fully developed. Hence, the complete development
of this method and description of the soliton interactions is a principal part
of the project. The coupled Maxwell-Bloch system, which arises as a model in
atomic physics, laser physics and optics, will also be investigated by a
suitable adaptation of the IST method. Further, the IST method will be extended
to the recently derived short-pulse equation, which provides a more appropriate
model than the quasi-monochromatic approximation. Theoretical development of the
IST for these systems and elucidation of the soliton dynamics will be guided by
numerical simulation and direct methods for constructing special solutions.

Because of their physical applicability in such diverse fields as water waves,
magnetic spin waves, optical fibers, waveguides and Bose-Einstein condensates,
NLS and other systems investigated in this project are of wide scientific
relevance. Dynamics of their solitary wave (soliton) solutions is also of keen
interest from the point of view of applications, as interaction of vector
solitons sets forth the experimental foundations for designing controlled logic
gates and all-optical computers, of the phenomenon of self-induced transparency,
as well as a mechanism for polarization switching of light in multi-level media.
The equations investigated in this project are not only models for phenomena at
the frontier of physical science, but also have intrinsic mathematical value.
The development of a modern IST for these equations will advance the fundamental
understanding of complex physical phenomena in a unified mathematical framework
and provide concrete information about the behavior of such systems. The
collaborative nature of the research program, both between the principal
investigators and with colleagues at nearby institutions, will serve to
accelerate the development of an interconnected research community accessible to
students at Montclair State and at University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
(both undergraduate institutions). Significantly, the student population at both
institutions includes a substantial number of members of underrepresented groups
and the collaboration leverages existing programs directed to these students
