
* 1009951
* Nonlinear Approximations for Inverse Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,06/25/2010
* Gregory Beylkin,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2013
* USD 301,491.00

This project aims to develop a new class of methods for solving inverse problems
in their different modalities, for example to develop new methods for non-
destructive evaluation, such as X-ray Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI), Synthetic Aperture Radar, Diffraction Tomography, Electron Microscopy,
and many others. In these problems, data may be collected directly in the
Fourier domain (as in MRI), or may be transformed into the Fourier domain for
the purpose of image formation (as in X-ray Tomography or Electron Microscopy).
In all cases, the image resolution is controlled by the largest wave-number
present in the measured data. In order to minimize the distortion due to Gibbs
phenomenon, current imaging methods either collect data in a large enough area
of the Fourier domain or window the data to force an artificial decay. It can be
shown that current methods require collecting more data than necessary or
negatively impact the resolution near spatial singularities of recovered
functions of interest. These singularities are, typically, the most informative
part of the final image. In contrast, this proposal relies on nonlinear, near
optimal approximation by exponentials to extrapolate the available Fourier data,
also yielding a near optimal rational representation in space. This approach not
only improves the resolution near singularities and achieves a near optimal
performance, but also detects the level of noise in data and provides a
practical technique for signal/noise separation. These new algorithms already
yield a significant improvement over existing techniques in one-dimensional
problems and this project intends to extend the approach to problems in two or
three dimensions. Such an extension is highly nontrivial since the mathematical
tools used in one dimension are only of limited use.

Inverse problems arise in a wide variety of scientific and engineering
disciplines as a way to analyze biological or inorganic specimens, analyze
manufactured devices for defects, perform remote sensing or geophysical
exploration among many other applications. In all of these modalities, from
processing multiple radar data to biomedical imaging such as MRI, the collected
data is processed by algorithms implementing the solution of an inverse problem
based on a specific mathematical model. The investigators propose a method of
developing and algorithmically implementing new mathematical models applicable
to many, if not all, of these problems. The reason for such wide applicability
is the fact that in the new mathematical models the functions of interest are
represented with a near optimal number of parameters, thus significantly
improving the recovery of information from the measured data. The mathematical
and practical significance of this project as well as its challenge lies in
extending the methods developed by investigators in one dimension to multiple
dimensions. Since techniques of non-destructive evaluation play a vital role in
natural sciences, engineering, medical diagnostics as well as such visible
applications as airport security, we expect a wide impact of these new
mathematical models based on nonlinear approximations. The numerical methods
developed within this project should provide scientists with computational tools
to efficiently solve problems beyond the capabilities of many of today's
algorithms.
