
* 1009502
* Dynamics and Ground States in Quantum Statistical Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,08/16/2010
* Bruno Nachtergaele,CA,University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 365,000.00

This award supports mathematical research on problems in equilibrium and non-
equilibrium quantum statistical mechanics with the primary focus on the dynamics
of quantum lattice models, which include quantum spin systems and quantum
oscillator lattice systems. In condensed matter physics these types of models
are commonly used to describe three types of degrees of freedom (separately or
in combination): atomic oscillations in a crystal lattice, spin magnetic
moments, and itinerant electrons. The same type of system, defined on a graph,
is currently studied extensively in the theory of quantum information and
computation. In that context, the degrees of freedom are qubits (or, more
generally, qudits), which are the basic entities carrying quantum information,
on which quantum algorithms are implemented as a sequence of unitary
transformations. The project focuses on studying the dynamics (Hamiltonian or
irreversible) of these systems and will lead to fundamental results such as
propagation estimates of Lieb-Robinson type for new classes of systems. In the
course of this project the investigator and his graduate students will also
analyze the low-lying spectrum of quantum lattice models and investigate
important properties such as the behavior of the spectral gap above the ground
state and the ordering of the low-lying excitations in Heisenberg-type models.
The mathematical results will furthermore be applied to the analysis of
transfer-matrix-like objects that appear in other contexts, such as techniques
of network analysis currently employed in biological applications.

This is fundamental research on a range of mathematical models for the dynamics
of systems that involve a large number of interacting components. In this
project, the main focus is on systems in which these components are microscopic
and described by quantum mechanics. The investigator will work with graduate
students, who in the process of their research will acquire a working knowledge
of the state of the art in analytic and algebraic methods for quantum lattice
systems. As fundamental research and technology advances, the results and
techniques developed in this project are expected to have an impact in
technological applications such as quantum information processing, quantum
cryptography, quantum computing, and the modeling of electronic or spintronic
devices that exploit the quantum properties of novel materials. Some of the
mathematical techniques developed for this project will also be useful in the
analysis of structured networks such as arise, for example, in systems biology.
