
* 1009105
* Numerical methods and analysis for interfacial fluid flow with soluble surfactant
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2010,08/17/2012
* Michael Siegel,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2014
* USD 330,008.00

This project investigates fundamental problems that are motivated by
applications to surfactant-mediated flow. The theoretical approach has the
potential to be adapted to a wider variety of practical situations that are
similar from a mathematical point of view. Using this approach, the project
investigators have recently begun the development of a fast and accurate hybrid
numerical method to study the effects of solubility of surfactant on the two-
phase flow of immiscible fluids in the practically important but theoretically
challenging limit of large Peclet number or slow diffusion. Surfactants
influence the dynamics of fluid mixtures by altering the surface tension at
interfaces between immiscible fluids and are energetically favored to remain on
an interface. However, in many examples the slow diffusional mobility of a
surfactant that is soluble in the bulk flow near to but not on an interface can
exert an important influence on the interface dynamics. The large bulk Peclet
number limit of this investigation introduces a separation of spatial scales
that presents a substantial challenge for traditional numerical methods. The
conceptual underpinning of the approach taken here combines analytical, singular
perturbation techniques in the small diffusion limit with fast and accurate
numerical methods for two-phase interfacial flow. An important benefit of this
approach is that highly accurate surface-based methods, such as the boundary
integral or boundary element method, can be adapted to the study of surfactant
solubility. Without the treatment that is under development by the investigators
these methods do not apply.

The project is expected to develop innovative theoretical models and numerical
methods for the analysis and simulation of surfactant-mediated drop breakup and
tip-streaming with soluble surfactant. It will develop new, fast, efficient and
accurate numerical methods that are expected to be useful to scientists and
engineers studying emulsion formation and stability as well as emerging
microfluidic applications that range from chemical processing techniques to
advanced medical applications. An additional and important impact of the project
is the education and training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. The
interdisciplinary training they receive on this project will be valuable
preparation for a range of careers in mathematics and science.
