
* 1009954
* Mathematics of Network Coding
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,09/11/2010
* Kenneth Zeger,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 08/31/2013
* USD 102,977.00

Zeger DMS-1009954

The project develops foundations for the recently booming applied mathematics
field of network coding. Network coding offers the promise of improved
performance over traditional network routing techniques used in practical
engineering applications. Emphasis is placed on the fundamental theory of
communication in networks that allow coding in addition to routing. Applications
include improved throughput in packet networks and power savings in wireless ad
hoc networks. The work exploits the diverse mathematical, engineering, and
computer science background from the investigator's previous work and involves
mathematical analysis, algorithm design, and computer simulation. The main topic
areas investigated are: the role of alphabet size and error correcting codes in
network coding, techniques for computing or bounding network capacities,
determining the scalar or vector solvability of networks, theoretically
achievable rates under a limitation of the number of network nodes that can
perform coding, and bi-directional networks.

This project has applications to practical engineering problems involving
packet switched networks, such as sensor networks, military battlefield
networks, and local area networks. The most prominent example is the Internet,
which is used on a daily basis by billions of people for sending email,
downloading images and video, transferring data, and many other applications.
This project studies the theoretical foundations of how information can be sent
across such networks using mathematical combinations of data rather than just
routing of data. Specifically, the project studies the fundamental limits of
data transmission, the best methods to transmit such data, and variations on the
types of networks used. The project includes graduate student participation as
well as some undergraduate and high school student contributions, with emphasis
on the interconnection between mathematics, engineering, and computer science.
