
* 1009461
* Floquet bundles and inertial manifolds for convection-dominated parabolic PDEs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2010,07/14/2010
* Jesenko Vukadinovic,NY,CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 06/30/2014
* USD 119,861.00

The project is devoted to the study of convection-dominated linear and nonlinear
parabolic PDEs that arise in various contexts in mathematical physics. It is
aimed at answering some outstanding questions concerning their asymptotic
behavior and a better understanding of the mechanisms behind the pattern
formation associated with these equations. In particular, one of the central
goals is to provide rigorous justifications for both the pattern formation
observed in fluid mixing--the so-called 'strange' eigenmodes, as well as for the
existence of kinematic dynamos. The investigator takes two distinct approaches;
the first one is to extend the existing theory of principal Floquet bundles and
exponential separation to a class of non-autonomous linear equations featuring
advection by velocity fields with periodic and general time-dependence and
subject to more physical boundary conditions. The second more ambitious approach
is via non-autonomous inertial manifolds, which provide an avenue for a complete
decomposition in Floquet bundles. While the theory of attractors is now very
well developed, the theory of inertial manifolds is lagging in many respects.
The question of existence of inertial manifolds for many physically relevant
parabolic PDEs, including the Navier-Stokes equations, for which most of the
theory was originally developed, is still open. The PI investigates the
possibility of extending the transformation method, which he recently developed
for a class of viscous Burgers equations and a class of nonlinear Fokker-Planck
equation to a larger class of convection-dominated parabolic equations that fail
to satisfy the spectral-gap condition. The transformation method exploits deeper
and more subtle interplay between the diffusive and convective terms, which has
been largely ignored in other approaches so far.

The research project lies at the crossroads of several different fields of
mathematical physics, ranging from global climate and ocean dynamics, fluid
mixing and turbulence to flame propagation and polymer dynamics. It employs
methods from the theory of partial differential equations and the theory of
infinite and finite-dimensional dynamical systems. Many interesting and
important physical phenomena are modeled by convection-dominated parabolic
partial differential equations which feature both a diffusive term that has an
entropic effect and leads to irreversible loss of structure, as well as
convective terms that lead to more organized states. These two mechanisms are
not separate, but act rather in unison, leading to pattern formations, whose
understanding is one of the central problems of mathematical physics. This
project is aimed at identifying and exploiting some subtle mechanisms of the
interplay between diffusion and advection in order to mathematically rigorously
explain the formation and properties of these patterns. Results of this research
have immediate practical implications. For example, they lead to understanding
of how parcels of fluid move and mix, which has an impact in climatology,
pollution dispersion and marine ecology.
