
* 1009633
* RUI - Pattern forming dynamical systems in theory and experiment
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2010,06/30/2011
* Chad Topaz,MN,Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 258,000.00

Biological swarms of insects, fish, birds, and other organisms influence
ecological and evolutionary dynamics, serve as prototypes for algorithm
development of autonomous vehicles, and are rich sources of patterns. Swarms are
shaped by an interaction of endogenous social forces with exogenous
environmental ones. A kernel describing the social forces is a key element of
swarm models. To improve the mathematical understanding of these models, to
clarify how exogenous and endogenous forces interact to influence aggregation
pattern and morphology, and to provide biological insight into aphids and
locusts, we carry out three projects. (1) We analyze and simulate a broadly
applicable differential equation based model describing organisms whose movement
is due to endogenous and exogenous forces. We connect properties of swarm
patterns to properties of the two forces. (2) In experiment, we measure
trajectories of pea aphids moving within a group. Using the model from (1), we
quantify the social kernel. (3) We generalize the study from (1) by
incorporating a dynamically evolving kernel that models social and antisocial
behavioral phases in desert locusts. This work will suggest swarm control
strategies to minimize aggregation and hence ameliorate some of the negative
economic and humanitarian impacts of locust swarms.

Turing patterns arise from a competition between reaction and diffusion in
diverse chemical, biological, and physical systems. To contribute to the
mathematical and chemical understanding of forced patterns, we perform
experiments on the chlorine dioxide - iodine - malonic acid (CDIMA) Turing
system. Specifically, we force Turing patterns with a time-periodic light source
and measure how the resulting pattern suppression scales with forcing
parameters.

These projects incorporate education through research involvement of twelve
undergraduate student researchers, including women, other underrepresented
minorities, and post-baccalaureate students bound for graduate study. To forge
links between experiment and theory, some students will perform experimental
work and all will train within the PI's experimental/theoretical lab. Students
will interact with theorists and experimentalists at other universities and
undergraduate colleges. Lab and curricular enhancements will provide benefits
beyond the term of the grant.
