
* 1009181
* GOALI: Modeling, analysis and numerical simulations of gels in the biomedical industry
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2010,08/26/2012
* Maria-Carme Calderer,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 322,863.00

Calderer DMS-1009181

This GOALI project supports a collaboration between investigators at the
University of Minnesota and at Medtronic, Inc. To improve the design of
implantable medical devices, the investigator and her colleagues develop
fundamental understanding of, and modeling tools for, polymer and solvent
interactions that result in swelling of the polymer. Many implantable devices
consist of plastic and metal components that are affixed to each other by
adhesives. When such a device is placed in the human body, the plastic parts,
made from polymer, interact with the surrounding fluid and swell, while the
metal parts are not affected by the fluid. The consequent swelling mismatch
causes a high stress at the interface, which can lead to deformation of the
components and, if interfacial shear stresses exceed critical values guaranteed
by the adhesive manufacturer, to interface delamination. Deformation and
delamination can cause devices to fail. The ability to model the behavior of the
components is critical in the design of implantable medical devices, such as
defibrillators, pacemakers, and neurological devices. This project addresses the
questions: (1) How does polymer swelling proceed without polymer chain
relaxation? (Only elasticity is accounted for, and viscous effects are
neglected.) (2) How does swelling proceed when polymer chains relax within the
same time frame? (3) How does swelling proceed if there is mechanical strain
applied to the sample? (4) How does swelling proceed if two samples made of the
same polymer but with different initial swelling are bonded together?

Many polymers can absorb an amount of water equivalent to about 1 percent of
their own weights; hydrogel can absorb water many times its own volume. Swelling
of polymers occurs in many applications, particularly in implantable biomedical
devices, made of metal and plastic polymer components, that typically are buried
in wet tissue. Polymers can relax mechanical loading and deformation over time
due to viscoelastic properties. Swelling-induced stress or size changes can
relax as well. The actual stress and geometric changes in polymers are
determined by the combined relaxation and swelling process. Each of these
processes is related to water diffusion, polymer chain motion, and water-polymer
interactions. Estimation of these processes and interactions is critical for
understanding swelling-induced deformation, delamination, and stability, key
factors in the design and quality control of medical devices. Building on an
existing collaboration between Medtronic Inc and the University of Minnesota,
the investigator and her colleagues develop mathematical models, analysis, and
computational and visualization tools to improve fundamental understanding of
polymer and solvent interactions; the tools can be used to identify unsuitable
polymers and so reduce the number of laboratory experiments performed by polymer
scientists at Medtronic by more than half. Students and postdocs are part of the
project, which also includes seminars, workshops, and outreach activities
sponsored jointly with Medtronic.
