
* 1009456
* Mathematical Analysis of Some Fundamental Problems in Solid-Liquid Interaction
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2010,05/18/2012
* Giovanni Galdi,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2013
* USD 186,416.00

Over the past decades, the study of the motion of solids in a viscous liquid has
become one of the main focuses of applied research. This project will address
some fundamental aspects of solid-liquid interaction directed toward the
accomplishment of the following objectives. The first one concerns the
vibration-induced motion of a rigid body in a viscous liquid. A particularly
significant case is when the vibration is induced by a time-periodically
displaced mass inside the body. The second one is devoted to the motion of a
deformable solid in a viscous liquid. This study will include propulsion of
bodies by time-periodic shape-changes, as well as the determination, and
possible bifurcation, of equilibrium configurations of elastic bodies subject to
a constant force.

The interaction of a viscous liquid with a solid body (either rigid or
deformable) constitutes a complex and intriguing topic of theoretical and
applied research. In fact, not only is it of fundamental theoretical interest,
but it also represents the focus of many engineering, biological and medical
studies at different scales. Important applications include damage of structures
due to the impinging of the liquid, like in dams or ships, animal locomotion,
like the flying of birds and the swimming of fish, manufacturing of short-fiber
composites, where the addition of short fiber-like particles to a polymer matrix
will enhance the mechanical properties of the material, separation of
macromolecules by electrophoresis, and DNA sequencing. Another, but no less
important, application of solid-liquid interaction occurs in blood flow, in the
study of the interaction of blood with arterial walls, and of the motion of
blood cells within the plasma.
