
* 1009448
* Dynamics of complex quantum systems with randomness and nonlinearities
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,06/22/2010
* Thomas Chen,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2014
* USD 141,999.00

This project addresses research problems at the boundary of analysis, applied
mathematics, and mathematical physics. In a first part of the project, we study
properties of a single electron in a random medium (weakly disordered Anderson
model) in the framework of nonrelativistic Quantum Electrodynamics (QED). In a
second part, we address the dynamics of a gas of electrons in a weak random
potential (describing materials such as semiconductors), where the interactions
between the electrons are modeled in dynamical Hartree-Fock theory. In a third
part of the project, we investigate the Cauchy problem for the Gross-Pitaevskii
hierarchy, which is a many body mean-field theory describing a gas of
interacting Bose particles. We study dynamical properties of solutions of
general form, and compare them to dynamical properties as predicted by the
nonlinear Schrodinger equation obtained for solutions of factorized type.

Non-relativistic quantum electrodynamics describes electrons, atoms, and
molecules moving at ordinary speeds and interacting with the energy quanta of
light (photons). It is the fundamental theory for the description of processes
in molecular physics and quantum chemistry. In this research project, we use the
framework of non-relativistic quantum electrodynamics to study the motion of an
electron in a random medium (e.g., materials including impurities) when exposed
to light or lattice vibrations. Moreover, we study the effect of the interaction
between electrons on the dynamics of an electron gas in a random medium. The
analysis of these questions is crucial for the understanding of electric
properties of semiconductors. Another main part of this project investigates the
dynamics of systems of many Bose particles, which play a role in the phenomenon
of superfluidity. In this work, we investigate the question of how well the non-
relativistic quantum electrodynamic description of a Bose gas matches
predictions of other models.
