
* 1054115
* CAREER: Non-Uniqueness in Inviscid Flow and Algebraic Vortex Spirals
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 05/01/2011,05/01/2015
* Volker Elling,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 04/30/2017
* USD 420,754.00

A ubiquitous feature in fluid flow is emergence of vortex sheets: surfaces
across which tangential velocity changes sharply, while pressure and normal
velocity are continuous. This shearing motion causes the Kelvin-Helmholtz
instability and other poorly understood phenomena. Vortex sheets are produced by
sharp corners of solid objects moving in a fluid, such as wings of accelerating
aircraft or by interacting shock waves in compressible flow. Vortex sheets
generally end in a spiral. Since computer simulation of vortex spirals is
notoriously unstable, it is especially important investigating them with
analytical tools from the theory of differential and integral equations. The
project is aimed in particular at understanding and construction of certain
classical spirals, followed by a generalization to compressible and viscous flow
models.

Recent numerical experiments by the principal investigator and analytical
results by others suggest that the Euler equation, a mathematical model of fluid
flow that neglects viscosity and heat conduction, may suffer from non-
uniqueness: the initial state of the fluid does not determine the state at later
times unambiguously. This project will put these unclear results into a more
satisfactory state by finding rigorous proofs for flows that have simpler
structure and are physically relevant, namely Pullin's separated spirals. The
non-uniqueness phenomenon surfaces not only in theory, but also in computer
simulation and in physical experiments which are crucial for designing aircraft
and other sensitive applications. Understanding non-uniqueness is important
because it indicates that the theoretical predictions are less reliable than
previously thought, with potentially catastrophic consequences. Broader impacts
of this project include combining education with hands-on research in order to
attract students, especially at the critical advanced undergraduate stage, to
the fluid dynamics research. Classroom innovations and several undergraduate
projects on computer simulation of compressible fluids, with emphasis on
extensive independent study instruction, are planned; PhD students will be
trained.
