
* 1069224
* Dynamical Systems Special Topics: Dynamics of granular materials: jamming, avalanches, disorder, and localization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
* 09/15/2011,09/15/2011
* Karin Dahmen,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2015
* USD 290,000.00

A simple analytic theory of the dynamics of sheared granular materials near the
jamming transition is needed to guide current experiments, simulations, and
applications. Here such a model is developed that: (1) identifies the key
parameters that control the intermittent dynamics of sheared granular materials
near the jamming transition, (2) provides predictions for the dependence of the
slip avalanche statistics on the key parameters, both near and far from the
jamming transition, and (3) provides a unified understanding of the interplay
between structure and dynamics of granular materials and related systems.
Granular materials, such as powders, sand, gravel, and grain, either flow if
pushed, similar to fluids, or they jam, with intermittent sudden stops and
slips, similar to earthquakes. A simple mathematical tool to quickly predict the
behavior of pushed granular materials is being developed that is expected to
have wide applications in processes that use molecular liquids, powders,
construction materials, and agricultural grains. The tool can be used to predict
the results of new experiments, in computer simulations, and in industrial
applications, where jamming of granular matter poses a significant operational
problem. The results of this research are relevant also to other physical
systems, over a wide range of scales, from the deformation of metallic crystals
and amorphous materials to the deformation of the earth's crust in earthquakes.
The model provides new approaches to nondestructive materials testing and hazard
prediction. The project also provides broad interdisciplinary training to a
graduate student and an advanced undergraduate student. The students learn
modern mathematical modeling tools from physics, materials science and
engineering, dynamical systems theory, mathematical physics, and computational
science. Collaboration with theorists, experimentalists, engineers, and
geophysicists broaden the students? perspectives and increase their versatility
in solving new problems.
