
* 1105189
* Mathematical Questions in Gravitation, Black Holes, Cosmology, and Rotating Stars
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2011,06/24/2013
* Joel Smoller,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2016
* USD 251,999.00

My research deals with mathematical problems involving gravity which arise in
astrophysics. Specifically my research will involve (1) proving decay of
solutions to the initial-value problem for Maxwell's equations of
electromagnetism and for gravitational waves, both in a Kerr rotating black hole
geometry; (2) studying shock waves and expansion waves arising in general
relativity; (3) magnetic rotating and non-rotating Newtonian stars. Part 1
continues previous work on decay results for the Dirac and scalar wave
equations, to Maxwell's equations and to the linearized Einstein equations in a
KBH background geometry. Part 2 deals with shock waves and expansion waves in
general relativity, and applying these wave solutions to problems in
astrophysics; e.g. the so-called anomalous acceleration of the universe, without
needing dark energy or the cosmological constant. It is based on my rigorously
obtained new solutions of the Einstein equations. Part 3 arises from my recent
results on existence and stability results for rotating Newtonian stars and is
aimed at extending these results to magnetic stars (like our sun). This study is
motivated by an attempt to better understand sunspots and solar flares, from a
rigorous mathematical point of view.

The proposal is focused on three areas of astrophysics. The first involves
studying whether black holes are stable under electromagnetic and gravitational
perturbation. That is, if one sends an electromagnetic or gravitational wave
into a rotating black hole, will the black hole remain pretty much intact, or
will it radiate away a good portion of its energy? The second is to continue my
work on new solutions of Einstein's equations explaining the so-called anomalous
acceleration of the universe. That is, the standard physical model modifies
Einstein's equations in an ad hoc manner and involves the notion of "dark
energy", an unobserved anti-gravitational force, in order to agree with
astronomical observations. This approach has no physical basis whatsoever. The
final area of interest to me is to study start with magnetic fields with an aim
to getting a theoretical explanation of sunspots and solar flares. These
phenomena remain highly mysterious, and are important since when they occur,
they disrupt satellite as well as radio communication. It is not known how to
predict sunspots and solar flares, and a firm mathematical understanding of the
associated equations would be an important step in this direction.
