
* 1107750
* Fractal Geometry and Dynamical Systems, with Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2011,08/09/2011
* Michel Lapidus,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2016
* USD 164,999.00

In this project, the principal investigator and his collaborators (including his
graduate students and postdocs) plan to pursue the investigation of the
geometry, dynamics and spectra of fractal drums, both drums with fractal
boundary and drums with fractal membrane (analysis and PDEs off or on fractals).
This entails the further development of the theory of complex dimensions, along
with the investigation of the underlying oscillatory phenomena, of
(approximately) self-similar fractals, multifractals, and associated nonlinear
dynamical systems. This also entails the development and the use of new tools in
noncommutative geometry and global analysis in order to study the geodesic flow
and the geodesic metric of 'fractal manifolds'. A connecting thread throughout
this project is provided by the interplay between fractal geometry and dynamical
systems, from two main perspectives: (i) the use of (multivariable) complex
dynamics in order to obtain a detailed understanding of the spectra of certain
fractal drums, via a generalization of the classic decimation method. (ii) The
development of a theory of fractal billiards and (in the longer term) of
corresponding trace formulas connecting the geometry (e.g., the geodesic flow)
and spectra of the associated fractal drums. Computer-aided experiments as well
as the interpretation of physical experiments play a significant role in forming
appropriate intuition in this context.

This projects aims at addressing the following question: "Can one hear the shape
of a fractal drum" That is, how much information can one recover about the
geometric contours of a rough or complex shape by making it vibrate and just
listening to the resulting sounds? This question, even in the classical setting
of smooth, Euclidean (or Riemannian) geometry, plays a central role in
contemporary mathematics. Fractals are mathematical idealizations of many
complex shapes occurring in nature, such as coastlines, river beds, trees,
computer networks, networks of blood vessels, lungs, ore and oil distribution,
etc. Understanding how waves propagate through these fractal shapes (or
'manifolds') or how light (and electromagnetic radiation) reflect on or off
them, is a key scientific and mathematical problem. Potential applications of
this work involve a variety of domains, including high technology (e.g, computer
microchips, computer networks, and fractal antenna for use in cell phone
technology), mathematical biology and medicine (cancer research, blood
circulation), geology, applied and theoretical physics (microwaves cavities,
random surfaces of use in models of quantum gravity), astronomy (large-scale
structure of the universe), and engineering (very efficient sound and heat
insulators, catalysts in chemical reactions). The principal investigator, whose
previous NSF supported research has already had a significant impact on this
area (both in mathematics, physics and other sciences), plans to continue his
broad integration of research and educational activities, via the continued
mentoring of his many graduate students and postdocs, as well as of promising
and creative undergraduate students. lecturing in many scientific venues and
summer schools, the creation, teaching and supervision of new courses and
seminars connected with this research area, as well as the writing of research
and educational books and scientific papers connected with this field.
