
* 1107307
* Mathematical foundations of plasma kinetic theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2011,08/09/2011
* Carlo Lancellotti,NY,CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2015
* USD 209,499.00

This project will focus on the mathematical derivation of the Balescu-Guernsey-
Lenard (BGL) equation of plasma transport theory. This equation is commonly
regarded as the most fundamental kinetic collisional model for classic Coulomb
plasmas. It was proposed to describe the infinite-particle limit for the
evolution of a system of particles that interact with long-range (e.g., Coulomb)
forces. However, there is no rigorous mathematical proof that the BGL equation
is the correct limit. This situation has made it much harder to develop more
general models for the physical situations, where the BGL equation is known not
to be accurate (e.g., anomalous transport in fusion reactors). This project will
aim to show that there is a deep connection between the BGL equation and the
theory of fluctuations in collisionless plasmas about the Vlasov limit.
Specifically, the goal is to show that the BGL equation is simply the non-linear
Fokker-Planck equation associated with long-time particle dynamics in the Vlasov
fluctuation field of a spatially homogeneous plasma. The centerpiece of the
study will be a new stochastic process which describes, loosely speaking, long-
time, self-consistent dynamics of particles traveling in a random force field
generated by the fluctuations of the particles' density about the mean-field
limit.

The Balescu-Lenard-Guernsey equation is pivotal in the theory of plasmas and
gravitating systems; it has many applications, especially in the mathematical
modeling of magnetically-confined fusion reactors. However, the existing body of
mathematical knowledge about it is very small. The chief goal of the project is
to construct a rigorous mathematical proof that this model provides a good
approximation for describing the behavior of a large assembly of particles, such
as those found in fusion plasmas. Such a proof will validate many theoretical
calculations and numerical simulations based on the BLG model, as well as their
applications in plasma physics. Having a better understanding of the mathematics
involved will be indispensable for modeling more complicated physical phenomena
that arise in very hot plasmas in a fusion reactor.
