
* 1107468
* Financial Mathematics: Nonlinear Problems and Systemic Risk
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2011,06/09/2011
* Jean-Pierre Fouque,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2014
* USD 279,970.00

In the first project, it is proposed to establish new results in the theory of
asymptotic analysis and homogenization of nonlinear partial partial differential
equations with direct applications to several important and practical problems
faced by practitioners in the financial industry. These problems include risk
management under uncertain volatility, behavior of implied volatilities at short
maturities, and portfolio optimization under stochastic volatility. In the
second project, it is proposed to develop new models based on systems of
interacting diffusions where the coupling is modeled in the drifts through
lending preferences. Combined with sophisticated Monte Carlo methods, including
interacting particle system methods, these models will allow to study the
stability of the system and the various statistical quantities relevant to
systemic risk of a network.

Challenging nonlinear problems arising naturally in the context of risk
management under uncertain or randomly fluctuating volatility are addressed in
the first project. This research has direct applications to practical problems
faced by practitioners in the financial industry. The second project is a new
direction of research on systemic risk and mathematical analysis of the
stability (or instability) of our banking system. The recent financial crisis
has revealed a lack of understanding of the risk of cascade of defaults in
banking networks. It is proposed to develop new models which will allow to study
the stability of the system and the various statistical quantities relevant to
systemic risk of a network. This research, including its training component, is
expected to contribute to the effort started by the regulators in the recent
creation of the Office of Financial Research.
