
* 1108994
* Large and Multi-Dimensional Solutions of Hyperbolic Balance Laws with Dissipation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2011,09/15/2011
* Ronghua Pan,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2015
* USD 183,000.00

This project is devoted to the study of large and/or multi-dimensional solutions
to dissipative balance laws arising in modeling of flows, including gases,
fluids, traffics, and semi-conductor devices. The research focuses on the
following particular objects: a) global behavior of compressible Navier-Stokes
equations in one and several space dimensions, b) vanishing viscosity limit from
compressible Navier-Stokes equations toward Euler equations with physical
viscosity coefficient, c) global stability or instability of relaxation system,
d) global BV theory for a class of dissipative balance laws, and e) large time
behavior for certain fluid dynamics systems including viscous Boussinesq system
in two dimension and compressible Navier-Stokes equations in two and three
dimensions. The goals of this project are developing novel analytic approaches
to constructing large solutions, investigating singular behavior of the
solutions, identifying global stability criterion, understanding the large time
behavior of multi-dimensional solutions.

The objective of this research is to investigate several open problems for
dissipative hyperbolic balance laws. Hyperbolic balance laws are important
nonlinear partial differential equations modeling the motion of fluids, gas, and
waves. The research will concentrate on problems for large solutions, strong
waves, and realistic models in multiple spatial dimensions. These situations
often involve complicated but interesting phenomena resulting from nonlinearity
and resonance and thus underdeveloped. The results are expected to have
applications to dynamics of compressible fluids, elastic material mechanics,
traffic control systems, semi-conductor devices modeling, porous medium flows,
and geophysical dynamics. The advance of mathematical understanding of these
problems plays important role in the design of effective numerical schemes for
scientific computation in these fundamental areas. The project will also provide
education and training to students and young researchers in this challenging
field.
