
* 1108647
* Analysis and applications of nonlinear partial differential equations in conservation laws and kinetic theories
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2011,09/15/2011
* Xianpeng Hu,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 104,598.00

The principal investigator will study mathematical problems of certain nonlinear
partial differential equations in fluid dynamics and the kinetic theory, such as
the compressible relativistic Navier-Stokes equation, the magnetohydrodynamics
(MHD) equations without the magnetic diffusivity, the compressible viscoelastic
flows, and the Vlasov-Maxwell-Boltzmann equations. These equations model a
variety of physical processes requiring significantly new mathematical
approaches, and understanding of properties of these models is a fundamental
challenge both from the mathematical and physical viewpoints. The research
program consists of four parts: (1) The first part concerns the global existence
of weak solutions of the relativistic Navier-Stokes equation and some
qualitative properties of weak solutions. Compactness theory and the kinetic
formulation will be explored. (2) The second part regards the global existence
of strong solutions to the magnetohydrodynamics without magnetic diffusivity.
The decay of the component of the magnetic field which is parallel to the
equilibrium will be fully developed. (3) The third part considers the
incompressible limit of the compressible viscoelastic fluids and the weak
solutions to the two dimensional steady compressible viscoelastic fluids. The
oscillation of the asymptotic solutions will be exploited. (4) The fourth part
studies the Vlasov-Maxwell-Boltzmann equations. Topics that to be addressed
include the global existence of the renormalized solution and its hydrodynamic
limit.

The mathematical problems to be investigated in the project arise in many
scientific disciplines including plasma physics, elastodynamics, astrophysics,
fluid dynamics, and the dynamics of biological and chemical reactions. The
mathematical issues, such as global existence, incompressible limits, and
hydrodynamic limits are of fundamental importance in biology, engineering, and
physics. The primary goal of this research program is to provide mathematical
verification of the fundamental models, to find a connection among these models,
and to investigate analytical properties that will yield new insight into the
mathematics of fluids, critical for plasma physics, elastodynamics, and other
physical models, which could facilitate better understanding of the relevant
physical phenomena.
