
* 1108782
* Complex Stochastic Systems: Analysis, Control and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2011,08/11/2011
* Chao Zhu,WI,University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2014
* USD 114,999.00

This research project considers a class of complex stochastic systems and
related stochastic control problems. The underlying systems are subject to
various random forces. The specific aims and anticipated results of this project
are as follows: (1) to investigate stability and ergodicity and to establish a
Feynman-Kac type formula for regime-switching diffusions with jumps; (2) to
develop singular stochastic control theories for regime-switching jump
diffusions and to design feasible and effective numerical schemes for the
associated control problems; and (3) to apply the theoretical results to
biology, mathematical finance, and risk management. The expected results of this
project will contribute to an in-depth understanding of a wide class of complex
stochastic systems. This, in turn, will facilitate the applications of such
systems in areas such as finance and biology. The mixed regular and singular
control problems for regime-switching diffusions are likely to generate many new
and interesting mathematical results as well as new problems in stochastic
analysis, numerical approximation and control theory.

This research project is motivated by emerging applications arising from
ecosystem modeling, financial engineering, insurance risk processes,
manufacturing and production planning. The dynamics of these systems inevitably
involve uncertainty. For example, in ecosystem modeling, the population dynamics
of a general ecosystem possess two salient features: (i) there is day-to-day
jitter that causes minor fluctuations as well as big population loss caused by
rare events such as epidemics, earthquakes, and tsunamis; and (ii) there are
qualitative changes in the system stemming from the fact that the growth rates
and carrying capacities of many species often vary according to changes in
nutrition, water supply, and/or food resources. Similar phenomena are observed
in the dynamics of insurance risk processes, the price of a risky asset, and
others. These features make the usual models in the literature inadequate in
describing such complex systems. The proposed project aims to take into these
inherent random forces and propose stochastic processes and related control
problems that are general and flexible, yet mathematically tractable, in dealing
with these real-world applications. It presents novel stochastic processes for
modeling and analysis of complex systems, obtains long-time behavior of such
systems, develops singular control theories, and designs numerical schemes for
the control problems. Student training and education, disciplinary and
interdisciplinary collaborations, and the dissemination of research results
through publications and presentations are integral parts of this project.
