
* 1109030
* Critical currents in superconductors
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2011,08/11/2011
* Yaniv Almog,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 07/31/2015
* USD 160,822.00

Almog 1109030

The investigator studies several fundamental theoretical problems of
superconductivity. Through analysis of the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau model,
he examines: 1. Critical currents, and bounds on them, associated with the loss
of stability of the normal and superconducting states in two and three
dimensions. 2. Phase transitions between these states in various circumstances.
3. Critical currents under magnetic field effects near the normal state. 4.
Highly nonlinear effects of induced magnetic fields.

Superconductors are metals that at a sufficiently low temperature exhibit two
important properties: 1. They lose entirely their electrical resistivity. 2. The
magnetic field is excluded from the superconducting area. Superconductors have
great technological potential for applications ranging from magnetic sensors,
through generators of large magnetic fields, to high power transmitters. The
investigator studies the behavior of superconducting materials near the critical
current, the maximum current density which can flow through a superconducting
wire with (practically) zero resistance. He focuses on the transition between
the normal and superconducting states, how stable these states are, and effects
of induced magnetic fields on the critical current. Of particular interest is
the disparity between experimental measures of the critical current and
theoretical predictions of the critical current in the absence of magnetic
fields. Determining the maximal current a superconductor can carry before
reverting to the normal state where material resistivity causes energy losses is
an important consideration in superconductor technologies. The project sheds
light on both the nucleation of superconductivity for decreasing currents, and
on the loss of superconducting properties when the electric current increases.
