
* 1109640
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Analysis of Certain Geophysical and Fluid Dynamics Models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, OPPORTUNITIES FOR RESEARCH CMG
* 10/01/2011,09/20/2011
* Edriss Titi,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2015
* USD 385,626.00

Titi, DMS-1109640 Cao, DMS-1109022

Numerical ocean modeling is computationally very demanding. Traditionally, the
hydrostatic approximation balance, in the vertical momentum equation, has been
applied to reduce the computational burden. Recently, the investigators have
made significant progress in the rigorous understanding of the properties of the
solutions to these models. However, it is still impossible to use present
computing resources to simulate this large system for the wide range of spatial
and temporal scales. Therefore, there is a need to further simplify these models
to focus on understanding and simulating certain localized smaller-scale
phenomena, such as the geostrophic adjustment of frontal anomalies in a rotating
continuously stratified fluid of strictly rectilinear fronts and jets, and
rapidly rotating convection which, according to the Taylor-Proudman constraint,
takes place in tall columnar structures. The development of fast, accurate, and
reliable numerical models of the climate system is key to understanding and
predicting the magnitude and distribution of future climate variability. The
focus of this project is to provide rigorous justification to these simplified
models of the dynamics of the atmosphere and the oceans, and to investigate
their long-term behavior. The investigators study the questions of existence,
uniqueness, and continuous dependence on the initial data of the solutions to
these models. This is the first, and the most crucial step, in justifying the
derivation of these models and their consistency with the physical observations.

There are numerous governing equations to fully describe the dynamics of
climate. It is impossible to use present computing resources to simulate this
large system for the wide range of spatial and temporal scales. Indeed, in order
to understand, for example, the mechanism of atmospheric and oceanic turbulence,
and to properly predict the climate, it is necessary to provide simplified and
reliable models that contain the main features of the underlying physical
phenomena. The investigators focus on the development of novel, theoretical and
computational, mathematical tools for investigating these simplified models, and
on justifying their derivation in order to enhance our understanding of fluid
dynamics models and the climate system and its predictability. The training of
undergraduate and graduate students with analytical and computational skills is
also achieved through this study.
