
* 1109645
* Collaborative Research: Study of Turbulence in Physical Systems Through Complex Singularities and Determining Modes
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2011,08/24/2011
* Edriss Titi,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2014
* USD 115,697.00

This project applies two recently introduced evolution equations to fundamental
issues in hydrodynamic turbulence. The first equation is for the determining
modes of a differential equation of Navier-Stokes type. A set of low modes is
determining, if for any solution on the global attractor, the high modes of the
solution for all time, can be produced from only the low modes (for all time).
Extending this relationship to the Banach space of bounded functions from the
reals into the low modes leads to a determining form, an evolution equation that
is globally Lipschitz, and dissipative. The global attractor of the original
differential equation is contained in the long time behavior of the determining
form. This provides an alternative to the theory of inertial forms which is not
known to be applicable to the Navier-Stokes equations. The other evolution
equation is for the radius of analyticity in the spatial variable. We will use
this equation to study the domain of analyticity for solutions on the global
attractor and its effect on aspects of fluid flow such as intermittency.

Fluid motions at large scales, for instance in ocean and atmosphere, display
erratic, seemingly incomprehensible (turbulent) features when viewed locally and
for short times. However, over time, consistent global statistical patterns
emerge. The purpose of this research is to develop a rigorous understanding of
the nature and origin of such patterns, and of deviations from it, with a view
towards diverse applications such as ocean modeling and weather forecasting. For
instance, weather forecasting is done by solving a large system of equations
which model the state of the atmosphere over a period of time. The current state
of the atmosphere is needed as input in order to compute the state in the
future. As there are always limited measurements of the state of the system,
this input inevitably contains some error. The inherent sensitivity of the
system to such an error means that as time goes on the computed solution
diverges from reality. The technique of data assimilation uses the limited
measurements of the system at not just a single moment of time, but rather over
an extended time period in the past, to arrive at a more accurate input. This
project applies recent mathematical discoveries to develop new variations on
this technique. It will lead to new algorithms that will be implemented and
tested by the research team. Graduate students will play an essential role in
this collaborative effort, thus serving to train future generation of scientists
in the STEM disciplines.
