
* 1109063
* Nonlinear sampling theory for signals with finite rate of innovation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2011,09/01/2011
* Qiyu Sun,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Eugene Gartland
* 08/31/2015
* USD 136,285.00

Sun DMS-1109063

The investigator develops a new mathematical framework for nonlinear sampling
and recovery of signals with finite rate of innovation from theoretical
viewpoint and in practical realization. The investigator works on several
fundamental problems concerning the recovery of a signal from its noisy sampled
data, the exploration of efficient algorithmic methods in the presence of
substantial noise, and the application of the novel sampling methodology to
engineering problems. This interdisciplinary project is based on the
observations that signals in many engineering problems have finite rate of
innovation and could be approximated by signals with sparse representations, and
that the sampling process has strong neighbor dependency.

Sampling theory is one of the most basic and fascinating topics in mathematical
science and in engineering sciences. In engineering applications, such as Global
Positioning Systems (GPS), Ultra-wideband (UWB) ranging systems in
communication, and mass spectrometry in medical diagnosis, noisy sampled data
are obtained, real-time recovery is preferred, and very accurate restoration is
crucial for meaningful justification. Standard Fourier approaches and
conventional sampling techniques are inapplicable in such problems. The
challenge resides in the requirement of rapid, accurate, and robust recovery.
The investigator applies calculus for infinite matrices and introduces novel
compressive techniques to tackle fundamental sampling problems. Success in the
project could be both mathematically fundamental and technologically important,
and has potential impact in the strategic areas of information technology and
biotechnology.
