
* 1109017
* Collaborative RUI. Nonlinear Schroedinger Models in Fluid Dynamics: Rogue Waves and Vortex Filaments
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2011,12/20/2013
* Annalisa Calini,SC,College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2016
* USD 174,104.00

This project combines the complementary expertise of the two principal
investigators (PIs) to study two areas of fluid dynamics modeled by the
integrable focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) equation and higher order
generalizations: rogue wave generation in deep water, and vortex filament
dynamics, for which accurate numerical methods will be used to guide theoretical
work, and to study more physically relevant models. Floquet theory, dynamical
systems methods, perturbation theory, numerical spectral diagnostics, and multi-
symplectic and conformal integrators, will be used to address the questions of
generation and persistence of rogue waves. Physical lab-tank experiments will
test and validate the analysis of the correlation between proximity to
instabilities and homoclinic data, and the likelihood of rogue waves; whether
nonlinear damping eliminates rogue waves through downshifting. Stability and
dynamics of vortex filaments will be investigated theoretically and numerically.

Rogue waves are extremely rare and destructive waves in the ocean that are
believed to arise spontaneously (in contrast with tsunamis). They are transient
large amplitude waves whose heights are significantly larger than the background
sea, 25 meters and up to 35 meters. The research on rogue waves is aimed at
improving predictors of these extreme wave events. Vortex &#64257;laments are
important models of localized vorticity structures that often emerge as
distinctive features in various physical phenomena; for example, vortex
&#64257;laments can be used to describe the &#64258;ow of super&#64258;uids and
of turbulent &#64258;uids. Filamentary structures in geophysical systems (e.g.
tornados) and in magneto-hydrodynamics (e.g. slender plasma-&#64257;lled tubes
in the solar corona) can also be modeled by vortex &#64257;laments. The
analytical and numerical tools developed for both rogue wave and vortex filament
models will be of value for other applied fluid mechanical problems. This
research will involve one undergraduate and one graduate student at each of the
institutions. The PIs will continue mentoring students from underrepresented
groups and broadening their training by bringing students to meetings that
connect mathematicians and experimentalists.
