
* 1120637
* Mathematical Study of Smectic Liquid Crystals
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2010,09/26/2011
* Sookyung Joo,VA,Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2013
* USD 85,852.00

Joo DMS-0908538

The investigator and her colleague study mathematically the interaction of
smectic liquid crystals with external electric or magnetic fields. Typical
liquid crystals are nematic and smectic liquid crystals, consisting of rod-like
molecules that tend to align themselves lengthwise along a common axis, called
the director. The local orientation of a nematic liquid crystal is described by
the director field. However, in smectic phases the molecules of the liquid
crystal also tend to lie in layers. To describe the local orientation, a smectic
order parameter must be introduced in addition to the director field. The free
energy of smectic liquid crystals has a resemblance to the Ginzburg-Landau
energy for superconductivity, and it is a nonlinear, nonconvex second order
energy. While nematic phases are rather well understood, the mathematical theory
of smectic phases is comparatively underdeveloped. This study consists of two
main projects. In the first project, the investigators advance the mathematical
understanding of smectic liquid crystals in the area of instabilities driven by
external magnetic fields, by means of mathematical analysis and numerical
simulations. Partial differential equation methods for phase transition,
calculus of variations, Gamma convergence theory, and bifurcation theory are
employed. In the second project, the investigators study ferroelectric liquid
crystals such as smectic C* and bent-core phases, which are named after the bent
or banana-shaped molecules. The response time of bent-core liquid crystals is
only in the range of microseconds and thus this material offers huge potential
for many applications. The investigator studies an electrodynamic model of the
molecular reorientation of ferroelectric liquid crystals.

Liquid crystals are used in many different applications such as optical
switching devices and temperature sensors. Nematic liquid crystal materials have
been widely studied because of their applications to flat panel displays.
However, it is known that ferroelectric liquid crystals such as smectic C phases
with chiral molecules exhibit much faster switching times. Thus understanding
the features of smectic liquid crystals such as defect structures and switching
dynamics is a very important issue in practical applications.
