
* 1151414
* CAREER: Dynamics of complex quantum systems, scaling limits and renormalization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2012,03/29/2012
* Thomas Chen,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 09/30/2018
* USD 416,231.00

This research project addresses three main topics: (1) The well-posedness theory
of the initial value problem for the Gross-Pitaevskii (GP) hierarchy, based on
the approach initiated by the PI jointly with N. Pavlovic (UT Austin). A main
motivation underlying our work is our aim at generalizing methods from nonlinear
dispersive PDE's for the analysis of quantum field theories (QFT's). (2)
Problems in non-relativistic Quantum Electrodynamics (QED), in particular
relating to the semiclassical motion of electrons, radiation damping, and the
problem of ultraviolet renormalization in QED. (3) Derivation of kinetic
equations from kinetic scaling limits of the thermal momentum distribution
function for interacting electron gases, modeled in dynamical Hartree-Fock
theory. These projects involve several ongoing collaborations, including
international ones. Study of the GP hierarchy, which emerges in the analysis of
interacting Bose gases, bridges some of the most exciting recent developments in
physics (Bose-Einstein condensation) with some of the most impressive recent
developments in mathematics (nonlinear dispersive PDE's). Non-relativistic QED
is the physical theory of non-relativistic quantum mechanical matter (electrons,
atoms, molecules) interacting with the energy quanta (photons) of light, and
describes processes in a wide spectrum of quintessential areas in technology
(chemistry, electronics, modeling of solar panels, etc). The derivation of
kinetic equations from quantum dynamics leads to a precise mathematical
understanding of classical physics (fluid dynamics) from quantum physics. The
educational component of this project involves the training of graduate students
in highly multidisciplinary annual thematic programs that provide them with a
integrative and specialized understanding of links between Analysis, Applied and
Computational Mathematics, nonlinear PDE's, and Mathematical Physics. The goal
is to provide graduate students with an exceptionally broad understanding of
their research fields.
