
* 1156393
* Modern Methods in Calculus of Variations with Applications to Polycrystalline and Granular Materials
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2011,06/28/2013
* Marian Bocea,IL,Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2015
* USD 153,852.00

The investigator develops new methods needed to study key issues in the emerging
area of Calculus of Variations in L-infinity, for the case where the functionals
to be minimized are the essential supremum of some function of fields that are
subject to constant rank differential constraints. This general framework
includes the treatment of curl-free fields, divergence-free fields, symmetrized
and higher order gradients, and fields that satisfy Maxwell's equations. He
studies necessary and sufficient conditions under which these functionals
possess a minimizer, relaxation, supremal representation, homogenization,
approximation via Gamma-convergence, and he investigates selected systems of
partial differential equations that arise as the Aronsson equations associated
to such functionals. Previous work in this direction has been focused on the
particular case where the admissible fields are gradients (curl-free); the
corresponding issues for supremal functionals acting on fields subject to other
differential constraints that appear naturally as balance laws have remained
largely unaddressed. An important goal of the project is to bridge this gap by
pursuing a systematic study of supremal functionals in this generality. The
project aims to provide a unified view of the subject and, in particular, to
reveal how the known properties of supremal functionals depending on gradients
can be understood as a particular case in the broader context considered. The
analytical methods developed by the investigator and his collaborators are used
to study selected problems in materials sciences that are described by means of
explicit variational principles involving supremal functionals. In particular,
the project seeks to answer certain questions regarding the macroscopic behavior
of polycrystals, and to elucidate several issues that come up in the study of
granular materials, where new models are analyzed and used to study the flow of
heterogeneous sand piles over given landscapes in the context of related Monge-
Kantorovich mass transfer problems.

The project is motivated by specific questions about the behavior of
polycrystalline and granular materials. Such materials are very common: most
metals found in nature are polycrystals; grains, coal, plastic, building
materials (sand, gravel), and various powders and chemical compounds, are all
examples of granular materials that are handled and stored on a daily basis.
Thus, understanding how to mix and transport them in an optimal fashion is an
issue of natural interest. Problems of practical importance where the more
realistic approach is to minimize the supremum rather than the average of
certain quantities are ubiquitous in many other areas, such as nonlinear
elasticity, image processing, damage and fracture mechanics, plasticity, and
semiconductor design. It is expected that the methods developed within this
project will be relevant to an extensive range of applications, beyond those
considered here explicitly. The broader impacts of the project are also achieved
through training of graduate and undergraduate students, who are exposed to
modern developments in applied analysis and are involved in projects related to
the proposal, as well as through other educational and outreach activities.
