
* 1210979
* Some Mathematical Problems on Exact Solitary Water Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2012,06/28/2012
* Shu-Ming Sun,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2016
* USD 145,657.00

The proposed research considers mathematical theory on the existence and
stability of two- and three-dimensional traveling waves on water of finite depth
moving under the influence of gravity and small (or zero) surface tension. The
exact fully nonlinear equations governing the fluid flows will be used. The
project includes three problems.The first one is to study the nonlinear
stability of solitary waves on water with zero surface tension, based upon
recent breakthrough on the linear asymptotic stability. The second problem
intends to give a rigorous proof on the existence of multi-hump (or multi-
solitary) waves for water with small surface tension, since such waves have been
observed in experiments and derived using model equations. The third problem
deals with the existence of three-dimensional waves bifurcating from two-
dimensional solitary waves (also called dimension-breaking bifurcation) on water
with small surface tension, which may confirm the phenomena observed from many
large-scale experiments. Here, the main thrust is to use the exact equations,
rather than approximate equations,to study the waves on water of finite depth.
An interplay of the theories in fluid dynamics and applied analysis will be
essential to this research.

The mathematical theory of wave motions on a free surface over a body of water
is a fascinating subject, with a long history in both applied and pure
mathematical research, and with a continuing relevance to the enterprises of
mankind having to do with rivers and oceans. Numerous observations in the real
world, such as waves generated by boats in lakes or ships in oceans, have been
studied experimentally, numerically,and mathematically. The mathematical study
on the existence and stability of these surface waves is one of the important
and difficult research subjects in this area. In particular, experiments and
observations have confirmed that single-hump waves (called solitary waves)
propagating along a channel or an open sea have a remarkable property of
permanence. Yet, the stability of such waves remains an unsolved problem
mathematically. Although multi-hump waves or three-dimensional waves bifurcating
from two dimensional waves have been observed in many experiments, mathematical
research on these waves is still lagging behind. The goal of proposed research
is to make some significant mathematical advances on these problems. The
research may have potential impact on many scientific research in mathematics,
physics and engineering that involve fluid interfaces and wave propagation and
interactions. For example, the theory may provide helpful forecasts and useful
information on the propagation of tsunami waves in oceans caused by earthquakes,
the prevention of giant waves generated from fast ferries that have been blamed
for many boat accidents, and the properties of waves induced by storms or
hurricanes in oceans which may cause tremendous damage to offshore oil rigs or
marine structures.
