
* 1211014
* Collaborative Research: Extraction of local strain and stress fields inside complex multi-scale composite architectures
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2012,07/31/2012
* Ivo Babuska,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2015
* USD 120,247.00

This award will support the development of new strategies for multi-scale
analysis of local stress and strain fields to identify the onset of failure in
structural components. At the core of the method lies a recent discovery in
approximation theory for elliptic second order divergence form partial
differential equations obtained by the principal investigators under previous
NSF support. The approximation scheme delivers a new class of local
approximation spaces exhibiting exponentially decreasing error with respect to
the local degrees of freedom. The research carried out under this award will
extend the theory to linear elastic system and to heterogeneous media with
residual stress and internal flaws. These results will deliver a new methodology
for estimating the size and location of zones where the local stress and strain
exceeds the failure threshold for material components. The local field recovery
technique developed here will be applied to data sets consisting of surface
strain data and actual CT images of predefined regions inside composite samples.
The goal is to provide a suite of predictive tools for assessing the elastic
interaction between flaws and composite architectures, the generation of zones
of excess strain, and the onset of failure.

There is a growing demand for advanced composite materials for use in aviation,
transportation and energy harvesting. This demand is driven by the superior
anisotropic stiffness properties that can be achieved through the use of
lightweight laminated, woven and braided fiber reinforced composite
architectures. Examples of composite structures include the fuselage of the
Boeing 787 Dreamliner, turbine blades for wind power generation and hulls for
America's cup yachts. This award will support the development of new strategies
for multi-scale analysis of local stress and strain fields to identify the onset
of failure in structural components. It is anticipated that the outcome of this
research will enhance the capability for novel energy efficient design of
composite aircraft components for use in commercial aviation. One of the primary
modes of operation will be the interaction between the Principal Investigators
at Louisiana State University and the University of Texas with research
scientists at the Materials and Manufacturing Directorate of the Air Force
research laboratories, Wright Patterson Air Force Base. The proposed effort will
strengthen research ties between these institutes. The Ph.D. student supported
by this grant will engage in research activity at the Air Force Labs each Summer
and gain hands-on experience in the science of predicting damage for laminated
and textile aerospace composites.
