
* 1211638
* Wave-breaking and Resonant Phenomena
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,09/11/2015
* Stephanos Venakides,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 510,316.00

The steepest descent method for Riemann-Hilbert problems (a nonlinear analog of
the classical steepest descent method for the evaluation of integrals) is the
method of choice for the solution of integrable systems in asymptotic regimes,
such as small dispersion or long time. We propose the study of the second and
higher breaking of the solution of the semiclassical focusing nonlinear
Schroedinger equation (NLS), through a new development of the steepest descent
method. The method will allow the deformation of strings of poles in the complex
plane (they are solutions of the Zakharov-Shabat eigenvalue problem) in similar
ways and for similar purposes that continuous contours are deformed. The
discreteness of the poles will be retained, contrary to our previous approach,
that condensed the poles to their continuum limit, obtaining the first break,
but leading to serious obstacles in treating the second break. We will also
tackle the derivation of the NLS waves in a spatial half-line, that result from
a time-periodic driver at the boundary point. The long-standing challenge here
is that the method of inverse scattering method is natural for solving evolution
equations. Confronted with a boundary value problem, the method demands
overdetermined data on one side. We propose to overcome the difficulty by
matching the wavetrain to the driver, through a boundary layer constructed of
multiphase waves and solitons (breathers). This is consistent with the linear
limit of the problem. In the second part of the proposal, we continue our code
development and analytic model development on the transmission and guidance of
light through photonic crystals near resonance (see below).

In both parts of the proposal, we address waves in natural and in man-made
materials, in particular, the generation, propagation, breaking and
extraordinary behaviour under resonant conditions of these waves.The physical
and technological counterparts of the analysis are mainly in optics (linear and
nonlinear). A central object of our analysis is the focusing nonlinear
Schroedinger equation (NLS), which appears dominantly in nonlinear optical
transmission, together with its many variants. NLS is notoriously unstable,
exhibiting the spontaneous break-up of wave-trains and the formation of new
ones. While the mechanism of the first break is understood from our previous
work, subsequent breaks and the type of wave-trains that eventually emerge are
challenging open questions. These questions constitute one of the two focal
points of our proposal. The second focal point of the proposal addresses
electromagnetic (EM) waves, in particular light and its interaction with
manufactured materials, known as photonic crystals (PC). These small-scale
materials, metallic or non-metallic, have a periodic or repetitive geometry
(e.g. film or plate perforated at the nodes of a periodic lattice).
Monochromatic light, incident upon the PC, must adjust to the refractive index
inside each of the PC constituent materials. When the PC geometry is structured
appropriately, light can be manipulated to respond taking novel and
technologically exploitable modes. Examples are the guiding, blocking and even
trapping of light, as well as extraordinary transmission through PC films. The
first commercial products involving two-dimensionally periodic photonic crystals
are already available in the form of photonic-crystal fibers (PCF). Because of
its ability to confine light in hollow cores or with confinement characteristics
not possible in conventional optical fiber, PCF is now finding applications in
fiber-optic communications, fiber lasers, nonlinear devices, high-power
transmission, highly sensitive gas sensors, and other areas. Our effort is two-
fold. We will continue our development of numerical codes that are dedicated to
PC structures and are appropriate for overcoming the difficulties of calculation
near resonance. We have verified that such codes significantly outperform
commercial EM codes. We will implement these codes to optimize transmission in
perforated films and to experiment with novel PC geometries. We will also
continue our development of simplified mathematical models that capture
analytically the essence of phenomena when a PC operates in the nonlinear
regime.
