
* 1211521
* Collaborative research: Mathematics of emerging imaging methods in medicine and homeland security
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2012,08/18/2015
* Leonid Kunyansky,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 183,000.00

Computerized tomography plays a central role in biomedical imaging. Tomography
techniques are also extensively used for industrial non-destructive testing, in
geology and geophysics, astronomy, and in other areas. Lately, they have found
important applications in homeland security. Over the last decades, several
modalities have been developed and have became standard. Such are, for instance,
the traditional X-ray CT scan, SPECT, MRI, Optical-, Ultrasound-, and Electrical
Impedance Tomography, to name a few. However, such tasks as detection of small
cancerous tumors in soft tissues or finding a small amount of nuclear material
in a large container still present a significant challenge. In recent years,
revolutionary "hybrid" or "multi-physics" methods of medical imaging have been
emerging. By combining two or three different types of waves (or physical
fields) these methods overcome limitations of classical tomography techniques
and deliver otherwise unavailable, potentially life-saving diagnostic
information - at a lesser cost and with less health hazard to a patient. As a
rule, the images in these modalities are obtained by complex mathematical
procedures, rather than through direct acquisition. The corresponding
mathematics is, mostly, at very early stages of development. Thus, the first
part of the project addresses the central mathematical and numerical issues in
several of the novel hybrid techniques, based on combinations of magnetic,
electric, acoustic, and optical waves, and the general mathematical issues
common to all of these techniques. The second part of the projects is directed
toward the improvement of the known methods and development of new tomographic
techniques for homeland security problems. In particular, we will focus on the
detection techniques for illicit weapons-grade nuclear materials in cargo, to be
used at border crossings and harbors. In the third part these techniques will be
used to resolve some outstanding problems in Synthetic Aperture Radar
applications, radio tomography, ultrasound reflectometry, and other areas.

The goal of the project is to develop new techniques of medical imaging, as
well as efficient methods of detecting illicit nuclear materials at border
crossings and in harbors. The project will have a significant impact on the
development and implementation of several new sensitive, inexpensive, and safe
methods of biomedical imaging, efficient techniques of nuclear threat detection
in homeland security, with applications in several other areas of imaging and
non-destructive industrial testing (e.g., synthetic aperture radar). The results
will be disseminated through publications in high quality research journals,
presentations at national and international conferences, and series of lectures
at various venues. Graduate students will play a significant role in the
project, which will prepare them for work in the exciting area at the junction
of exact sciences, medicine, biology, and homeland security. Parts of the study
resulted from the project will be delivered in graduate level classes, lecture
series at national and international schools and conferences, and in two
monographs.
