
* 1211528
* Representation and approximation of functions in nonclassical and anisotropic settings with applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2012,05/21/2012
* Pencho Petrushev,SC,University South Carolina Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 05/31/2016
* USD 170,011.00

This project centers on the development of multiscale representation systems in
various nonclassical and/or anisotropic topological settings such as on Lie
groups and Riemannian manifolds and in the framework of anisotropic dilations of
the space. Furthermore, it will develop sophisticated new methods for
approximation and numerical computation using these systems. The project lies at
the interface between computational harmonic analysis, spectral decompositions,
orthogonal polynomials, nonlinear approximation and numerical analysis. It is
organized into two main directions of investigation with several specific goals.
The first research objective of the project is to develop frames with elements
of nearly exponential space localization in the general setting of strictly
local regular Dirichlet spaces with doubling measure and local scale-invariant
Poincare inequality which lead to a Markovian heat kernel with small time
Gaussian bounds and Holder continuity. The key point of the proposed approach is
to be able to deal with (a) different geometries, (b) compact and noncompact
spaces, and (c) spaces with nontrivial weights, and at the same time to allow
for the frame decomposition of Besov and other spaces with complete range of
indices. This will facilitate the development of well localized frames in the
context of Lie groups or homogeneous spaces with polynomial volume growth,
Riemannian manifolds with Ricci curvature bounded from below and other new
settings. The development of frames on the simplex and on graphs is another aim
of this project. The second core objective of this project is the development of
adaptive representations in the framework of anisotropic dilations of the space.
Anisotropic phenomena appear in various contexts in analysis, PDEs and in
applications. For instance, functions are frequently very smooth on subdomains
of Rd separated by smooth curves or manifolds. This project aims at resolving
this kind of singularities of functions (and more general singular behaviors) by
utilizing the framework of anisotropic multiscale dilations of d-dimensional
space or its subdomain, which may change rapidly from point to point at any
level and in depth. The main strands of this approach are (i) the development of
algorithms for rapid construction of best or near best dilation matrices leading
to optimal sparsity, (ii) the construction of highly localized anisotropic
frames and their utilization to representation and approximation of functions.

Many scientific areas require efficient representation of the underlying
functions in the natural topology of the targeted application. The capturing of
physical phenomena occurring at various scales requires locally supported
multiscale systems relative to the application domains. Moreover, these systems
should be amenable to fast and accurate computation. Such systems (called
needlets) have been recently developed by the investigator and his collaborators
for the sphere and the ball. The needlets are the outcome of a complete
rethinking of data representations in the context of classical orthogonal and
spectral representations and break new conceptual and practical ground, going
far beyond traditional multiscale ideas like wavelets. Spherical needlets have
already had a significant impact in cosmology/astrophysics for the statistical
study of the cosmic microwave background radiation data. This award will support
the development of image and data processing techniques, which will lead to much
novel representation systems in new mathematical settings, allowing the
treatment of new data structures. It will also enhance our fundamental
understanding of complicated processes through the development of innovative
adaptive methods for efficient (sparse) representation and approximation of
geometrical objects that have jumps or other sharp transitions along curves or
surfaces. It has the potential to impact many areas ranging from image
processing and edge detection to geopotential, oceanographic and atmospheric
modeling, and to physics and cosmology.
