
* 1211906
* Mathematics of Energy Markets & Differential Games, Financialization of Commodities Markets, and Volatility & ETF Derivatives
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COFFES
* 09/01/2012,09/07/2012
* K. Ronnie Sircar,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2016
* USD 235,663.00

Sircar DMS-1211906

The investigator and his student and collaborators study some problems central
to financial mathematics and mathematical economics. They develop analytical and
computational methods for continuous-time nonzero sum games that arise in models
of oligopolies where a small number of large players compete. Numerical solution
of the associated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman system of PDEs is challenging due to a
degeneracy that develops because one player may not participate. The goal is to
produce and analyze regularization or smoothing schemes that will be useful for
many models in mathematical economics involving differential games with
heterogeneous players. They also investigate the feedback mechanism from
speculative commodities trading to understand market instabilities, and study
volatility-related products through multiscale asymptotic analysis.

Energy markets are undergoing fundamental changes as production shifts from oil
to natural gas towards renewable sources. The investigator analyzes these
markets as oligopolies where the production costs and supplies are very
different between different fuels or technologies. For example, an oil producer
has relatively low costs but exhaustible reserves, while a producer from solar
technology has high costs and essentially inexhaustible supply. He also studies
how commodities markets have become more "financialized" over the past decade.
This is due to an influx of speculative traders. The price movements of goods
such as oil or wheat, which prior to the last decade were mainly governed by
supply and demand of users of the commodity, are now much more similar to the
more random movements of stock prices. Finally, the investigator looks at modern
derivatives contracts such as volatility derivatives and leveraged exchange
traded funds, in order to assess and quantify their risks, particularly in light
of the recent financial crisis.
