
* 1211350
* Structure, Transport, and Chaos in Volume-Preserving Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2012,07/29/2016
* James Meiss,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2018
* USD 537,000.00

The persistence of quasiperiodic motion on codimension-one tori in nearly-
integrable volume-preserving maps is explained by KAM theory. However, the
robustness of these tori and the existence of remnants upon destruction are
understood only in two-dimensions. The PI proposes to study tori of three-
dimensional maps, and to generalize the residue criterion discovered by Greene
and the anti-integrable limit discovered by Aubry. Studies will include symmetry
reduction, invariance, and the loss of integrability for general, structure-
preserving maps and flows. An important application is the optimization of
mixing in open duct flows used in the continuous blending of materials. Our
current understanding of the mixing process is, for the most part, limited to
flows that are in essence two-dimensional and either closed or recycling.
Transport in three-dimensional systems can be quantified by the flux through the
destroyed structures, computed using a generalized action based on Lagrangian
forms, thereby obtaining accurate and computationally efficient volume fluxes.
The PI and students will use the concept of transitory dynamics to quantify and
optimize transport in open flows. The extension to episodic and more general
time-dependence will clarify the definition of Lagrangian coherent structures in
aperiodic dynamics.

The complexity of patterns obtained by mixing a passive scalar in a fluid can be
observed by anyone pouring cream into hot coffee. That this process is not fully
understood is perhaps less obvious. If the flow is sufficiently turbulent then
mixing is rapid and uniformity is not hard to achieve. If, however, the flow is
slow, on a small scale, or viscous, then mixing is much more difficult. Yet,
such processes are important to many applications including the development of
micrometer scale bioreactors and effective mixing of polymer and granular
materials. A predictive theory for laminar mixing would also contribute to the
understanding of climate modeling and pollution dispersal in the atmosphere as
well as nutrient dispersal and spawning efficiencies for sea life. Mixing in
laminar flows proceeds by stretching and folding due to chaotic motion that
gives rise to fine-scale structure where diffusion is effective. Any measure of
mixing requires quantification of chaos and its concomitant transport. Chaotic
motion in incompressible fluids has some similarities to that in conservative
dynamics. The later models are used to predict the lifetime of particles in
accelerators, obtain rates for simple chemical reactions, calculate confinement
times in plasma fusion devices, understand the spectra of highly excited atomic
systems, and design efficient spacecraft trajectories. For chaotic dynamics,
prediction of specific trajectories is difficult; nevertheless, chaos can be
profitably utilized, for example, to improve efficiency of spacecraft
trajectories, by judiciously applying small course corrections, or to enhance
the lifetimes of particles in confinement devices and the rates of chemical
reactions. In this study, chaos will be used to optimize mixing with the goal of
obtaining practical designs for open, three-dimensional, mixing devices.
