
* 1211164
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Aspects of Interior Problem of Tomography
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2012,07/12/2012
* Alexander Katsevich,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 190,945.00

One of the long-standing paradigms in computed tomography (CT) is that CT
detectors should be large enough to cover the entire cross-section of the
patient. The reason for this requirement is that, according to the classical
theory, image reconstruction from truncated CT data (the so-called "interior
problem") is non-unique. As a consequence, many aspects of truncated data
inversion have not been studied in literature. In this project the PIs will
theoretically analyze the problem of image reconstruction from truncated data
with minimal prior knowledge. Both transmission CT and emission tomography
(SPECT) with constant attenuation will be addressed. The PIs will study the
questions of stability of the reconstructions in 2D and 3D, characterize the
null-space of an integral transform arising in the interior problem, and analyze
eigenfunctions of certain singular Sturm-Liouville problems. The PIs will also
develop efficient algorithms for numerical solution of the interior problem.
These algorithms will be implemented and tested using both simulated and real
data.

At present, interior tomography is at the cusp of being directly applicable in
general medical imaging diagnostics. The confluence of theoretical, algorithmic,
computational, and technological advances gives the PIs hope that interior
tomography can move from the "drawing boards" to practical medical imaging in
the not so distant future. While there are still some open research problems,
the results obtained recently show that the problems can be solved with a fairly
high degree of confidence. If successful, this study will provide theoretically
justified and practically applicable two and three-dimensional reconstruction
algorithms for imaging a region of interest inside an object (e.g., the patient)
from truncated data. The broader impact of the proposed research lies in the
promise it holds for improvements in the practice of clinical medicine and
biomedical science generally, as well as for industrial non-destructive testing.
The most direct benefit is the reduction in the x-ray dose to the patient; other
benefits include less expensive scanners, improved temporal resolution,
increased scanner throughput, capability of imaging larger objects, reduced
system cost, etc.
