
* 1251859
* Efficient, accurate and rapidly convergent algorithms for solutions of wave propagation problems in configurations complex material and geometrical features
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/30/2012,09/12/2012
* Catalin Turc,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Curry
* 06/30/2013
* USD 43,492.00

Turc DMS-1008076

The investigator develops efficient, accurate and rapidly convergent algorithms
for evaluation of the interaction between electromagnetic fields and complex
structures. Specifically, the investigator and his collaborators develop a
family of algorithms that focus mainly on (1) Fast, high-order numerical
solutions for wave-propagation problems in domains that contain geometric
singularities, and (2) Scattering problems from penetrable electromagnetic
periodic structures, with a particular emphasis on resonant problems relevant to
the design of photonic crystals and Negative Index Materials (NIM). The
investigator concentrates on development and implementation of a massively
parallel computational framework based on integral equation formulations capable
of producing fast and high-order solutions of wave scattering problems of
realistic complexity. The approach consists of the following main elements: (a)
High-order resolution of the singularities of the solutions of the boundary
integral equations in non-smooth domains; (b) Pseudodifferential-calculus-based
design and analysis of well-conditioned integral equation formulations leading
to small numbers of Krylov-subspace iterations for a wide range of
electromagnetic transmission problems; and (c) Use of equivalent sources, FFT-
based acceleration algorithms, and implementations that take advantage of the
newly available Graphic Processing Units (GPUs) computational platforms to
dramatically enhance computational times and capabilities.

The algorithms that are developed as part of this project are of fundamental
significance to diverse applications such as electromagnetic interference and
compatibility (electronic circuits), dielectric/magnetic coated conductors, and
composite meta-materials (photonic crystals and Negative Index Materials). The
simulation of electromagnetic wave propagation in complex structures gives rise
to a host of significant computational challenges that result from non-coercive
formulations, oscillatory solutions, geometric singularities, resonances, and
ill-conditioning in the high-frequency regime. The recent efforts of the
investigator and his collaborators resulted in the development of a highly
efficient computational methodology that resolved several of these difficulties
and whose extension enables the fulfillment of an ambitious plan: to simulate
with high fidelity realistic scattering environments with a high dynamic range.
