
* 1307685
* Applications of Frames to Problems in Mathematics and Engineering II
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2013,09/18/2013
* Peter Casazza,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 294,559.00

Casazza 1307685

The investigator and his students work on four fundamental problems concerning
applications of Hilbert space frames. These problems all require developing
completely new techniques for frame design. (1) Fusion frames have a host of
applications in distributed processing, wireless sensor networks, and other
areas. The investigator and his students construct fusion frames designed
specifically for applications. (2) It is now known that the 1959 Kadison-Singer
Problem is equivalent to fundamental unsolved problems in a dozen areas of
research in pure mathematics, applied mathematics, and engineering. The recent
surprising positive solution to the problem raises a number of fundamental
questions about the implementation of this result to all these areas of
research. Advances here affect a dozen important research areas in a fundamental
way. (3) The investigator and his students derive new classes of Grassmannian
frames. These frames have broad application to communication theory, graph
theory, and quantum physics -- especially quantum information theory, quantum
state tomography, quantum cryptography, and foundational issues in quantum
mechanics. (4) The investigator attacks the famous Paulsen Problem in frame
theory, which has important implications for operator theory and other areas of
pure mathematics.

The investigator constructs and designs fusion frames for a host of
applications to problems in engineering. One emphasis is on designing wireless
sensor networks. which are an emerging technology with the potential to detect
chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons in transport. Another
application is to distributed processing where data systems are too large for
central processing. This overload of data now appears in engineering, physics,
astronomy, medicine, biology, and industrial applications that demand real-time
processing on as ever-increasing amounts of data. Frames also have application
to a number of important problems in pure mathematics.
