
* 1308985
* Quantum Friction, Resonance Problems and New Methods in Geometric Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2013,07/23/2013
* Gang Zhou,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2014
* USD 97,933.00

The problem of quantum friction concerns the motion of an invading classical
particle in the Bose Einstein condensate. The PI considers the problem on a
partial differential equation (PDE) model. Specifically the PI uses a nonlinear
Schrodinger equation coupled to the trajectory of a classical particle, obtained
after taking the mean field limit on the Bose Einstein condensate. The PI will
prove the following three results: (1) if the initial speed of the classical
particle is higher than the speed of sound in the Bose Einstein condensate, i.e.
supersonic, then the particle will decelerate due to the friction until the
speed reaches the speed of sound, (2) if the initial speed of the particle is
subsonic, then the particle will travel ballistically as the time goes to
infinity, (3) the whole system will converge to some inertial mode. Technically,
the PI has to develop a better understanding of integro-differential equations,
together with other techniques in nonlinear PDEs, for example Fermi Golden
rules. The second problem is the resonance problem. The PI wants to consider the
problem in the context of linear and nonlinear Schrodinger equations. Very often
the presence of degeneracy, or resonance, in perturbation expansions makes the
problem hard. The PI hopes to develop a better understanding of normal form
transformations, and then to tackle some of the problems in Schrodinger
equations. The third problem is to develop a new method for geometric flows,
specifically mean curvature flow and Ricci flow. Different from the previous
works, by Huisken for example, the PI mainly uses modulation equations and
spectral analysis to perform almost precise estimates, instead of the maximum
principle and entropy estimates. Hopefully the PI can solve some open problems
here. For example, in the context of mean curvature flow, the evolving surface
will collapse in finite time and form a cylinder around the collapsing point.
However, whether the cylinder is unique is an open problem. The PI hopes to
solve it, also a similar problem in Ricci flow.

Quantum friction has many applications nowadays. One example is to test the
speed of particles, for example neutrinos, by shooting the particle to some
medium, for example argon. This phenomenon is known as Cerenkov radiation (Noble
prize 1958). Despite its importance, the mathematical understanding of Cerenkov
radiation is not satisfactory. In a broader context, the problem is in the class
of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics and quantum fluid, which are popular at
the moment. The second problem, the resonance problem, will deepen the
understanding of normal form transformations, and help to tackle other problems,
for example, in dynamical system (specifically KAM theory), and spin model in
quantum mechanics. For the third problem, in the recent years, people have
applied mean curvature flow to classify topological structures of different
surfaces, and have estimated the amount of mass in general relativity. The PI's
techniques provide more precise information on the evolution of the surfaces.
Hopefully the PI's method will find applications there.
