
* 1311740
* Pattern and wavenumber selection in the wake of fronts
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2013,07/17/2015
* Arnd Scheel,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 380,000.00

Pattern and wavenumber selection in the wake of fronts

In a variety of chemical, biological, and manufacturing processes, patterns
emerge in the wake of interfaces. This proposal is particularly motivated by
Liesegang patterns in recurrent precipitation, bacterial colony patterning, and
self-organized nano-ripple formation under ion-bombardment of surfaces. In all
those contexts, a plethora of regular and complex patterns has been observed as
they form in the wake of moving fronts, both experimentally and in direct
simulations. Pattern-forming fronts have been poorly understood from a
mathematical view point, yet they provide a prime avenue to a systematic
understanding of patterning in phase separation processes, surface evolution,
and biological growth. A systematic, model-independent understanding of
patterning in the wake of fronts, combined with computational tools for
quantitative predictions, has the potential to both explain classic 100-year old
chemical experiments and shed new lights on biological aggregation mechanisms.

Coherent patterns in the wake of fronts allow for clean qualitative and
quantitative predictions of patterns. In this respect, the proposed research
will give new tools for quantitative, deterministic model validation.
Predictions on patterned surface instabilities have potentially high impact in
manufacturing processes. The educational aspect of the proposed research
involves undergraduate students during two summer REUs and four graduate
students.
