
* 1311709
* Fluid-multi-layered-structure interaction problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2013,04/17/2018
* Suncica Canic,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2019
* USD 204,577.00

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems arise in many applications. The
widely known examples are aeroelasticity and biofluids. In biofluidic
applications, such as, e.g., the study of interaction between blood flow and
cardiovascular tissue, the coupling between the fluid and the relatively light
structure is highly nonlinear, requiring sophisticated ideas for the study of
their solutions. In the blood flow application, the problems are further
exacerbated by the fact that the walls of major arteries are composed of several
layers, each with different mechanical characteristics. No results exist so far
that analyze solutions to fluid-structure interaction problems in which the
structure is composed of several different layers. The proposed research takes a
first step in this direction by proposing a program to study the existence of
solutions to a class of FSI problems describing the interaction between a multi-
layered structure and the flow of an incompressible, viscous fluid, giving rise
to a fully coupled, nonlinear moving boundary, fluid-multi-structure interaction
problem. The analysis relies on a novel, loosely coupled, partitioned, time-
marching numerical scheme, and on novel compactness arguments providing
convergence of the numerical scheme to a weak solution of the nonlinear fluid-
multi-layered structure interaction problem. The proposed program opens up a new
field within the area of FSI problems. This work brings to light several
features that have not been studied before. In particular, this work reveals a
new regularizing mechanism in FSI problems that is due to the presence of a
fluid-structure interface with mass. The inertia of the fluid-structure
interface regularizes the evolution of the entire FSI solution.

This is an exciting, novel study requiring the development of original
mathematical techniques motivated by an important biological application: the
interaction between blood flow and human arterial walls. It is well-known that
arterial walls are composed of several layers, each with different mechanical
characteristics and thickness. The healthy physiology and the pathophysiology of
the human cardiovascular system are significantly affected by the pulsation of
arterial walls during each cardiac cycle. However, the interaction between the
different arterial wall layers and their interaction with blood flow is still
not completely understood. For example, recent developments in ultrasound
speckle tracking methods revealed significant shear strain between the different
layers of arterial walls in high adrenaline situations. The consequences of this
phenomenon on the initiation of cardiovascular disease are yet to be understood.
The proposed research makes a step in this direction by designing mathematical
models, and by analyzing solutions of the mathematical models that capture
fluid-structure interaction between blood flow and arterial walls in the case
when arterial walls are modeled as multi-layered structures. No mathematical
results exist so far in this area, and the proposed research opens up a new area
in the field of fluid-structure interaction problems. The work proposed here
promises to develop a strong partnership between the University of Houston, the
University of Pittsburgh, the University of Zagreb, and the Texas Medical Center
in Houston. The PI is a woman, and active recruitment of minorities and women to
participate in this research is proposed.
