
* 1311923
* Theory and Applications of Weighted Complementarity Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2013,08/12/2013
* Florian Potra,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 179,983.00

The weighted complementarity problem (wCP) is a new paradigm in applied
mathematics that provides a unifying framework for analyzing and solving a
variety of equilibrium problems in economics, multibody dynamics, atmospheric
chemistry and other areas in science and technology. It represents a far
reaching generalization of the notion of a complementarity problem (CP).
Generally speaking, wCP consists in finding a pair of vectors belonging to the
intersection of a manifold with a cone, such that their product in a some
algebra equals a given weight vector. When the weight vector is equal to zero
wCP reduces to CP. With nonzero weight vectors the theory of wCP becomes more
complicated than the theory of CP. The aim of this project is to investigate the
analytic and geometric properties of wCP and to develop efficient algorithms for
computing its solution. The investigator focuses on finding sufficient
conditions ensuring the convexity of the solution set of wCP, on studying
different central paths for wCP and the relationship between their curvatures
and the computational complexity of the corresponding path-following algorithms,
and on establishing the analyticity of certain central paths. The latter
property has implications on the superlinear convergence of the path-following
algorithms. These questions are not trivial even for linear wCP over the non-
negative orthant, but they become very difficult in the nonlinear case and/or
for more general cones such as the second order cone or the cone of positive
semidefinite matrices. The intellectual merit of the project lies in
understanding the theoretical properties of wCP and the computational complexity
of interior point methods for solving wCP. This extends existing theory from CP
to a more general class of problems. The generalization for wCP is highly
nontrivial and requires invention of new mathematical techniques.

In recent years the scientific community has embarked on a sustained research
effort for understanding computability of market equilibria, motivated in part
by the emergence of highly lucrative markets on the internet. Formulating an
equilibrium problem as a wCP opens the possibility of devising highly efficient
algorithms for its numerical solution. For example, Fisher's competitive market
equilibrium model can be formulated as a wCP, while the Arrow-Debreu competitive
market equilibrium problem (due to Nobel prize laureates Kenneth Joseph Arrow
and Gerard Debreu) can be formulated as a self-dual wCP. The original proofs of
existence of solutions to the Fisher and Arrow-Debreu equilibrium problems were
nonconstructive. One of the objectives of the present project is to formulate a
large class of market equilibrium problems and game-theoretical problems as wCPs
that are amenable to efficient computation. The broader impacts of the proposed
research are significant because the applicability of wCP extends beyond market
equilibrium problems. In this research program, the investigator aims at
identifying several classes of problems in science and engineering that can be
modeled as wCP. Studying theoretical properties of wCPs and developing robust
algorithms for their numerical solution will provide the scientific community
with new modeling and computational tools that are likely to have a positive
impact on the US economy.
