
* 1311707
* Modeling and numerical simulation of yield stress fluids, and studies of viscoelasticity and confinement in the flow of two immiscible fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2013,07/23/2013
* Yuriko Renardy,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2017
* USD 192,805.00

The project is devoted to the modeling and numerical simulation of yield stress
fluids, and studies of viscoelasticity and confinement in the flow of two
immiscible fluids. The majority of the effort is focused on the following three
themes: (i) Recent developments have enabled detailed measurements of the
properties of a class of suspensions known as thixotropic yield stress fluids.
An example is the flow of ketchup under applied stresses. Prior theoretical
models require the input of measured quantities such as a yield stress, or to
pose a phenomenological equation for the structure of the microcomponents. In
contrast, a new mathematical perspective is explored in this project, in which
yielding is an output of a systematically derived viscoelastic constitutive
model in the limit of large relaxation time. Direct numerical simulations, in
conjunction with multi-scale perturbation techniques based on slow and fast time
scales, will enable the prediction of several experimentally observed phenomena,
such as the hysteretic loop for up-down ramping of applied stress. (ii) The
technological drive toward smaller scales has spawned new modeling and
simulation challenges for droplet evolution in devices that are as small as the
droplet itself. Confinement can enhance drop elongation, lead to new modes of
drop breakup, and introduce numerical difficulties with respect to the
constitutive laws and interface tracking. Capillary-focusing is a recently
developed technology for the production of monodisperse submicron-sized
droplets, which is not completely understood. This project sheds light on the
physical mechanisms at work, by modeling the Hele-Shaw geometry and with direct
numerical simulations. (iii) The advantages in combining the desired properties
of two different liquids to produce a new blended mixture are well known. The
quality of the blend is strongly dependent on the size of the dispersed droplets
and their distribution. Therefore, it is of practical importance to understand
how a droplet evolves in a matrix fluid, and to predict the influence of the
rheological properties of each constituent. A novel viscoelastic height function
algorithm will be developed and implemented in this project, and optimized for
drop breakup simulations with possibly high gradients of stress.

This project contributes to the understanding of physical mechanisms that
control practical applications, such as recycling plastics for environmental
sustainability, predicting the dynamics of droplets and particulates in confined
flows for biomedical drug delivery, and understanding fundamental processes that
improve nanofluidic technology for the pharmaceutical industry. The use of a
computational infrastructure such as XSEDE will enable direct numerical
simulations for comparison with experimental data. The knowledge gained from
this research will be disseminated to a broader scientific audience at
conferences on mathematics, physics and engineering, and through journal
publications. The outcomes include the training of graduate students, outreach
to the local K-12 audience, and cross-disciplinary partnerships.
