
* 1312883
* Current Density Impedance Imaging from Minimal Interior Data
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2013,06/14/2015
* Alexandru Tamasan,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Lora Billings
* 08/31/2016
* USD 157,777.00

This project concerns the problem of conductivity imaging from minimal knowledge
of boundary and interior data. The mathematical formulation leads to the non-
linear partial differential equation of 1-Laplacian with a variable coefficient.
This is a singular and degenerate elliptic equation for which solutions can be
defined in the viscosity sense. While not all viscosity solutions are of
interest in the inverse conductivity problem, it turns out that solutions of
interest are of weighted least gradient. One direction of research considers the
study of weighted least gradient functions (in the sense of Radon measures) with
prescribed boundary data. A major goals is to prove uniqueness and stability for
the minimization problem in the larger space of functions of bounded variations.
Delicate questions concerning the regularity of the weight, as well as what
happens when the coefficient vanishes on open subsets are to be investigated.
Another direction of research concerns the understanding of types of boundary
data which would a priori exclude singularities. Existence of such data would
then reduce the problem to a Hamilton-Jacobi system, in which the role of time
is played by one spatial variable. More generally, some regularization
techniques coming from the algorithmic side of Image Processing will be analyzed
in the context of the weighted minimum gradient problem. On an second facet of
imaging, the PI will investigate the relation between the range conditions that
characterize the data obtained in the attenuated X-ray transform, and the theory
of A-analytic maps, as well as a stochastic model arising in X-ray tomography
when low count radiation does not warrant the law of large numbers assumed in
the transport model.

The proposed research is in the area of Inverse Problems of hybrid type, a hot
topic in imaging sciences that uses coupled Physics to determine a material
property inside a body. The PI aims to find and analyze new mathematical methods
which quantitatively recover the electrical conductivity (a characteristic
encoding responses to electromagnetic excitations) with significantly higher
accuracy and resolution than currently possible. A quantitative display that not
only reveals the inner structure of the object, but also allows for
discriminating in the status of a same part. Applications range from
nondestructive testing in Material Sciences to Medical Imaging and Diagnostic.
Of special interest in medical diagnostic applications, the use of harmless
radiation to image with high resolution would decrease the current rate of
misdiagnosis by methods such as CAT-scans, and would detect defective tissue at
an earlier stage of development, with the benefit of increasing the odds of a
cure. At least two students will participate and be trained in this
investigation.
