
* 1312569
* Idempotent Methods and Fundamental Solutions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2013,09/17/2013
* William McEneaney,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2017
* USD 250,001.00

Idempotent algebras include the max-plus and min-plus semifields and the min-max
semiring. There is a deep relation between these algebras and the semigroups
associated with Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) and Hamilton-Jacobi-Isaacs partial
differential equations (PDEs). During the past decade, the max-plus curse-of-
dimensionality-free methods for solution of classes of first-order HJB PDEs were
discovered. Most importantly, for some classes of HJB PDEs, these methods can
solve problems in significantly higher dimensions than would be feasible with
classical, i.e., grid-based, methods, which are subject to the curse of
dimensionality. More recently, it has been discovered that idempotent
distributive properties allow such methods to address stochastic control and
dynamic game problems, and this is opening up interesting new domains. The
project has four components. The first is the further development of max-plus
curse-of-dimensionality-free numerical methods, specifically extending the
domain of applicability to diffusion processes. Second, application of these
methods to the control of quantum-spin in the case of open quantum systems where
one has stochastic inputs. On the third front, the investigators are developing
idempotent algebra-based methods for solution of linear, infinite-dimensional
control and estimation problems where the dynamics are described by systems of
PDEs. The fourth component regards fundamental solutions of two-point boundary
value problems (TPBVPs) for conservative systems, in which case one may apply
the Stationary Action Principle. The fundamental solutions convert two-point
boundary value problems into initial value problems via an idempotent
convolution of the fundamental solution with a cost function related to the
terminal data. Moreover, as these are fundamental solutions, once computed, one
can easily convert any of a large class of TPBVPs for that system and time
duration into an initial value problem. The investigators are also expanding
this theory to cover the classic n-body problem. There, it can be found that an
n-body TPBVP, posed in terms of the stationary-action principle, can be
converted into a differential game, and the fundamental solution can be obtained
as a set in Euclidean space.

Optimal control has not generally been feasible due to the half-century old
problem of the curse of dimensionality, whereby with classical grid-based
approaches, the computational complexity grows exponentially fast with the
dimension of the system being controlled. Max-plus based curse-of-
dimensionality-free methods are not necessarily subject to this exponential
growth. Consequently, this research is opening up large application areas which
were previously inaccessible. Specific applications of interest (among many
possible application domains) include spacecraft and aircraft guidance and
control, quantum spin control, signal amplification for long fiber-optic
networks, UAV sensor tasking operations and portfolio optimization. The efforts
on fundamental solutions for two-point boundary value problems will allow rapid
solution of dynamical system problems where one seeks solutions of the dynamics
for a variety of initial/terminal conditions. That is, the fundamental solution
allows one to use the same object repeatedly for varying initial and terminal
data. The applications of current interest include systems governed by linear,
infinite-dimensional dynamics such as the standard heat and wave equations, as
well as the n-body problem. In the latter case, applications could include rapid
estimation of asteroid threats. Extensions to other classes of potential fields,
beyond gravitational, will also be considered.
