
* 1312874
* Nonlinear Interactions and Dynamics in Problems From Fluids and Optics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 08/15/2013,04/18/2017
* Jeremy Marzuola,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2017
* USD 170,000.00

The goal of this project will be to study theoretically and computationally
quasilinear dispersive partial differential equations related to Hamiltonian
models in mathematical physics from nonlinear optics, water waves, many body
quantum systems and plasma physics. The equations of interest come from families
of Schrödinger, Dirac, Korteweg-de Vries, and gravity-capillary wave equations.
In addition, the PI hopes to continue to explore the strongly nonlinear effects
relating to frequency cascades in Hamiltonian models on compact domains. The
bulk of the project will focus on understanding theoretically the existence and
regularity of solutions to strongly nonlinear models, as well as studying local
and global dynamics of special solutions within these complex models. However, a
component will also consist of using modern functional analytic techniques to
study convergence of numerical methods and to study validity of discrete
approximations to these models. Such analysis can serve as motivation for
dynamics, as well as a means of testing asymptotic limits where direct analysis
may no longer predict precise dynamics. In addition, the PI will work to develop
a functional analytic framework for studying stability under stochastic
perturbations of quasilinear models and computational approximations.
Quasilinear partial differential equations arise in models where curvature has a
strong influence on the underlying physics. Hence, surface tension in fluids,
surface energy in crystals or relativistic effects in optics can introduce
interaction terms that strongly depend upon higher order derivatives of the
solution. It is the aim of this project to shed light on in what sense these
models have solutions and in particular understand precise asymptotic
descriptions of the solutions when possible. Capillary waves might be useful for
measuring the surface signature of internal water waves, crystal relaxation
plays a role in semiconductor fabrication and ultra-short pulse lasers have
appeared in many recent physics applications and plasma generation. From a human
resources standpoint, quasilinear problems provide a large pool of problems that
can be used for training purposes in work with researchers of all levels, from
undergraduate to postdoctoral. In particular, undergraduates can learn some of
the innate difficulties in quasilinear equations by numerically analyzing simple
1,2-dimensional toy-model systems, graduate students can learn the functional
analysis framework and develop the techniques through applications to reduced
models or critical equations, and postdocs can collaborate on projects to fully
explore the models, develop techniques and work towards optimal results in
stability theory and phenomenology. Such approaches give trainees and the PI a
broad class of analytic and computational tools to use for solving many
interesting problems, allowing them to work towards a full enough understanding
to consider complex nonlinear inverse problems and a large set of open nonlinear
scattering problems to work on well into their careers.
