
* 1312856
* Collaborative Research: New Directions in Atomic Bose-Einstein Condensates
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2013,09/04/2013
* Panayotis Kevrekidis,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2016
* USD 64,999.00

The aim of this proposal is to explore a number of novel, emerging directions in
the context of atomic Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs). The project will extend
the recent collaborative work of the PIs on the theme of vortex dynamics in
trapped condensates. There, we will explore both connections with experimental
results obtained by a collaborating experimental group at Amherst College and
ones with other areas of mathematics and physics. These include most notably the
spectral theory of such nonlinear coherent states, structural phase transitions
thereof, reductions to particle-based dynamical models with interesting
nonlinear bifurcation phenomena, and computational tools to monitor the
existence, stability and dynamics of vortex clusters. Also, a multi-component
generalization of these themes will be considered in the recently established
direction of spin-orbit coupled BECs. These contain a more complex operator
structure within the nonlinear problem, with a linear part featuring both a
dispersive (Laplacian) and a Dirac-like part and the interplay of these terms
and their impact on nonlinear states such as dark or bright solitons and
vortices will be studied. The results in this direction will be compared to
ongoing experiments by a collaborating experimental group at Washington State
University.

This research is expected to provide a new generation of both theoretical and
computational tools for studying nonlinear coherent structures with a particular
view towards the pristine atomic physics setup of Bose-Einstein condensates.
Furthermore, the theoretical/mathematical tools developed here will bear broader
impacts towards areas such as spectral theory and nonlinear ordinary and partial
differential equations, among others. It is also envisioned that our findings
will create connections with a number of areas of Physics such as Fluid
Dynamics, Nonlinear Optics and Statistical Mechanics (of Phase Transitions). On
the other hand, the developed computational tools will explore the interface
between numerical bifurcation theory, dynamical system and even Monte-
Carlo/Molecular Dynamics techniques and their potential use for the physical
system at hand. Importantly, the research will be a genuine synergy in truly
Applied Mathematics, involving not only the development of theoretical methods
and computational techniques, but also their direct connection with physical
experiments. Finally, the project will be critically focused on sustaining a
dynamic and multi-disciplinary team with a strong and diverse core of graduate
students and hence will be consistently geared towards having a significant set
of broader impacts. The relevant research will be disseminated via high quality
journal publications both in Mathematics and in Physics and will be presented at
Nonlinear Science and Mathematical Physics conferences both in the US and
abroad.
