
* 1313373
* Financial markets with discontinuities
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2013,08/27/2013
* Tomoyuki Ichiba,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2017
* USD 84,601.00

Ichiba 1313373

The main objective of the project is to develop new stochastic models for
important financial systems such as equity, foreign exchange, bond, and credit
markets through stochastic differential equations (SDEs) with discontinuous
coefficients and with degeneracies. Discontinuous coefficients introduce a rich
family of probabilistic models that capture abrupt transitions from one phase to
another phase of random phenomena. The degeneracy of the diffusion coefficients
brings to the system some interesting mixtures of stochastic dynamics and
deterministic dynamics in the neighborhood around the domain of degeneracy. A
prototypical tractable example is a system of SDEs with piece-wise constant
drift/diffusion coefficients, which can be applied to financial mathematics in
the context of stochastic portfolio theory. The investigator tackles new
problems in SDEs with piece-wise constant coefficients, works towards more
general models with degeneracy and discontinuous coefficients, and applies these
mathematical results to improve understanding of the complicated global
financial system. The problems include boundary behaviors, ergodicity, large
deviations, weak/strong solvability of forward and backward SDEs with
discontinuous coefficients and boundary conditions, large-scale optimal
portfolio choice, and long-term stochastic optimizations.

The investigator studies financial systems by developing and analyzing new
models of stochastic dynamics that may capture elastic changes and aberrant
risky phenomena in the system. Those anomalies are caused by uncertainty
inherent in the financial system. It is important to understand the properties
of the models and to propose good safeguards, in order to increase efficiency of
the financial system and to prevent its failure. Another feature of the proposed
work is to capture, describe, and predict the evolution of the financial system.
The greater understandings of the financial market mechanism that result from
these studies can potentially increase efficiency of long-term financial
investments. In addition, mathematical methods developed in the project may
contribute to several areas of mathematics -- partial differential equations,
combinatorics, geometry, and general dynamical systems.
