
* 1403400
* Frame-Based Kernel Analysis and Algorithms for Fast Recovery of Erasures and Multiplexing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,08/22/2014
* Deguang Han,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 163,460.00

Accurate transmission of messages is critical in many areas of application in
our information-based society. But a message can be distorted in many ways,
often arriving with erasures in parts of the message. In such cases, most frame-
based methods to restore the message have been aimed at either fast
reconstruction of the message (but allowing approximation errors) or perfect
reconstruction (but usually with expensive computational cost). In this project
the investigator targets problems related to both fast and accurate recovery of
the lost data from either known or unknown locations in the message. This has
direct applications in information technology, biotechnology, and
communications, particularly in multiplexing where expensive channels are shared
and the multiplexed data are used to enhance coding security. Students will be
trained in the course of this project.

The principal investigator and his students work on three fundamental questions
concerning the use of frames for fast and accurate recovery of signals with
erasures: (i) Develop new approaches to the problem of recovering signals from
the frame coefficients when there are erasures at either known or unknown
locations. The investigation includes both theoretical analysis and new
algorithms. The main objective is to characterize and identify the encoding
frames that ensure fast and perfect recovery of the erasures for almost all
input signals when erasures occur at possibly unknown locations. (ii) Develop
theory and algorithms for optimal superframes and erasure recovery in channel-
sharing applications. Multiplexing combines several messages into a single one,
which must then be decoded -- that is, its separate component messages must be
extracted. Multiplexing usually is done to share an expensive resource, such as
a channel, or to enhance the security of the component messages. The
investigator studies conditions on superframes that allow perfect recovery from
erasures while maintaining information security among the receivers of the
different component messages. (iii) Study spectrally optimal frames. The chief
aim here is to characterize spectrally k-uniform or near k-uniform frames.
Additionally, the investigator continues to work on problems related to the
theory of frame dilations and its connections to the Similarity Problem.
