
* 1406730
* Theoretical Models of Shape Formation: Analysis, Geometry and Energy Scaling Laws
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,08/06/2014
* Marta Lewicka,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2017
* USD 169,037.00

Recently there has been sustained interest in growth-induced morphogenesis
(i.e., shape formation), particularly of low-dimensional structures such as
filaments, laminae, and their assemblies, which arise routinely in biological
systems and their artificial mimics. The physical basis for morphogenesis can be
presented in terms of a simple principle: differential growth in a body leads to
residual strains that generically result in changes of its shape. Eventually,
the growth patterns are expected to be, in turn, regulated by these strains, so
that this principle might well be the basis for the physical self-organization
of biological tissues. Such topics lie at the interface of biology, chemistry
and physics, with practical questions of engineering design and others.
Residually stressed laminae are present in science and technology in a variety
of situations; from atomically thin grapheme (of thickness 1 nm, with a lateral
span of a few cm), to the earth's crust (of thickness 10 km, which spans
thousands of km laterally). On the everyday scale, there has been much work on
trying to understand the mechanics of these laminae when they are actuated, as
in a growing leaf, a swelling or shrinking sheet of gel, a plastically strained
sheet, etc. Understanding of the laws governing the equilibria and the evolution
of such structures has many potential applications. The investigator studies
mathematical problems related to the development of the shapes of these low-
dimensional structures due to the interplay between growth patterns of the
structures and residual strains in the material. Students are trained in the
course of the project.

Questions about the development of shapes fundamentally have also a deeply
geometric and analytical character. Indeed, they may be seen as a variation on a
classical theme in differential geometry -- that of embedding a shape with a
given metric in a space of possibly different dimension. In this project the
investigator aims not only to state the conditions when this embedding might be
done (or not), but also to: 1) constructively determine the shapes resulting
from minimizing the energy that measures the overall discrepancy between the
imposed metric and the metric realized by the deformed shape, 2) determine the
shapes as above in terms of an appropriate mechanical theory, and 3) investigate
the separation of scales that arises naturally in slender structures and induces
the constraints associated with the prescription of growth laws.
