
* 1407207
* Large scale structure in complex networks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2014,06/21/2016
* Mark Newman,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 265,000.00

Many systems of scientific and technological importance can be represented as
networks: the Internet, the power grid, airline and road networks, biological
networks, and social networks, to name just a few. The last fifteen years have
seen a wave of advances in mathematical and computational techniques for
understanding these systems and analyzing the massive troves of network data
that are becoming available. The work to be undertaken under this funding will
do two things: (1) develop fundamental new mathematics to enhance our
understanding of the structure and function of networks of all types, and (2)
employ that mathematical foundation in the creation of new measures, metrics,
and computer algorithms for practical application to real-world network
problems. The work will draw on mathematical methods from two areas in which the
PI has worked extensively: Statistics (Bayesian inference) and spectral theory.
Using these tools the PI and his students and collaborators will develop
techniques to tackle a range of network problems, including: the detection of
communities of interacting nodes or individuals within larger networks; the
identification of the most influential or core nodes with a network; the
understanding and prediction of spreading processes on networks, including the
spread of diseases over human contact networks; fast and scalable computer
algorithms for the analysis of network data on the largest scales; and specific
applications to a range of technological, social, and information networks.

This grant will fund a three-year research effort to develop fundamental
mathematical tools for understanding large, real-world networks such as the
Internet, the World Wide Web, biological networks, epidemiological contact
networks, social networks, and others. The proposed work focuses on large-scale
network properties, rather than local properties, and will employ techniques
mainly from two fields, spectral methods and statistical inference. Recent work
by the PI's group and others has produced significant advances, including a
number of results revealing deep and previously unsuspected connections between
spectral and inference methods. These advances have opened up substantial
avenues for new research whose exploration is the primary goal of the proposed
work. Specific projects to be undertaken include the development of random
matrix and free probability methods for computing spectra of complex networks
within several widely used structural models; development of new inference
algorithms for features such as core/periphery structure and centrality,
particularly based on belief propagation methods; connections between inference
and spectral methods, particularly via the Hashimoto operator which appears in
the theory of graph zeta functions; spectral localization and the development of
improved spectral centrality measures; applications to network processes such as
percolation and disease transmission, which can be treated using belief
propagation and hence connected to spectral properties of graphs; applications
to spectral algorithms for multiway community detection and other large-scale
structure detection problems; connections between spectral and inference methods
derived from relaxations of the likelihood function; and model selection methods
for network inference.
