
* 1411866
* Long-term Effects of Small Perturbations and Other Multiscale Asymptotic Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2014,08/19/2014
* Mark Freidlin,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2017
* USD 210,000.00

Long term effects of small perturbations, both deterministic and stochastic are
of great interest in real life and for various intellectual enterprises from
history, sociology, and economics to biology, physics, and engineering. When one
wants to understand the time evolution of a complex system, a simplified model
of the system, that can be analyzed, is usually a way forward. In this case one
chooses a relatively small number of main 'factors' or variables which are
guiding the evolution of the system while neglecting other factors that are
relatively insignificant. On a short time interval, these small factors are not
essential. However, on long time scales, the factors, which were considered as
negligible, can become important and even critical for determining the system's
behavior. The investigator and his colleagues are developing new models and
methods for studying such problems. 'Problem' examples include climate change,
biological evolution, and phase transitions in physical or economic systems as
well as the appearance of 'stable' oscillations, equilibriums, and other
patterns caused by small perturbations.

The investigator and his colleagues study deterministic and stochastic
perturbations of various dynamical systems as well as semi-flows corresponding
to the evolution of PDEs. A general approach to, at first glance, different
problems is suggested. Metastability and stochastic resonance, which are
manifestation of the large deviation theory, as well as the averaging principle
and its modifications can be considered from this point of view. This general
approach is based on the study of limiting slow evolution as a motion on the
cone of invariant measures of the non-perturbed system. The approach underlines
the importance of joint consideration of deterministic and stochastic
perturbations. Perturbations of the generalized Landau-Lifshitz equation for
multiple spins, incompressible flows in 3D having a conservation law, reaction-
advection-diffusion equations in narrow channels arising in models of molecular
motors can be studied using this approach. Various boundary problems for second
order elliptic equations with a small parameter can be considered as well.
Finally, the PI will also study the small mass asymptotics for the Langevin
equation.
