
* 1411560
* Integrable PDEs and Hankel operators
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,07/29/2016
* Alexei Rybkin,AK,University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 255,000.00

This project is devoted to some fundamental issues of propagation of waves in
various media. The principal methods of this work come from the soliton theory.
Solitons are very special solitary waves ("bumps") of water that move with
constant speed without any deterioration in their shape. The first soliton
siting was described in 1834 by the Scottish naval architect John Scott Russell,
who noticed this wave in a channel and pursued it on his horse for quite a
while. The soliton theory was originated in the mid-1960s from the fundamental
Gardner-Greene-Kruskal-Miura discovery of the inverse scattering transform (IST)
for the Korteweg-de Vries (KdV) equation for shallow water waves (this equation
happens to describe the channel phenomenon that Russell observed). Soon
thereafter different versions of IST were found for many other physically
important nonlinear evolution partial differential equations (PDEs) referred to
as completely integrable systems. Being conceptually similar to the Fourier
transform, the IST has yielded a tremendous amount of information about
completely integrable systems, far beyond what standard PDE techniques may
offer. Soliton theory is regarded as a major achievement of the 20th century
science connecting different branches of pure mathematics and theoretical
physics with numerous applications ranging from hydrodynamics and nonlinear
optics to astrophysics and elementary particle theory. Much of work in soliton
theory has been done on the propagation of waves initiated by rapidly decaying
or periodic initial data (the so-called classical data). The corresponding
solutions have a relatively simple and well understood wave structure of running
solitons accompanied by radiation of decaying waves, or periodic wave-trains and
their modulations. However any deviation from classical data meets principal
difficulties that are yet to be surmounted. The project will focus on soliton
theory for initial profiles that are much broader than classical. We expect new
types of solutions with much more complicated wave structure and far-reaching
practical applications. It is expected that the results could be used for
understanding rogue waves, soliton propagation on different backgrounds
(including noisy), tidal waves, certain meteorological phenomena (e.g. morning
glory), or for the study of propagation of coherent structures in noisy media in
such diverse disciplines as hydrodynamics, telecommunication, atmospheric
sciences, nonlinear optics, plasma, astrophysics, etc. In the context of the KdV
equation the principal investigator has reformulated the classical IST in terms
of Hankel operators and Titchmarsh-Weyl m-functions that let one extend the IST
to a surprisingly broad class of initial data. This was achieved by employing
some subtle properties of the m-function and deep results from the theory of
Hankel operators. The principal investigator plans to use powerful methods of
Hankel operators to identify the broadest possible class of initial profiles for
which a suitable analog of the IST exists. Another objective is asymptotic
analysis of the underlying solutions. The well-known powerful machinery of the
classical Riemann-Hilbert problem breaks down on such initial profiles in a
number of serious ways. The main thrust will be put on understanding how to make
the Riemann-Hilbert problem work far outside of the realm of classical problems.
The results are expected to be instrumental for various applications. The
accompanying mathematical problems are also very important to the theory of the
Schrodinger operator, the cornerstone of quantum mechanics, and the theory of
Hankel and Toeplitz operators, fundamental objects of operator theory.
Uncovering connections between soliton theory and Hankel operators theory is of
great independent interest and could potentially have a profound influence on
both theories. The project will have a very large educational component. The
principal investigator is committed to continuing his research experience for
undergraduates program on nonlinear wave phenomena to identify and mentor young
scholars in the field of applied mathematics. It is his intent to attract a
diverse (gender, ethnicity, disability) group of talented undergraduates into
the program to broaden the participation of underrepresented in the mathematical
sciences groups.
