
* 1412627
* Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2014,04/15/2014
* Thomas Chen,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2015
* USD 18,963.00

This award provides support for the 2014 Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics
Symposium that will take place at the University of Texas at Austin during the
Fall 2014 semester. The Symposium will focus on the area where probability
theory, dynamical systems theory, spectral theory, and partial differential
equations intersect and interact. The Symposium is a forum for regional
specialists in mathematical physics and related areas of analysis to become
familiar with the latest problems and present their own results; in addition it
introduces young mathematicians to the current state of the subject. More
information, including a list of speakers and abstracts, registration
information, and an archive of the past symposium can be found at the website of
the meeting:
https://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/tc/TeXAMP/TeXAMP-2014/TeXAMP-2014.html

The Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium is a regional weekend
meeting held annually, hosted in turn by Rice University, and the University of
Texas at Austin. It is intended for the participation of around 50 people
(including 25 non-local graduate students). The workshop brings together many
senior mathematicians from Texas and neighboring states, who may not otherwise
have a chance to discuss mathematics together throughout the year. Structurally
the symposium consists of 8 main lectures given by nationally recognized leaders
in the field, and contributed sessions for advanced graduate students and
participating researchers from regional universities, to present their work.
This will provide graduate students with an opportunity to obtain feedback from
senior faculty from other departments. The networking activities made possible
by the Symposium will prove to be a valuable experience for young researchers.
The Symposium encourages and financially supports participation by students,
recent Ph.D. recipients, and members of groups underrepresented in mathematics.
