
* 1412023
* Topics in Applied PDE
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2014,07/03/2014
* Alexander Kiselev,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 420,031.00

The proposal focuses on three directions: intense structures in fluid flows,
mixing by fluid flows, and effects of chemical attraction in biology, ecology
and medicine. Fluid flows exhibit high degree of complexity and can easily
develop intense structures. Better fundamental understanding of the mechanisms
of creation of intense features in fluid flows is very important for many
applications in engineering, weather forecasting and other fields. The first
direction of the proposal seeks to study classical equations of fluid mechanics
focussing on situations where intense fluid motion can develop spontaneously.
Recent novel results obtained by the PI in this direction provide hopes for an
essential advance in understanding these complex and important phenomena. In the
second direction, a study of most efficient ways of mixing in fluid flow is
proposed. Efficient mixing is of critical importance in many applications,
ranging from combustion in engines to ecology. In the third direction, the PI
will study the role of chemical sensing and chemical attraction for enhancement
of reactions in biology. One situation where it is relevant involves healing of
the body, where infected or injured tissues releases special compounds which
attract immune system cells to fight the infection. Chemical attraction can also
be an undesirable effect: some tumors are known to rely on this mechanism for
their growth. The PI plans to develop new mathematical tools to analyze these
more advanced and better predictive models. The project involves a training
component, where junior researchers at all levels will be mentored as scholars
and educators and will work on research projects under the guidance of the PI.

The first main focus of the proposal is on studying solutions of the classical
equations of fluid mechanics, such as incompressible Euler, Navier-Stokes and 2D
Boussinesq system. Recent numerical simulations of Hou and Luo suggest a new
scenario for singularity formation for solutions of the 3D Euler equation. The
scenario is axi-symmetric, and singularity formation happens at the boundary.
The scenario also applies for the 2D inviscid Boussinesq system. Inspired by the
geometry of the scenario, the PI (jointly with Vladimir Sverak) has constructed
examples of solutions of 2D Euler equation with double exponential growth in
vorticity gradient. Such growth is known to be sharp. The PI intends to use new
insights obtained in the construction to approach more complex and long open
questions for 2D Boussinesq system and 3D Euler equation. Methods employed will
include functional analysis, Fourier analysis, PDE techniques and novel
comparison principles. The second direction concerns efficiency of mixing in
fluids given constraints on fluid velocity. Bounds on the mixing rates under
various types of constraints and boundary conditions as well as insight into the
nature of best mixing flows will be sought. This area lies at the intersection
of dynamical systems, PDE and Fourier analysis. The third direction involves
effects of chemical attraction between reacting species on the rates of
reaction. Chemical attraction will be modeled by the Keller-Segel and related
nonlinear terms. The PI proposes to obtain qualitative results about the
behavior of solutions in such systems, and to derive precise bounds describing
the strength of the effect and its dependence on various key parameters. Sharp
bounds on convergence to equlibirum for Fokker-Planck operators with certain
natural classes of potentials will also be obtained.
