
* 1412524
* Frame builder: Greedy construction principles for near-optimal signal sparsification, transmission and recovery
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,08/22/2014
* Bernhard Bodmann,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 229,156.00

Bodmann DMS-1412524

The last decades have seen an explosive growth in the amount of digitized
analog data being generated by high-resolution sensing devices and transmitted
by communications infrastructure. High-resolution data is acquired for example
in medical imaging in the form of MRI or CT scans or confocal microscopy, and in
defense-related imaging as hyperspectral satellite images. The development of
compressed sensing in applied mathematics has shown us that, surprisingly,
randomly organized measurements provide a means to reduce the amount of data
acquired by the sensor at the cost of invoking a nonlinear post-processing
stage. The randomization strategies from compressed sensing are also relevant
for generating codes and check sums that permit the recovery from sparse errors
when transmitting a digitized analog signal. However, even at the level of
state-of-the-art mathematical theory, random sensing and encoding precludes
performance guarantees needed in critical situations. This project provides an
alternative to random choice: Frames, which describe the structure of the
measurements obtained with a sensor, are built in a step-by-step, incremental
fashion. In order to realize provable performance guarantees, each step proceeds
according to "greedy" optimization principles. A main application of this
measurement design is image recovery from limited acquisition in region-of-
interest computed tomography. The ability to perform accurate reconstruction of
tissue density in a region of interest with limited scanning presents several
potential advantages, including the reduction of radiation dose and the
shortening of scanning time. More generally, the efficient parsing of signals
according to this strategy has potential relevance for microarray data
processing, motion segmentation, and many other data-intensive applications. The
same greedy construction principles can be applied to the encoded transmission
of digitized analog data, which is important for communication systems such as
the internet. The solution to near-optimal error suppression for data loss would
impact the quality of streaming media sent across the internet, or of wireless
audio or video communications in unreliable environments. Parts of this project
can be formulated at undergraduate or graduate-level research. The investigator
trains at least two graduate students and one undergraduate student in the
course of this project. The students are expected to gain valuable knowledge
through the combination of theoretical work and the application to computed
tomography.

Compressed sensing has shown us how to reduce bandwidth by randomized sensing,
which captures the essential part of a compressible signal directly, and by
moving the burden of signal recovery from the sensor to a digital post-
processing stage. The same techniques are useful for model selection such as
subspace clustering and for correcting sparse errors such as partial data loss
in transmissions. However, we still face challenging unresolved problems in
signal acquisition and transmission. The gap between the relevant dimensions
required to give near-certain success of a random construction is often far
removed from practical situations. Moreover, there is no feasible known test
that guarantees that a concrete outcome of a random construction is successful.
This project addresses the need for provable performance guarantees of data
acquisition and transmission in the following settings: (1) If a source for
random signals concentrates near a union of subspaces, how can these subspaces
be identified efficiently and reliably from noisy samples of the source? (2) If
one expects communication failures when sending a digitized analog signal,
resulting in a lost portion of the transmitted data, then how can the signal be
encoded in order to suppress the impact of the data loss on the reconstructed
analog signal in a near-optimal way? The project involves elements from convex
optimization theory, functional and numerical analysis, and frame theory. A
frame is an (over)complete family of vectors that provides stable expansions.
Frame theory is important for sensing and digitized communications because in
contrast to orthonormal bases, frames can incorporate linear dependencies
between frame vectors, which allows for flexibility in their design and provides
a fundamental method of error correction. Until recently, the state of the art
of frame theoretic results relied on either randomized or group-representation
constructions. This project focuses on an incremental, step-by-step design of
near-optimal frames by greedy construction principles that are inspired by a
technique developed by Daniel Spielman in works with Nikhil Srivastava and Adam
Marcus. This technique has powerful applications, as shown in the recent
simplified proof of the Bourgain-Tzafriri theorem and in the resolution of the
Kadison-Singer problem. The expected outcomes of the project include the
construction of frames by greedy methods that provide (1) sparse expansions for
signals with known statistics and (2) error-correction capabilities for encoded
transmissions that match the performance of randomized constructions. These
construction methods are applied to region-of-interest computed tomography, an
intentional data reduction strategy in which only X-rays are used that pass in
the vicinity of an organ that is being imaged, thereby reducing the overall
radiation dose. The successful implementation of greedy methods in frame design
is also expected to have a significant impact on all tasks that involve analog
signals being transmitted or interpreted in the presence of noise. The
investigator trains at least two graduate students and one undergraduate student
in the course of this project.
