
* 1413249
* Phaseless Reconstruction and Geometric Analysis of Frames
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2014,08/17/2016
* Radu Balan,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 356,459.00

The investigator studies two problems, each exploiting redundancy of
representations in mathematics and engineering, and develops new methods to
recover a signal from a nonlinear processing scheme. The first problem is
related to signal reconstruction from magnitudes of a redundant linear
representation (the so-called phase retrieval problem). The second problem
involves a geometric analysis of frames and connections to deep problems in
mathematics (such as the Kadison-Singer problem). This analysis leads to faster
methods that offer better quality and resolution of the reconstructed signals in
applications from X-ray crystallography, data communication on fiber optics, and
speech processing. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in this project
are trained for a globally competitive STEM workforce by learning to develop new
mathematical tools to solve real-world problems.

The investigator studies two problems, each exploiting redundancy of
representations in mathematics and engineering. The first leads to new methods
to recover a signal from a nonlinear processing scheme. Recently two far-
reaching discoveries have been made that connect the nonlinear information
(magnitudes of frame coefficients) to certain scalar products in larger
embedding spaces. This way the original problem of recovering a signal, which is
fundamentally nonlinear, is recast into a linear reconstruction problem coupled
with a rank-one approximation problem. When the linear redundant representation
is associated with a group representation (such as Weyl-Heisenberg, or windowed
Fourier transform), then the relevant tensor operators inherit this invariance
property. Thus a fast (nonlinear) reconstruction algorithm is possible. This
approach suggests a new signal representation model, where signals are not
represented simply by vectors in a Hilbert space, but rather by operators in a
larger dimensional Hilbert-Schmidt-like space, similar to the quantum state
theory. The methods developed here borrow from a wide range of mathematical
areas such as harmonic analysis, operator theory, and algebraic geometry. In
turn this approach allows for stable and efficient solutions relevant to areas
of electrical engineering as diverse as array signal processing, speech
processing, quantum computing, and X-ray crystallography. The second problem
expands the solution of the Kadison-Singer problem in a different direction in
frame theory. Specifically the issue is to "thin out" frames to subsets that
remain frames and have density arbitrary close to one, the critical density
associated to a Riesz basis. Such a result belongs to a larger body of results
describing the geometry of frame sets. The unifying concept in all these
problems is redundancy of representations and atomic decompositions.
