
* 1413223
* Stabilization of Periodic Regimes in Symmetric Systems with Memory via Time-Delayed Feedback Control
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2014,08/22/2014
* Wieslaw Krawcewicz,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2018
* USD 152,587.00

The symmetric character of fundamental laws of nature manifests itself in an
abundance of symmetries in natural phenomena. Modeling of such phenomena by
networks of interacting oscillators is common in various fields of science and
technology ranging from electronics and optical communications to neurology and
medicine. Controlling symmetric features of spontaneously generated oscillatory
patterns in such networks constitutes a substantial challenge. The goal of this
project is to develop new methods that allow simple but effective control of
performance of complex symmetric networks of oscillators. The work is focused on
non-invasive methods of control that allow achievement of the desired behavior
with minimal forcing of the system and that can be easily adopted for practical
implementations (e.g. in electronic circuits). The educational component of this
project aims to allow students from the undergraduate to the post-graduate
levels to actively participate in this research, working on concrete networks of
oscillators with specific symmetry groups.

Stabilization of unstable systems is one of the most important problems in
applied nonlinear science. Natural symmetries of real life systems lead to
multiple periodic regimes and complicate the stabilization problem. The
objective of this research is to develop methods for stabilization of unstable
periodic regimes in symmetric systems by a combination of delayed feedback
control and linear proportional control. The focus of the project will be on two
types of symmetric systems with memory, namely systems with hysteresis and with
delay. The method of stabilization of unstable periodic orbits (UPO) by non-
invasive delayed feedback control (due to Pyragas) has been successfully tested
against different types of models of chaotic systems. During the last two years,
the co-PIs have been developing computerized symbolic numerical tools and
supporting theoretical framework for localization and classification of UPOs in
models of systems admitting large symmetry groups. The efficiency of these
methods is based on development of the equivariant degree theory and its
applications. This project will combine these new methods with a properly
adapted version of Pyragas' control to achieve stabilization of UPOs in systems
with complex symmetries. It is expected that these methods will be instrumental
in navigating the system to various oscillation patterns (related to different
spatio-temporal symmetries of UPOs) of practical interest. The application
component of the project includes stabilization of UPOs in models of networks of
electronic circuits, networks of hysteretic oscillators, and symmetrically
coupled semiconductor lasers.
