
* 1413039
* Inverse problems for poroelastic composites with applications in bone health monitoring
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2014,06/16/2016
* Miao-jung Ou,DE,University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2017
* USD 207,111.00

This research project is directed towards developing mathematical and
computational methods arising from quantitative ultrasound techniques (QUT) for
detecting osteoporosis, a major public health threat affecting more than 44
million Americans. Understanding the bio-mechanical advance of the disease and
developing quantitative mathematical techniques for its monitoring is the first
step towards efficient treatment and prevention. Diagnostics based on QUT is
relatively inexpensive and, unlike X-ray densitometry, it does not ionize the
tissue. The strength of cancellous bone plays an essential role in the diagnosis
of osteoporosis. The proposed work aims at developing mathematical tools for
determining various parameters that describe the strength of porous-elastic
materials, by probing the materials with mechanical waves such as ultrasound.
The educational component emphasizes the interdisciplinary nature of the
proposed research in several STEM fields. Through joint work with the PI's
collaborators in mechanical and biomedical engineering, facilitated by the
Center for Biomedical Engineering Research at the University of Delaware, a new
interdisciplinary educational initiative linking biomedical engineering and
mathematics for undergraduate and graduate student training is planned. The
results from this project will be of interest to researchers who conduct
laboratory experiments to study the relation between bone strength and bone
micro-architecture and will open an avenue for a more accurate and reliable
ultrasound devices for measuring properties of porous-elastic materials.

The goal of the research is to utilize the dehomogenization techniques to study
the mathematical characterization of effective parameters relevant to mechanical
properties of poroelastic materials and the governing equations of wave
propagation in these materials. Poroelastic composites are two-phase composite
materials consisting of elastic solid frames with fluid-saturated pore space,
e.g. fluid saturated rocks, sea ice, and cancellous bone. The study of
poroelasticity plays an important role in biomechanics, seismology, and
geophysics. The physical properties of these composites depend not only on the
constituent materials but also on the microstructure of pore space and how the
viscous pore fluid interacts with the solid frame. The bulk properties are
described by various 'effective parameters' that appear as coefficients of the
integro-differential equations governing wave propagation through poroelastic
materials when the wavelength is much larger than the scale of the
microstructure. Retrieval of effective parameters through a non-destructive test
using waves is essential in monitoring the health of these composites. In the
course of this project, a numerical paradigm for simulating wave propagation in
poroelastic composites and the inverse problem of the parameter retrieval will
be developed, analyzed, and implemented. By utilizing the fact that all the
effective properties in the poroelastic wave equations for a given bone sample
are underpinned by the same microstructure, the computational model will be
constructed from micro-CT scans in a mathematically consistent way.
