
* 1413437
* Delay dynamics: biochemical importance, large deviations, and statistical coherence
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2014,01/09/2018
* William Ott,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 188,000.00

A major goal of synthetic biology is the creation of practical, engineered
genetic circuits for medical and industrial applications. Mathematics plays a
vital role in the design of such circuits by providing applied scientists and
engineers with predictive models that describe how to achieve desired design
goals. These predictive models must take into account the 'delay' that results
from the synthesis of functional protein inside cells. Recent high-resolution
laboratory data and theoretical investigations have shown that this type of
delay helps naturally-occurring organisms achieve biologically desirable
results: it can accelerate signaling, stabilize biochemical networks, and create
tunable oscillations. The principal investigator and his colleagues develop the
mathematical theory needed to help explain how delay shapes the dynamics of
genetic circuits as well as study certain associated infinite-dimensional
models. Synthetic biologists use this theory to inform the design and
implementation of synthetic genetic circuits for use in medicine and industry.

'Delay' is now recognized as an important component of genetic regulatory
networks and biochemical networks more generally. Given the pace of
technological innovation in synthetic biology and the availability of high-
resolution biological data, there is need for a mathematical theory applicable
to the dynamics of delay systems. The principal investigator (PI) and his
colleagues leverage and extend techniques from both probability theory and
abstract ergodic theory to study the interplay between stochasticity and delay
on multiple levels. First, the PI and his colleagues study the rare events
problem for delay stochastic processes. Specific topics include large deviations
rates, optimal transition paths, mean first passage times, numerical simulation,
and importance sampling. Further, the PI and his colleagues develop a method by
which time series data may be used to estimate the distribution of biochemical
delay. Such a method is valuable because delay distributions are difficult to
measure experimentally. Second, the PI and his collaborators study the
stochasticity that can arise after one takes thermodynamic limits of delay
stochastic models. Such stochasticity may be called 'statistical coherence.' it
arises from dynamical instabilities in the deterministic limits. When one takes
the thermodynamic limit of a delay stochastic differential equation, one obtains
a delay differential equation (DDE). From the ergodic-theoretic point of view, a
DDE may be viewed as a functional differential equation (FDE) that generates a
solution semigroup on a suitable Banach space of functions. Similarly, certain
evolution partial differential equations (PDEs) generate solution semigroups on
suitable Banach spaces. These solution semigroups are infinite-dimensional
dynamical systems; the PI and his colleagues study statistical coherence in the
FDE and PDE contexts. They do this by isolating specific geometric mechanisms
that produce nonuniformly hyperbolic dynamics. In this context new notions of
Sinai-Ruelle-Bowen (SRB) measure must be developed. SRB measures form a
cornerstone of statistical coherence because they govern the asymptotic
distribution of large sets of orbits in the function space. Crucially, checkable
conditions that imply the existence of SRB measures for concrete FDEs and PDEs
are developed. Statistical properties such as central limit theorem behavior,
decay of correlations, invariance principles, extreme value statistics, and
stochastic stability are investigated. This work informs the modeling,
experimental study, and design of biochemical systems and introduces a large new
class of physically relevant examples to the abstract dynamical systems
community.
