
* 1447067
* Monte Carlo methods for fully non-linear PDEs and application to quantitative finance
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2013,08/08/2014
* Arash Fahim,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2016
* USD 89,363.00

Monte Carlo methods have brought a new era to quantitative finance, resulting in
accurate and implementable numerical methods for pricing risks in complicated
models. In several models and for certain types of risks, the solution of a
partial differential equation (PDE for short) provides the price of the risk.
The complexity of the pricing PDE increases with the dimension of the problem
and with the complication of the non-linear components of the model. One of the
major features of Monte Carlo methods is to be less sensitive to the dimension
of the problem than other evaluation methods, as the dimension grows with the
number of uncorrelated risk factors. For a significant class of PDEs, i.e. for
fully non-linear parabolic equations, designing an appropriate Monte Carlo
method is challenging. Recently, new work by the PI and his colleagues opened
the door to progress. This award will exploit these advances in theoretical and
practical aspects of Monte Carlo schemes for fully non-linear parabolic PDEs and
will also incorporate existing ideas in the simpler linear and semi-linear
cases. The project will relax the assumptions that had to made previously and
will result in schemes for more general situations, such as fully non-linear
parabolic equations, nonlinear terms that are neither concave and nor convex, or
non-Lipschitzian terms. The convergence of such schemes will be analyzed and
asymptotic results for the rate of convergence will be derived. In addition,
more problematic PDE's, i.e. degenerate PDEs will be considered. The award will
also support the study of so called non-monotone Monte Carlo schemes. Such
schemes are observed to converge faster in practice than monotone schemes, but
the rigorous mathematical verification of this improved convergence still
presents difficulties at the theoretical level, which in turn impedes further
broad progress. The theoretical discoveries will be verified by implementing
them in practical numerical schemes. This implementation will involve
undergraduate students in the context of a summer REU program. Students will be
trained in a class of state-of-the-art numerical techniques that have wide
practical applications.

The award will support the development of computational methods that are useful
in quantitative finance. Traditional methods for this task are known to be quite
accurate, but are limited to situations of low complexity. So-called Monte Carlo
methods, which employ simulated random experiments, are known to avoid this
bottleneck (at some well-known loss of accuracy), but so far have been limited
to cases with special (linear or nearly linear) structure. This project will
extend computational Monte Carlo schemes to situations with more general non-
linear structure. The results of this project will help mathematicians and
financial engineers to test new models by comparing their outcome with the
patterns in the market and thus help to extend our knowledge about financial
markets. Specifically, the project will provide efficient methods for performing
computations in the models. At the immediate application level, the project will
contribute to progress in the practical aspects of risk pricing, i.e. to develop
faster and more reliable evaluations of financial derivatives and of risk
related products. Moreover, there are potential applications also in other areas
of engineering, for e.g. noise reduction in image processing. The breadth of
applications of this research project is also expected to attract students from
mathematics and other disciplines. The award will support undergraduate students
through summer research experiences and train them in an exciting and accessible
area, and the results obtained from this research will be integrated into
classes. The award will also be used to disseminate the results within the
mathematical research community and beyond.
