
* 1510249
* Mathematical Problems of Geophysical Fluid Mechanics: Uncertainties, Modeling, Theory, and Computing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Climate & Large-Scale Dynamics, CR, Earth System Models
* 09/01/2015,08/26/2015
* Roger Temam,IN,Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2019
* USD 368,016.00

This research project addresses problems of great significance in ocean and
atmosphere sciences, related to weather or climate predictions. The studies have
also potential applications in other areas of sciences but this project only
addresses the geophysical problems. The two classes of problems considered are
the study of boundary conditions for predictions made in a limited domain, and
the study of moist convection, which is related to the understanding of the
behavior of clouds. It is generally considered that our limited understanding of
the physics of clouds is a major cause of uncertainty in current weather and
climate predictions. Developing methods that improve weather predictions and
climate modeling is an objective of important human, societal, and economical
interest. The training of graduate students and postdoctoral students at the
interface of mathematics, geophysical and industrial fluid mechanics, and
scientific computing is another broader impact of the project.

A major problem in developing computational models of geophysical flows, when
the flows extend over a large area but the region of particular interest is
smaller, is to develop suitable boundary conditions for limited-area models when
the physics does not provide natural boundary conditions. This old problem,
already mentioned by von Neumann and Charney, is expected to become very
significant. Indeed, when new computers will allow the use of fine spatial
resolutions, it is predicted that inappropriate boundary conditions will
introduce spurious modes. The problem arises also in other contemporary
developments like the use of multilevel numerical methods or modeling. The
investigator has obtained a number of relevant results for linear and nonlinear
two-dimensional equations. Here he aims to continue building a sound
mathematical theory for the inviscid primitive equations and other related
equations. Concerning the outstanding problem of moist convection, precipitation
and clouds, the the problems to be addressed relate to the theory, computations,
and modeling. On the theoretical side, the tools of convex analysis and
variational inequalities are used to address questions of existence and
uniqueness of solutions for the equations of the humid atmosphere with
saturation, which are nonlinear discontinuous partial differential equations
(PDEs) not directly connected to any existing PDE theory. On the modeling side,
using again tools of convex analysis, he models the equations of the humid
atmosphere corresponding to water clouds below freezing levels by considering a
more refined description of the micro physics at saturation, which would
introduce additional state parameters. On the computational side, he studies
numerically the superparameterization of the very complex convection phenomena
occurring near the equator in the presence of topography, using finite volumes
and multilevel methods. The importance of these phenomena, which involve
tropical rains and affect the climate far into the mid-latitude regions, is well
known. Finally, certain questions of probability are addressed in connection
with the modeling of the many uncertainties occurring in the phenomena described
above. Graduate students and postdoctoral students are engaged in the work of
the project.
