
* 1514698
* Interest Rate Modeling at the Zero Lower Bound: Applications of Diffusions with Sticky Boundaries
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2015,09/03/2015
* Vadim Linetsky,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 207,744.00

Short-term interest rates in the U.S., the Euro zone, and Japan have been near
zero since the global financial crisis of 2008, due to the monetary policy
responses by the central banks to the financial crisis and the recession that
followed. Conventional mathematical models of interest rates break down when the
short term interest rate is at the zero lower bound (ZLB). This project develops
and investigates a novel class of mathematical models of interest rates with the
zero lower bound based on the mathematics of diffusion processes with sticky
boundaries. The anticipated impact of the project is in applications in the
financial industry to the pricing and hedging of interest-rate-sensitive
financial instruments, to managing interest rate risk, to fixed income portfolio
construction, and in central banking to aid in conducting monetary policy, as
well as in training of doctoral students in financial mathematics and
engineering.

The class of diffusions with sticky boundaries is well suited to the challenge
of modeling the ZLB, as it naturally supplies a model with two distinct economic
regimes -- the process away from the boundary and the process on the boundary.
This project develops analytical and computational tools to work with diffusions
with sticky boundaries, including computational methods specifically tailored
for this class of stochastic processes, and applies them to develop and
empirically test interest rate models. The intellectual merit of this project is
in the development of a novel class of interest rate models based on diffusions
with sticky boundaries, and in the associated analytical and computational
methods to solve stochastic differential equations with sticky boundaries and
partial differential equations with Wentzell boundary conditions. Graduate
students are included in the project.
