
* 1514576
* Analysis of Viscoelastic and Compressible Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,09/11/2015
* Michael Renardy,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/28/2019
* USD 363,094.00

Yield stress fluids are liquids that need to be subjected to a critical stress
before they will flow. Examples include essentially everything that is squeezed
from a tube or spread with a knife, including common household substances such
as cosmetics, shampoo, and ketchup, as well as a wide array of industrial
compounds. The study of these fluids is important, for instance, in food,
cosmetics, and pharmaceutical industries as well as for biological applications.
For many such fluids the yield stress is not fixed, but depends on the flow
history. A familiar example is the common experience that ketchup will flow more
readily for a second helping than it did the first time. This type of complex
yield stress behavior is referred to as "thixotropic." There are several
approaches to modeling thixotropic fluids. This project follows up on work of
the investigator that showed that the essential features of thixotropic behavior
can be obtained by considering the limit of certain models of viscoelastic
fluids when a relaxation time becomes very long. This kind of model naturally
opens up the possibility of applying mathematical methods of asymptotic
analysis, which rely on the presence of a small parameter. The investigator
explores the systematic application of these methods to study the behavior of
thixotropic yield stress fluids. The second part of the project concerns
questions of controllability, that is, whether a system can be driven from a
given class of input states to a desired state by a control mechanism. This is a
natural engineering question that, from a mathematical point of view, poses
fundamental and challenging problems in the theory of partial differential
equations. The investigator studies this issue for the equations modeling
compressible flow and for other equations of a similar mathematical structure
that arise in modeling viscoelastic fluids. A question closely related to
controllability issues is that of backward uniqueness. Do we change the future
state of a system by altering its present state or is the future partly
independent of the present? For systems given by partial differential equations,
it is not always possible to "invent the future" in this sense. The investigator
has developed a technique that can be used to prove backward uniqueness for
certain systems of partial differential equations. A graduate student and a
postdoctoral student are included in the project.

The project addresses the following areas: Thixotropic yield stress behavior
arises as a limit of viscoelastic flow when a relaxation time is large. This
large relaxation time naturally provides a small parameter for asymptotic
analysis. The investigator has recently analyzed the distinct dynamics regimes
of fast, slow and yielded dynamics that arise in this limit. In spatially
inhomogeneous flows, these regimes coexist in spatial regions separated by sharp
boundaries. Here he analyzes the development of these boundaries as functions of
time. The second topic concerns questions of controllability. The equations of
compressible flow involve the coupling of a transport equation and a parabolic
equation. The investigator studies the controllability of this system and other
mathematically similar problems. Prior results for linearized problems are
extended to the nonlinear situation. The analysis is based on Carleman estimates
for the parabolic part and the method of characteristics for the transport
equation, along with a suitable splitting method that allows the construction of
controls in an iterative fashion. The design of this splitting method is the
principal challenge. The problem of backward uniqueness for partial differential
equations is closely related to questions of controllability. The investigator
has developed a method of establishing backward uniqueness that is based on the
Phragmen-Lindeloef theorem. This method can be applied to one-dimensional
linearized compressible flow and to the one-dimensional damped wave equation.
The investigator aims to extend the technique to problems in higher space
dimensions. The essential ingredient in the analysis is the derivation of
certain resolvent estimates, which are based on a rigorous application of
matched asymptotics.
