
* 1515161
* Systematic Search For Extreme and Singular Behavior in Some Fundamental Models of Fluid Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,09/09/2015
* Charles Doering,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 454,916.00

The investigator develops and applies effective mathematical analysis and
scientific computation tools to systematically search for extreme behavior in
some of the fundamental equations of physical fluid mechanics. The goal is to
derive precise predictions of physically significant quantities from first
principles. The work capitalizes on recent developments to implement ideas from
optimal control theory and the calculus of variations to compute fluid flows
achieving maximal mixing, optimal transport, or other extreme dissipation.
Transport, mixing, and dissipation are among the most fundamental features of
fluid flows and are of foundational significance for important applications
ranging from microfluidics engineering to modeling in climate science and
astrophysics. The control and optimization techniques adopted here constitute a
new and unified computationally aided analysis approach to these problems. This
project directly involves advanced training for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers.

This project utilizes methods of modern applied mathematics and scientific
computation. Mathematical measures of mixing introduced by the investigator and
collaborators are utilized in optimal control analyses of the advection and
advection-diffusion equations in order to place absolute limits on passive
tracer mixing by incompressible flows, and to illuminate key features of
particularly effective stirring strategies. Computational control and applied
analysis are employed to construct incompressible fluid flows optimizing
transport between impenetrable surfaces and produce new transport bounds for
buoyancy-driven Rayleigh-Benard convection and the outstanding problem of
turbulent convection. Optimal control techniques are developed and deployed to
determine maximal enstrophy production in the incompressible three-dimensional
Navier-Stokes equations over finite time intervals. Extremal solutions provide
new insight into fully nonlinear vorticity amplification in unforced flows, and
this component of the project is a novel and promising framework for the study
of one of the signal challenges for 21st century applied mathematics: the
regularity question for the 3D Navier-Stokes equations.
