
* 1515712
* Mathematical and Computational Methods for Non-Equilbrium Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2015,08/20/2015
* Luc Rey-Bellet,MA,University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 279,654.00

This research project is concerned with the behavior in time of complex systems
subject to random influences. Complex systems with a large number of parameters
and agents are ubiquitous -- think, for example, of the traffic on a network of
highways or of bio-chemical systems, which involve many types of molecules and
many chemical reactions. For such systems, the issue of sensitivity analysis
presents special challenges: sensitivity analysis consists in understanding the
effects of parameters on the future behavior of the system -- for example, how
the closure of one lane on a busy highway influences the traffic, possibly many
miles away and several hours later. Understanding these effects is at the heart
of the field of predictive modeling and poses formidable challenges, which often
exceed the capabilities of modern computers. The Principal Investigators will
develop tools, both conceptual and computational, to tackle such issues by
using, in a complementary fashion, techniques from different fields of science.
This includes methods from information theory (which quantifies how information
is lost in physical processes), from statistical mechanics (which allows one to
understand the global behavior of very large systems), and from numerical
analysis (which is the science that allows one to simulate and reproduce the
behavior of complex systems on a computer).

Understanding non-equilibrium systems driven by external forces, boundary
effects, and multi-physics presents numerous mathematical and computational
challenges, especially if the system is large and involves many parameters. A
paradigmatic example is a bio-chemical reaction network, which often involves
multiple time scales, feedback loops, hundreds of species, and hundreds of
parameters. At the center of this project is the development of mathematical and
numerical tools for the analysis and simulation of such non-equilibrium high-
dimensional stochastic systems. The research blends together concepts from
information theory, statistical mechanics, numerical analysis, and probability
theory in order to develop novel algorithms, as well as novel tools to assess
existing algorithms for complex systems. The issue of sensitivity analysis plays
a central role in the work. One of the novelties here is the systematic use and
development of information-theoretic tools for the analysis and uncertainty
quantification of stochastic systems, with a strong emphasis on the long-time
behavior of the systems. Concepts such as the relative entropy and the Fisher
information matrix, especially applied to the time histories of the system, are
particularly well suited. Another important feature of the project concerns the
fact that non-equilibrium systems do not respect invariance under time reversal.
Measuring quantitatively this symmetry breaking is one the main themes in modern
non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, and the Principal Investigators will use
concepts developed in this project to create efficient algorithms to do this for
complex systems. Finally, the research team will investigate the role of memory
or delay effects, which are unavoidable in complex systems with multiple spatial
or temporal scales.
