
* 1517162
* Bose-Einstein Condensation Beyond Mean Field: A Partial Differential Equation Approach to Quantum Fluctuations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2015,07/14/2017
* Dionisios Margetis,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2019
* USD 243,687.00

This research addresses a series of challenging questions for the physics of
very cold atoms by analytical methods of applied mathematics. In Bose-Einstein
condensation, a certain type of particles (bosons) occupy a single macroscopic
quantum state called condensate at very low temperatures. This condensate is one
of the most coherent states of matter known to date, allowing for a precise
control of atomic systems in laboratory settings. The Bose-Einstein condensation
has been observed experimentally in atomic gases that are trapped through
magnetic and optical means, and has sparked active experimental research into
attractive applications of fundamental importance in quantum information and
computation, e.g., the design and construction of quantum atomic computers, as
well as in precision measurements. The investigator of this project will develop
models and carry out analysis that will lead to a better and more fundamental
understanding of atomic effects in Bose-Einstein condensation. The impact of
this research will be felt by the applied mathematics community as well as by
communities of some of the applications, including atomic and condensed-matter
physicists, and computer scientists and engineers with specialty in quantum
information. The investigator will train one graduate student who will gain
interdisciplinary research education and perspective in cutting-edge problems of
modern science.

The goal of this research is to develop a hierarchy of models and analytical
tools in order to link the motion and interactions of individual atoms to the
macroscopic properties of ultra-cold atomic gases in Bose-Einstein condensation.
The methods invoked in this project single out the effect of pair excitations,
which cause the many-body wave function of such systems to deviate from the
usual mean-field tensor product of one-particle states. The methods of the
investigator include: (i) perturbation theory for many-body operators, which
links the microscopic Hamiltonian to systems of low-dimensional partial
differential equations; (ii) homogenization of the derived systems of equations
for settings with microstructures of experimental relevance; and (iii) the
global existence and uniqueness of the resulting partial differential equations.
This research effort will elucidate fundamental mechanisms of controlling the
condensate through the many-body wave function, hence improving past predictions
based solely on mean-field theory. Results obtained in this direction can guide
simulations of and experiments related to complex condensed-matter systems, and
the design of new devices for quantum information and precision metrology.
