
* 1517519
* Collaborative Research: Kinetic to Continuum Modeling of Active Anisotropic Fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,09/10/2015
* Ruhai Zhou,VA,Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 120,800.00

The principal investigators use mathematics and computation to model fluid-
particle mixtures in which the individual particles are anisotropic (e.g., rod-
like) and have their own propulsion mechanism. Examples arise in nature with
suspensions of rod-like, flagella-propelled bacteria, in living cells where
actin filaments provide structural integrity and molecular motors propel the
filaments to achieve cellular function, and in high performance materials where
catalytic nano-rods are suspended in a reactive solvent and propelled by
chemical reactions. These systems share the remarkable feature of self-
organization on scales in space and time far greater than those of the
individual particles, translating to functionality across many scales. These
diverse active particle-fluid systems have been previously modeled. Here the
investigators undertake a unified theoretical and computational platform for
such problems, which offers multiple benefits. A common mathematical structure
reveals how these systems achieve their functional properties, informs which
physical and chemical features allow the most efficient steering and
optimization of the system toward desired properties, allows for a common
computational platform, and allows one to incorporate additional degrees of
freedom or perturb existing particle and fluid properties and predict their
consequences. These advances have applications to enhance beneficial bacterial
colonies and to disrupt harmful ones, to repair damaged cellular functions, and
to design nano-composite materials with optimal properties. Graduate students
are involved in the work of the project.

The principal investigators develop a modeling and computational platform for
active, anisotropic fluids, unifying three apparently diverse fluid systems
(catalytic nano-rod dispersions, swimming bacterial suspensions, and motor-
driven actin filament gels) for which models, analysis, algorithms, and
simulations have so far evolved independently. The mathematical platform unifies
previous results, spans kinetic to continuum spatial and temporal scales, and
identifies a common leading-order mathematical structure at each scale of
description as well as the lower-order structure that distinguishes among
different active, anisotropic fluids. This structure guides analysis and
algorithm development toward an understanding of, and predictive control over,
the remarkable observed behavior of these fluid systems. The project aims to
distinguish sensitivity to particle dimensions, aspect ratio, concentration, and
activation energy, with direct application to active nano-rod dispersions, actin
filament gels, and bacterial suspensions in confined and free surface flows.
