
* 1517879
* A Combined Theoretical and Experimental Approach for Internal Wave Dynamics: Coupling to Free Surface and Instabilities
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,09/11/2015
* Roberto Camassa,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

Internal waves are a common manifestation of density stratification in the ocean
and atmosphere, and their dynamics is a key component of solar energy conversion
into transport, mixing, and dissipation phenomena that affect our planet from
local to global scales. An important class of these waves, that of nearly
solitary, coherent large amplitude structures, has recently been given renewed
attention with the realization, thanks to instrumentation improvements and
increased human activity, that such waves are ubiquitous in a wide range of
geophysical settings and are easily observed in both field and laboratory
experiments. In the former case, one of the main tools for collecting data over
scales beyond what in-situ sensors can reasonably afford is the satellite
observation of the surface expression of internal waves, seen as bands of choppy
waters moving in otherwise calm seas. The in-depth investigation of the
mechanisms responsible for this surface-internal wave interaction, as well as
some of the ramifications in the mathematical framework for modeling the
nonlinear dynamics of this class of wave propagations, is the main thrust of
this research project. With accurate models, it becomes feasible to solve the
inverse problem of reconstructing solely from surface observations the internal
state of motion of the ocean due to large solitary waves. When combined with
satellite and remote sensing capabilities, this would allow a global mapping of
such wave motion, especially for the large swaths of world ocean, such as the
South China and Andaman Seas, where these large waves are frequently observed
and affect human interests such as oil-drilling and navigation.

The work is organized around three mutually overlapping efforts that target
outstanding issues in this class: (i) the derivation of asymptotic models for
the coupled dynamics of free surface/large amplitude internal waves, with the
goal of maintaining sufficient quantitative fidelity with respect to parent
systems such as stratified Euler equations, while maintaining accessibility to
analysis and numerical tools for large-scale simulations; (ii) the rigorous
assessment of validity of these models (consistency, existence time scales and
closeness), with particular attention to stability issues coupled with surface
tension, and (iii) the implementation of the first experimental investigations
in a controlled lab environment of coupled surface/internal wave dynamics, with
further attention to transport and mixing of tracers. Achieving these goals
relies on the application as well as the implementation of novel mathematical
techniques: in (i) new asymptotic tools removing the classical weak nonlinearity
assumption would have to be refined beyond those obtained in recent advancements
in this direction; for (ii) the corresponding advances in the free surface
formulation of the classical water wave problem have to be adapted to the
internal stratified fluid dynamics, with the development of analytical estimates
for surface dynamics under surface tension and internal-wave induced currents;
in (iii), the combined use of surface wave generators and surfactants is
implemented to explore the relevant physical parameters such as surface group
velocity and internal wave phase speed, including regimes with capillary/gravity
wave interactions, to validate and test the theoretical and numerical advances
in coupled surface-internal dynamics with controlled experiments.
