
* 1543660
* TEXAS ANALYSIS AND MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS SYMPOSIUM
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 11/01/2015,10/26/2015
* Vladimir Dragovic,TX,University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 10/31/2017
* USD 20,180.00

This award provides support for the 2015 Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics
Symposium that will take place at the University of Texas at Dallas during the
Fall 2015 semester. The Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium is a
regional weekend meeting held annually, hosted in turn by Rice University, the
University of Texas at Austin, and the University of Texas at Dallas. It is
intended for the participation of around 60 people, including 25 non-local
graduate students. The workshop brings together many senior mathematicians from
Texas and neighboring states, who may not otherwise have an opportunity to
discuss mathematics together throughout the year. Structurally the symposium
consists of 7-8 main lectures given by nationally recognized leaders in the
field, and contributed sessions, including a poster session, for advanced
graduate students and participating researchers from regional universities, to
present their work. This will provide graduate students with an opportunity to
obtain feedback from senior faculty from other departments. The networking
activities made possible by the Symposium will prove to be a valuable experience
for young researchers. The Symposium encourages and financially supports
participation by students, recent Ph.D. recipients, and members of groups
underrepresented in mathematics. The Symposium is a forum for regional
specialists in mathematical physics and related areas of analysis to become
familiar with the latest problems and present their own results; in addition it
introduces young mathematicians to the current state of the subject.

This year's Symposium will focus on the areas where probability theory,
dynamical systems theory, spectral theory, and partial differential equations
intersect and interact. More information, including a list of speakers and
abstracts, registration information, and an archive of the past symposium can be
found at the website of the meeting:
https://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/tc/TeXAMP/TeXAMP-2015/TeXAMP-2015.html
