
* 1551897
* February Fourier Talks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 01/01/2016,02/27/2018
* Kasso Okoudjou,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2019
* USD 49,998.00

This award provides partial support for the period 2016-2018 for an annual
series of conferences titled "February Fourier Talks" (FFT) at the University of
Maryland in the general area of applied harmonic analysis - the 2016 meeting
scheduled for February 18-19. In recent years, this area of mathematics has made
important contributions in a number of application areas, including image
analysis and signal processing - for example, members of this community were
instrumental in the development of the JPEG 2000 image coding standard. The
meetings are held in February, and they provide a high-level forum for harmonic
analysts to bring their work to scientists from industry and government
agencies. In addition, they allow experts in applied and pure harmonic analysis
to become familiar with the latest problems in need of mathematical formulation
and solution. Finally, they serve to introduce young mathematicians and
scientists to applied and pure harmonic analysis.

The February Fourier Talks directly encourage dialogue and collaboration between
mathematicians and scientists working in industry and government. The structure
of the conference consists of three main lectures, 30-minute invited talks, and
a poster session that showcases the work of students (both undergraduate and
graduate) as well as postdocs. The conference encourages and financially
supports participation by students, recent PhD recipients, and members of groups
underrepresented in the mathematical sciences. More information, including lists
of speakers and abstracts, registration information, and an archive of past
conferences, can be found at the conference webpage:
www.norbertwiener.umd.edu/FFT/2016.
