
* 1559587
* Inverse Boundary Value Problems For Scalar and Elastic Waves: Stability Estimates and Iterative Reconstruction
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2015,08/26/2015
* Maarten de Hoop,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2018
* USD 190,000.00

This project centers on inverse problems that enable innovative new technologies
for interpreting the rich information contained in seismic wavefields. The
results will fundamentally improve the ability to reconstruct highly
heterogeneous geological media with structure from observational data. The
nonlinear approaches that will be developed will yield possible discoveries of
hitherto unknown substructures in our planet's interior, such as cracks and
faults including the presence of fluids and the crust-mantle interface. On the
one hand, more accurate mapping and characterization of shallow and deep mantle
structures will facilitate integrated geological and geophysical studies, and
may lead to more comprehensive models of Earth's dynamic interior. On the other
hand, these methods will also aid in developing strategies for monitoring or
identifying changes over time and benefit natural resources management. The
results will also give important insight in how processes at the surface are
coupled to processes in Earth's deep interior.

The principal investigator and his colleagues will develop a comprehensive
analysis of the seismic inverse boundary value problems in the time-harmonic and
hyperbolic formulations. They consider Cauchy data and the Dirichlet-to-Neumann
map or the Neumann-to-Dirichlet map as the data. The different formulations
emphasize different 'features' of the data and lead to different conditions for
stable recovery. The principal investigator and his colleagues will analyze in
conjunction the inverse boundary value problems for the Helmholtz equation and
the wave equation and their extensions to systems describing (time-harmonic)
elastic waves. They plan to study global uniqueness in the case of time-harmonic
elastic waves with coefficients containing conormal singularities (interfaces)
and of limited smoothness. They will analyze conditions for Lipschitz stability
of the relevant inverse maps with partial data. This will enable the team to
obtain estimates for the stability constants, which leads to hierarchies of
subspaces of coefficients, and develop a family of local iterative methods via
the introduction of generalized variational source conditions. They also plan to
develop resolvent estimates which provide a connection between the time-harmonic
and hyperbolic formulations and analyze conditions for the unique recovery of
piecewise smooth coefficients from high-frequency data. Finally, they will
obtain a method of direct reconstruction of elastic parameters near the boundary
(a free surface), and revisit the use of complex geometrical optics solutions in
proofs of uniqueness theorems and adapt them to a framework of iterative
regularization and reconstruction without very low frequencies in the data.
