
* 1600307
* Utility Based Pricing and Hedging in Incomplete Markets with Stochastic Preferences in a Unifying Framework of Admissibility
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/15/2015,10/22/2015
* Oleksii Mostovyi,CT,University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2019
* USD 115,237.00

The problems of pricing and hedging of financial instruments are of fundamental
importance from both theoretical and practical sides of mathematical finance. In
this research project, the investigator develops a novel framework and an
approach for analysis of various notions of prices and hedging strategies in
general models of financial markets. He aims to develop a utility-based pricing
method for contingent claims with embedded payment streams.

In a complete financial market every contingent claim can be replicated by a
portfolio of the traded securities and therefore admits a unique arbitrage-free
price, which is an initial value of the replicating strategy. In an incomplete
market, to every contingent claim is associated an interval of arbitrage-free
prices (unless the claim is replicable). In order to overcome the issue of non-
uniqueness, alternative (equilibrium- or utility-based) approaches have been
developed. The present project focuses on the probabilistic process-theoretic
aspects of the problems of utility-based pricing and hedging of contingent
claims and income streams. The aim of this project is twofold -- investigation
of different notions of prices, hedging strategies, and relationships between
them, in the settings that include stochastic utility (as a natural
generalization of the utility function concept), and a construction of a
utility-based pricing methodology for the contingent claims with embedded
payment streams, in incomplete continuous-time models of financial markets. A
novel concept of a unified framework of admissibility is introduced for the
accomplishment of the goals described above. The unified framework permits
consideration of the underlying utility maximization problems with different
types of budget constraints, in one formulation. On the technical level, the
analysis relies on the existing and new techniques drawing on the general theory
of semimartingales, stochastic optimal control, and convex analysis. The
approach provides a firm ground for an extension of the scope of applicability
of the utility-based pricing techniques and for asymptotic expansions of the
utility-based prices and hedging strategies.
