
* 1600780
* Limit Theorems for Non-Stationary and Random Dynamical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 06/01/2016,03/23/2021
* Matthew Nicol,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2022
* USD 239,552.00

Although much is understood about the statistical properties of physical systems
in equilibrium, many systems of interest cannot be modeled realistically as
being in equilibrium, meaning that the chance of observing an event or taking a
certain measurement on the system does not change over time. Some physical
systems are subject to external influences that vary over time; for example, the
atmosphere is affected by the seasonal ocean temperatures, and the state of an
electrical grid is affected by the time-varying demand for power. Physical
systems are often also subject to random effects, either through measurement
reading errors or noise in the system itself. This research project aims to
develop a good statistical understanding of non-equilibrium and random complex
systems using recent advances in probability and analysis. A better
understanding of the statistical properties of non-equilibrium systems and
random systems will lead to improved predictions and expand our knowledge of the
statistical laws that can be expected to hold in nature.

The project aims to develop new techniques based on recent developments in
martingale theory and analysis to investigate central limit theorems, almost
sure invariance principles (a strong form of approximation by Brownian motion),
large deviations, and other advanced statistics for a wide class of non-
equilibrium and random dynamical systems that are used to model complex physical
systems. Examples of the systems to be studied include billiard systems
(polynomially and exponentially mixing), models of intermittency, Lorenz-like
maps and flows, and systems arising from statistical mechanics. Statistical
properties of random dynamics can be investigated by sampling over all noise
realizations (annealed statistics) or along individual realizations of the noise
(quenched statistics). The project will also develop our understanding of
annealed and quenched statistical properties and the interplay between the two.
