
* 1609760
* Hilbert Space Frames and their applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2016,07/18/2017
* Peter Casazza,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 274,683.00

This award supports the research program of the Principal Investigator in the
area of "frame theory," a subject concerned with the mathematical representation
of signals, images, and information in general. This project concerns
applications of Hilbert space frame theory---one of the most active and applied
subjects in mathematics today, with applications to pure mathematics, applied
mathematics, engineering, medicine, computer science, and more. Frame theory is
fundamental to the digitalizing of information for processing and storing. One
part of this project will develop new methods for "phase retrieval," which has
applications to X-ray crystallography, electron microscopy, astronomical
imaging, optics, quantum physics, and more. Phase retrieval will even be needed
to align the mirrors in the new James Webb Space Telescope scheduled for launch
in 2018. Another part of this research project involves developing "fusion
frames" for modern applications. Recent advances in hardware technology have
enabled the economic production and deployment of a large number of low-cost
components, which through collaboration enable reliable and efficient operation.
Wireless sensor networks have emerged as a new technology with the potential to
enable cost-effective and reliable surveillance. Radar imaging is moving away
from single platform to multiple platforms that cooperate to achieve better
performance. Recent advances in sensor hardware provide an unprecedented
capability to detect the production, deployment, and use of chemical and
biological weapons. All of these applications involve a large number of data
streams, which need to be integrated at a central processor---often at multiple
levels of information fusion. Fusion frames are being designed to deal with
these problems.

Phase retrieval is the century-old problem of reconstructing a function (such as
a signal or an image) from the magnitude of its Fourier transform. Its origin
comes from the fact that in many scenarios, detectors can only record intensity
measurements and lose the phases. This project is pushing phase retrieval in
several relatively new directions using frame theory. Determining the minimal
number of measurements needed to ensure that a signal or image can be uniquely
reconstructed from its intensity measurements (without any prior knowledge) will
provide crucial insight into designing detectors. This project will also use an
innovative combination of tools from time-frequency analysis, quantum physics,
and discrete geometry to provide novel measurement designs that are backed up by
a rigorous mathematical theory and efficient numerical algorithms. Another
direction of the research will be to extend the existing approach used for phase
retrieval, which uses vector-based measurements, to higher-rank projections.
This will have important applications to crystal twinning. Fusion frames offer
great promise to a host of problems surrounding information fusion but need much
better designs, algorithms, and much more generality to fit current needs. This
project will address all of these problems to bring fusion frames into the
mainstream.
