
* 1613213
* Hyperbolic Conservation Laws and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,08/23/2016
* Dehua Wang,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 274,955.00

The aim of this research program is to develop new methods of mathematical
analysis and techniques for studying some nonlinear partial differential
equations governing the motion of compressible flows and related applications.
Compressible fluids such as gases are ubiquitous in nature. Understanding of
dynamics of compressible fluids is a crucial ingredient to prediction and
control of important physical processes arising in aerodynamics, atmospheric
science, astrophysics, plasma physics, biology and medicine, material science,
and others. While the highly idealized one-dimensional problems are rather well
understood, the general theory for the real-life multi-dimensional case is
mathematically underdeveloped. The project will advance the mathematical
understanding of the multi-dimensional equations of compressible flows and
related problems in emerging applications. The research program will advance
knowledge of the fundamental areas of mathematics and mechanics as well as
applications. Graduate students will be involved in this research and trained on
the outstanding problems in the related research fields.

This project is devoted to a mathematical study of some nonlinear partial
differential equations in multi-dimensional conservation laws and related
applications. In particular, the study focuses on the following topics from the
theory of inviscid and viscous compressible flows and related applications: (a)
the existence and stability of vortex sheets in multi-dimensional compressible
elastodynamics, (b) the global smooth isometric embedding of surfaces of
negative curvature, (c) the stochastic partial differential equations of
compressible flows, and (d) the active liquid crystal systems in
biology/biophysics. The goal of the research is to develop novel analytic
methods and efficient techniques for solving some important problems in multi-
dimensional inviscid and viscous conservation laws and applications, to explore
new phenomena of the motion of compressible flows, and to gain insights into the
general multi-dimensional problems and emerging real-world applications.
