
* 1613819
* Dynamics, Integrability, and Control of Mechanical and Nonholonomic Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Dynamics, Control and System D
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2016
* Anthony Bloch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 246,299.00

The project focuses on problems in mechanics, dynamics, and control. The theory
of nonholonomic dynamics is the study of mechanical systems subject to
constraints on velocities, such as rolling without slipping. Examples where we
use this theory in practical systems include wheeled vehicles, such as cars (in
particular self-steering cars) and robots. The mathematics behind the control of
nonholonomic systems plays a key role in control of mechanical systems in
general, such as the control of aircraft. Also important is how dissipation, or
friction, affects the behavior and stability of such systems. This research
project explores how to explicitly solve for the dynamics to predict the
behavior of such mechanical systems. The methods under development are expected
also to be useful in studying quantum control problems, with applications to
quantum computing among others. The project involves graduate and undergraduate
students in the research.

This research project aims to broaden and deepen understanding of the geometry,
dynamics, and control of mechanical systems including Hamiltonian and Lagrangian
systems, integrable systems, nonholonomic systems, and gradient flows. The
investigator will study the dynamics of various mechanical systems including
integrable Hamiltonian systems in finite and infinite dimensions, coupled
Hamiltonian and gradient systems, systems with nonholonomic constraints, optimal
control equations on manifolds, and quantum control systems. The research will
consider the geometry of integrable systems in several new contexts, including
extensions of the Toda lattice flow and rigid body flows, as well as
applications to optimal control of certain systems on Lie groups. It is expected
that similar methods can be used to study the control and dynamics of open
quantum systems that involve coupled Hamiltonian and dissipative dynamics.
