
* 1613135
* Asymptotic Analysis for Magnetostrophic Turbulence
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Geophysics
* 07/01/2016,05/03/2021
* Susan Friedlander,CA,University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 155,232.00

The Earth's magnetic field is vitally important to the existence of life on our
planet. It serves to protect the Earth from the charged particles of the solar
wind that would otherwise strip away the upper atmosphere. Changes in the
magnetic field have significant implications for climatic changes. The source of
the Earth's magnetic field is deep inside the Earth where a small solid iron
center is surrounded by a huge spherical mass of electrically conducting liquid
iron. Convection in this liquid is at the origin of Earth's magnetic field
through a dynamo effect: this is the process by which the rotating, convecting,
molten iron maintains the geomagnetic field against ohmic decay. The
mathematical description of this process is a highly complex system of three-
dimensional, nonlinear partial differential equations (PDE) that govern
convective magnetohydrodynamics. Computer models have been used to simulate the
actual geodynamo; however, no three-dimensional model has yet been run at the
spatial resolution required to encompass the broad spectrum of turbulence that
surely exists in the Earth's fluid core. The investigator and collaborators
study a PDE model for the core where a stochastic force driving the geodynamo is
to be interpreted as a source that is continuously regenerating a statistically
steady buoyancy distribution throughout the fluid. For scales relevant to the
Earth's core, this PDE system has many small parameters. The team exploits this
feature by analyzing the asymptotics of the stochastically forced PDE in the
limit of vanishingly small parameters. They aim to establish that the PDE system
sustains ergodic statistically steady states, thus providing a rigorous
foundation for a turbulent geodynamo. A graduate student is involved in the
research.

The partial differential equations that govern fluid dynamics are notoriously
challenging. One aspect of the challenge is the singular behavior of the
equations as certain parameters, which are produced by the physics of the
problem, vanish. Studying such problems is important both to illuminate the
physical processes described by the singular limits and to advance the creation
of new mathematical techniques. The investigator and collaborators contribute to
this endeavor by studying mathematical models for magnetostrophic turbulence in
the Earth's fluid core. The analysis requires a detailed understanding of the
delicate interaction between the nonlinearity and the stochastic forcing. The
team plans to apply recent developments in a theory of hypoellipticity for
stochastic PDE with spatially degenerate forcing to prove the existence of
unique ergodic invariant measures for the PDE that model magnetostrophic
turbulence.
