
* 1613004
* PIMS Summer School 2016 in Financial Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2016,05/27/2016
* Jean-Pierre Fouque,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/30/2016
* USD 29,268.00

DMS-1613004 Fouque

This project helps support US participants in the 2016 Pacific Institute for
the Mathematical Sciences (PIMS) summer school in financial mathematics. The
summer school is held at the University of Alberta in Edmonton, Canada from June
25 to July 6, 2016. Participants of the summer school learn the current
techniques in cutting-edge topics of financial mathematics. This is a key area
of applied mathematics and indispensable for the financial sector and its
regulation, which has become a major public concern since the 2008 financial
crisis. The summer school deals with novel topics such as algorithmic trading,
which involves the analysis of complex data sets. Such topics of the summer
school relate financial mathematics directly to information technology and data
science so that US participants funded by this project are equipped with the
latest skills and methods in scientific and economic areas of US strategic
importance.

The summer school focuses on lectures of leading researchers in two themes:
"Informational and Imperfect Financial Markets" and "Market Microstructure and
Algorithmic Trading." In the first theme, lecturers discuss questions such as
how the classical arbitrage pricing can be modified to reflect funding costs and
counterparty risk, and how market imperfections lead to nonlinearities in wealth
dynamics, affecting pricing and hedging of financial derivatives. These
questions are naturally related to backward stochastic differential equations,
which also are studied in the summer school. The second theme deals with
relevant topics in market microstructure, by both providing a practical point of
view to construct and analyze effective trading algorithms and developing the
underlying mathematical theory using stochastic optimal control. Further
information on the summer school can be found at http://www.mathfinance2016.com
