
* 1614537
* A novel paradigm for nonlinear convection models and large systems of particles
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2016,07/18/2016
* Pierre-Emmanuel Jabin,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Jabin DMS-1614537

Convection or transport mechanisms are a critical feature of several phenomena
in physics and the biosciences. This project focuses on such mechanisms in
compressible fluid mechanics and systems of many "particles." Compressible fluid
mechanics includes a large set of models in very diverse settings: geophysical
fluids with gravity in large scale fluids (Earth atmosphere), biological fluids
(such as swimming bacteria), or "exotic" examples such as solar events or photon
radiation. Systems of particles typically involve a very large number of coupled
equations, one for each particle. Particles can here represent many different
objects: In physics they can represent ions and electrons in plasmas, or
molecules in a fluid, or even galaxies in some cosmological models; in the
biosciences particles typically model micro-organisms (cells or bacteria); in
economics or social sciences, particles are individual "agents." Instabilities
can develop in all those systems and may manifest as oscillations in the mass
density of the fluid or as collisions (or near collisions) between particles. A
better understanding of such behavior can have important consequences. For
example, insights on the swarming motility of micro-organisms would help the
development of new biotechnologies. The main challenge to reduce the complexity
of such systems is to understand how, and how quickly or slowly, the convection
or transport (of mass in the fluid or of the particles) can amplify such
oscillations. Graduate students are included in the work of the project.

The project offers a new mathematical framework to study instabilities in many-
particles systems and nonlinear convection equations. It unifies the methods to
control collisions between particles, required by singular forces, and the ones
to propagate regularity in convection equations, required to limit oscillations
in nonlinear terms. The new method relies on a direct control of the regularity
of the solution through a doubling of variables and requires delicate and
explicit commutator estimates. This natural interplay between apparently very
different sets of problems leads to new insights and breaks some of the barriers
to more realistic models: Systems of interacting particles with physically
realistic and unbounded forces or random collisions in velocity, leading to
degenerate diffusion; models of fluid mechanics with thermodynamically unstable
state laws or anisotropic terms. Graduate students are included in the work of
the project.
