
* 1614918
* Stability of shocks and layers in Fluid Mechanics and related problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2016,09/03/2016
* Alexis Vasseur,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 407,306.00

The main part of the project concerns the study of dramatic behaviors in fluid
mechanics known as shocks. A typical example, in oceanography, is the
propagation of a tsunami. Understanding flows with shocks is of particular
importance for engineering and industry. The investigator studies the stability
of such structures using state of the art mathematical tools. The project
focuses on these specific goals: (1) Advance the knowledge of physical systems
that are of fundamental importance in engineering, meteorology, medicine, or
natural disasters, such as flooding and tsunamis; (2) Develop powerful
mathematical tools, based on the theory of nonlinear partial differential
equations, that can be used to study these systems. Graduate students are
involved in the work of the project, which provides good opportunities for
training junior researchers in mathematical analysis and physical modeling.

The investigator studies the stability of discontinuous solutions in
compressible fluid mechanics, known as shocks. They are linked to intriguing
behaviors of fluids, especially in supersonic flows. This project advances the
understanding of these phenomena. A special emphasis is on the study of
asymptotic limits from viscous models such as compressible Navier-Stokes
equations, or from kinetic models. These problems involve the study of layers
subject to large perturbations. The investigator also studies the existence and
properties of solutions to related models, such as compressible Navier-Stokes
equations with degenerated viscosities, or nonlinear nonhomogeneous kinetic
equations. For this purpose, the investigator uses and develops deep analysis
tools, such as the De Giorgi method and the relative entropy method.
