
* 1615124
* Hilbert transform with incomplete data and applications in Tomography and Optics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Dynamics, Control and System D
* 09/01/2016,08/19/2016
* Alexander Katsevich,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 335,000.00

In computed tomography (CT), detectors usually cover the entire cross-section of
the patient. Even when a small organ inside the patient needs to be visualized,
the entire cross-section is irradiated. Development of robust algorithms for
image reconstruction from truncated CT data (i.e., the data obtained by
irradiating only a region of interest (ROI) inside the patient) will have
numerous benefits, such as reducing the radiation dose to patients in many CT
scans, opening the way to novel multimodality imaging platforms, etc. In this
project, we will investigate stability of algorithms for reconstruction from
truncated CT data. Similar mathematical approaches are useful for the study of
image reconstruction from incomplete data in optical imaging, such as in
microscopy and optical metrology applications. We will apply the methods
developed for CT to optical imaging with the goal of increasing the field-of-
view or reducing the amount of measurements, while maintaining spatial
resolution in the ROI. This research may pave the way to the development of
inexpensive, large-field-of-view direct phase imaging systems, which, in turn,
would benefit cell biology research, and applications such as digital pathology
and cell-tracking.

In CT with truncated data, the key analytical tool is the Gelfand-Graev formula,
which transforms the tomographic reconstruction problem to the problem of
inverting the finite Hilbert transform (FHT) of the attenuation coefficient from
incomplete data. When CT data are truncated, reconstruction of the attenuation
coefficient is frequently non-unique. On the other hand, the contribution of the
missing data to the ROI is analytic, and adding prior knowledge about the
attenuation coefficient inside the ROI restores uniqueness. Another application
where inversion of the FHT with incomplete data is useful is optical imaging.
Inspired by the recent development of compressive optical imaging in
spectroscopy and holography, optical systems based on the FHT have the potential
to achieve high resolution, high speed phase contrast imaging. In a number of
microscopy imaging applications, prior knowledge about the sample being
investigated is possible to obtain. Thus, similar approaches can be used both
for CT and for optical imaging. The objective of the research is to develop
theory and algorithms for inverting the FHT with incomplete data. We will
estimate stability of inverting the FHT with incomplete data by finding the
singular value decomposition of the relevant operators. The method of the
Riemann-Hilbert problem, perturbation theory, and the Titchmarsh-Weyl theory,
are some of the mathematical tools that will be used in this project. We also
plan to develop and test the corresponding reconstruction algorithms and test
them on simulated and experimental data.
