
* 1615480
* Nonlinear Dispersive Water Waves in Multiscale Interaction Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2016,06/06/2016
* Philippe Guyenne,DE,University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2019
* USD 129,960.00

This project contributes to a better understanding of various phenomena related
to water waves. Of special interest are two problems that go beyond the
classical setting of a homogeneous medium: (i) surface waves interacting with
internal waves and (ii) surface waves interacting with rough topography. These
two problems are of physical importance. In case (i), internal waves are large-
amplitude waves that play a key role in many oceanic processes like mixing and
energy dissipation, which impact the transport and diffusion of contaminants and
nutrients. The strong currents associated with them also affect ocean acoustics,
and present a potential hazard to offshore and submerged structures. In case
(ii), the character of coastal wave dynamics is known to be very complex and can
lead to extreme phenomena such as wave breaking. In turn, these wave phenomena
influence many other coastal processes such as current generation and sediment
transport which eventually drive sandbar formation and beach erosion. A detailed
description of these two problems entails considerable mathematical challenges
due to the complexity of the physical mechanisms involved. This project develops
analytical and numerical tools that can help address a wide range of questions,
ranging from theoretical to more practical ones (e.g., to improve the remote
sensing of internal waves, the parameterization of wave forecasting models, and
the design of wave energy farms in coastal regions). The project thus has
broader impacts in oceanography, marine biology, coastal engineering, and
climatology, which ultimately affect human activities, and also has far-reaching
applications to wave problems in such diverse areas as material science that
share similarities with the present ones. Graduate students are involved in the
work of the project.

The investigator studies wave-wave and wave-bottom interactions occurring at
substantially disparate scales, which poses serious challenges to their
asymptotic analysis and direct numerical simulation. More specifically,
attention is paid to long internal waves resonantly coupled with smaller surface
wavepackets in case (i), and to surface waves propagating over rapidly varying
topography in case (ii). Such interactions produce complex dynamics such as wave
localization and scattering, and a better understanding has important physical
and technological implications. So far little effort has been devoted to
examining these two problems analytically and in particular they still lack a
mathematically justified asymptotic theory. The investigator develops building
blocks for such a theory by deriving new reduced models that describe essential
features of these nonlinear dispersive wave systems based on the large
separation of scales. For this purpose, he develops new analytical methods from
Hamiltonian systems and homogenization theory to deal with the multiple scales.
Of special interest is the modulational regime for surface waves, in which the
solution exhibits a two-scale dependence allowing for fast and slow dynamics.
The latter can be described by an evolutionary partial differential equation (or
a system of such equations), while the former can be determined by e.g.
resonance conditions and their effects can be reproduced via effective
coefficients in this equation. Together with the rapid progress in optical and
imaging technologies, such models have the potential to improve the performance
of remote sensing techniques for internal waves, and the subgrid
parameterization of wave-bottom interactions that have so far been poorly
represented in operational forecasting. Graduate students are involved in the
work of the project.
