
* 1615952
* Grain Growth in Graphene: Novel Aspects in Two Dimensions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2016,06/23/2021
* John Wilber,OH,University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 247,275.00

This award supports a collaboration among three investigators on the modeling,
analysis, and simulation of the behavior of sheets of graphene and similar
materials interacting with other sheets or substrates. A graphene sheet is a
single-atom-thick macromolecule of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice.
Hailed as the first truly two-dimensional material, graphene has been
intensively studied since 2004 when individual graphene sheets were first
isolated, a Nobel-prize-winning achievement. This research is motivated in large
part by the exceptional physical properties of graphene and its potential
applications in engineering and materials science. Experimental work confirms
that the novel electronic properties of graphene, as well as its optical and
thermal properties, are strongly coupled to deformation, deviations from perfect
crystallinity, and the presence of defects such as wrinkles and grain
boundaries. The project will use mathematical modeling and scientific
computation to study these phenomena. It will provide rigorous insight and
fundamental scientific understanding supporting applications of graphene sheets
and related carbon macromolecules to develop new materials and technologies.

The particular focus of this research is on pattern formation and interface
motion in various two- or three-dimensional nanoscale structures built from two-
dimensional macromolecules of carbon atoms. The project addresses a collection
of problems related to lattice registry effects in single and bilayer graphene
sheets, carbon nanotubes, and other carbon nanostructures. The phenomena
motivating this study include pattern formation and localized wrinkling driven
by lattice and orientation mismatches between a graphene sheet and its
supporting substrate, moire patterns in bilayer graphene, motion of grain
boundaries in polycrystalline graphene, and polygonization and faceting in
multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Several variational problems are considered;
analyzing the minimizers of these problems will yield insight into the phenomena
just mentioned. A part of the project is devoted to studying propagation of
interfaces using gradient flow dynamics. Much of the research activity hinges
upon deriving continuum models that retain lattice registry effects to describe
weak van der Waals interactions in carbon nanostructures. Hence, an important
part of this study is the rigorous justification of the atomistic-to-continuum
procedure that leads to such continuum models. Understanding and perhaps
controlling phenomena influenced by lattice registry in carbon nanostructures
and recently developed van der Waals heterostructures is essential for the
successful use of these structures in materials science and nanoscale device
development.
