
* 1640387
* 36th Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations 2016 (SEARCDE)
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 11/01/2016,10/28/2016
* Jaffar Ali Shahul-Hameed,FL,Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 10/31/2017
* USD 24,000.00

This project supports participation in the thirty-sixth annual meeting of the
Southeastern Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations (SEARCDE),
on November 5-6, 2016, at the Florida Gulf Coast University. The conference
began in 1981 and has met annually since then, with the venue rotating among
research institutions in the Southeast. The conference will serve as a forum for
discussion and exchange of research ideas and recent developments in both
theoretical and applied differential equations. In addition to four invited
plenary lectures by leading international scholars in differential equations,
there are twenty minute contributed talks given in parallel sessions. All
participants will have the opportunity to present their work in these
contributed talks, which are organized so that talks by established and senior
researchers are interspersed with talks by beginning researchers. The conference
tradition fosters an atmosphere conducive to networking and the creation of new
research collaborations. SEARCDE especially encourages the participation of
beginning researchers who get the opportunity to meet and hear renowned plenary
speakers and senior researchers from the region. These opportunities are
important for junior researchers, especially those from underrepresented groups.
NSF funding ensures that many talented young researchers in applied mathematics
will have the opportunity to participate in SEARCDE 2016.

The principal objective of the SEARCDE conference is to promote research and
education in the field of differential equations by bringing together
established and beginning researchers to exchange ideas and discuss recent
developments. Among others the conference topics will include mathematical
biology and epidemiology, dynamical systems approaches to partial differential
equations, optimization, and optimal control and numerical analysis and
simulation of solutions to PDEs. Proceedings of this conference will be
published in Communications in Applied Analysis. Information about the
conference can be found at the website, http://math.fgcu.edu/SEARCDE2016
