
* 1710827
* Analysis, Simulation, and Applications of Stochastic Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,06/22/2020
* Gang George Yin,MI,Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 02/28/2021
* USD 411,592.00

Stochastic systems are systems in which random disturbances play a significant
role. Stemming from emerging and existing applications in networked systems,
wireless communications, signal processing, economics, and ecology, this project
encompasses the study of dynamically evolving stochastic systems with
uncertainties, switching among different configurations, and complex structures.
The networked systems of interest include financial, communication, social,
biological, and ecological networks. The work will be devoted to learning the
intrinsic properties of stochastic network systems, developing mathematical
models and novel mathematical methods for analyzing such systems, and designing
efficient computational schemes for optimization and control of such systems to
meet desired goals. The results of the research will be useful for applications
to economics, nonlinear system identification and estimation, un-manned vehicles
and other multi-agent systems, biodiversity in ecological systems, and social
networks. This projects will involve undergraduate and graduate students and
will integrate the research with teaching and student training. This work will
contribute jointly to the further development of mathematical theory,
computational methods and applications, and the improvement of mathematics
education.

Motivated by a wide variety of applications, this project will study the
following research topics. (1)Stochastic models with random switching will be
developed and analyzed. Novel features of the systems include (i) past-dependent
switching having a countable state space, and (ii) switching jump diffusions
with non-local operators, finite switching set, and sigma finite jump measures.
Criteria for recurrence, positive recurrence, and ergodicity will be obtained.
(2) Kolmogorov-type systems under white noise perturbations, where the
diffusions are degenerate, will be investigated. Applications to control
dependent environmental protection zones, infectious disease and ecology will be
studied. (3) New algorithms for switching diffusions and stochastic
approximation will be developed and their rates of convergence will be studied.
(i) For Milstein-type algorithms for solutions of switching diffusions, it will
be shown that the algorithms preserve order 1 convergence rates as their
diffusion counterpart. (ii) Motivated by applications to multi-agent systems,
consensus, and swarming, the novelties of the stochastic approximation
algorithms include the inclusion of state-dependent switching, state-dependent
observation noise, and general time-dependent nonlinear functions. (4) Precise
error estimates for identification of Hammerstein nonlinear systems with
quantized observations will be obtained. It will be proved that the estimates
escape from a small neighborhood of the true parameter with a probability that
is exponentially small. (5) Accurate error bounds for approximation schemes of
duplication-deletion random networks in the sense of strong approximation will
be obtained. This will have impact on the study of random dynamic graphs and
applications to social networks. Extensive numerical experiments and simulations
will be performed to complement the analysis and algorithm design. The projects
will involve the participation of undergraduate and graduate students.
