
* 1710989
* Research in Applied Dynamical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2017,04/21/2017
* Yuri Latushkin,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 05/31/2020
* USD 230,029.00

The focus of this project is to further develop the mathematical approach known
as the Maslov index. This theoretical instrument is a geometric count that
describes the degree of instability of traveling waves and other more
complicated patterns found in solutions of partial differential equations. It
draws upon a broad array of tools, including spectral and perturbation theories,
symplectic geometry, and Hamiltonian dynamics. While the Maslov index was
originally introduced in an abstract area of mathematics, one of the major
objectives of the current project is to demonstrate its fundamental importance
in many unresolved and more applied problems. This approach can be used to study
equations describing the combustion of solid fuels and the interaction of
several chemical reactants evolving in time, as well as the stability of a
regularized version of equations describing ideal incompressible fluids that has
continued to challenge researches for more than three centuries.

Stability and instability of nonlinear waves and other patterns for
multidimensional reaction diffusion and other partial differential equations,
and the study of dynamics near these special solutions, are cornerstone issues
at the crossroads of contemporary applied dynamical systems, partial
differential equations, spectral theory of non-selfadjoint operators, and
infinite dimensional symplectic geometry. The aim of this project is to develop
and apply new methods in spectral theory of multidimensional differential
operators, and address nonlinear stability for models in applied combustion
theory, as well as general gradient systems of reaction diffusion equations, and
many others. The project is built on a theoretical breakthrough recently
achieved in these areas in computing the Morse index via the Maslov index. The
Morse index counts the number of unstable eigenvalues of the linearization about
the pattern, while the Maslov index is an invariant from symplectic geometry
that counts the signed number of intersections of paths in the space of infinite
dimensional Lagrangian planes. The principal investigator and his colleagues aim
to to further develop the Maslov index approach by proving new Hadamard-type
formulas for the derivatives of the eigenvalues and new spectral flow formulas
for families of the differential operators obtained by linearizing partial
differential equations about the traveling waves. The Maslov index calculations
are being utilized in several open problems in applied dynamical systems: the
gradient conjecture on Turing's patterns, the computation of spectra of
nonlinear pencils, and the periodic problems for nonlinear Schrodinger
equations. An important part of the project is the study of the multidimensional
nonlinear stability of planar fronts for reaction diffusion systems arising in
combustion theory of solid fuels and in modeling of exothermic and endothermic
chemical reactions.
