
* 1714984
* Incomplete Markets and Financial Bubbles in Mathematical Finance
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CDS&E-MSS
* 07/01/2017,06/26/2017
* Philip Protter,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 229,673.00

The subject of speculative pricing in financial markets, leading to what is
commonly known as bubbles, is a topic of current concern. Its importance is
underscored by the huge housing market bubble, which crashed in 2008, and which
thereby caused extensive financial suffering. This proposal aims to continue a
study of the mathematical modeling of bubbles in financial markets. The
mathematical basis for modeling speculative pricing is that it provides the
opportunities to quantify when bubble pricing is occurring and how big (in an
appropriate sense) the bubble is, and perhaps even more importantly, to identify
when a bubble is occurring, or not. Early steps in this direction were burdened
by rather severe restrictions in the generality of the mathematical models. In
this research, the PI will continue the analysis in a more general setting. The
key is to drop the standard restriction of what is known as a "complete market"
in favor of the more realistic situation involving "incomplete markets."

In the study of bubbles in incomplete markets, the role of strict local
martingales will continue to be of paramount importance. The PI plans to tackle
the issue of identifying models that lead to strict local martingales within
incomplete markets, thus abandoning the wonderful but too simple framework first
begun with the work of Delbaen and Shirakawa. The plan is to begin with the
models of M. Musiela and P.L Lions, but then progress to multidimensional strict
local martingales, using the theory of Lyapunov exponents as developed in the
work of Narita, Khasminskii, Stroock, and Varadhan. The PI will also tackle some
thorny numerical analysis issues created by the lack of linear growth, a problem
inherent in the framework of strict local martingale models.
