
* 1714169
* Fast Spectral Solvers for Partial Differential Equations in General Domains
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2017,08/14/2017
* Oscar Bruno,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 147,086.00

1714169 Bruno

This project concerns development and analysis of computational methods
enabling prediction of the behavior of physical systems including fluid flow,
solid mechanics, acoustics, and electromagnetism. The new computational methods
seek to efficiently predict the time-dependent behavior of physical and
engineering systems, with application in areas such as medicine, seismology,
aerodynamics, and stealth. A common thread in all of these areas relates to the
complexity of the time evolution inherent in these systems. The flow of blood
from a beating heart, the seismic waves arising from an earthquake, the fluid
flow around an aircraft, and the behavior of radar technologies all share some
of the same elements: the time evolution of the observed phenomena. It is this
complexity in time-dependence that is addressed by this project: the Fourier
Continuation (FC) and spectral time methodologies seek to reproduce the
outstanding performance of certain spectral solvers, which are unfortunately
restricted to simple geometric configurations, for simulations in a much more
general realm, with greatly reduced computer memory and processing time -- thus,
effectively enabling the solution of previously intractable problems in areas of
highly significant engineering and scientific interest. A graduate student and
an undergraduate student participate in the project.

From a mathematical perspective, the effort seeks to produce solvers for
partial differential equations (PDEs) in the time domain that can deliver, in
fast computing times, nearly dispersionless (spectral) PDE solutions for general
complex three-dimensional structures. The project thus extends to general
engineering and scientific configurations the high quality otherwise inherent in
spectral solvers for spatially periodic structures. The FC and related
frequency-domain approaches have already been highly successful in a wide range
of important problems in science and engineering. The extensions studied here
seek to bring time-domain solvers to the realm of general applicability, thus
extending to the time domain the previous successes in the area of spectral
solvers in the frequency domain. The resulting methods are applied to important
problems in the fields of materials science, applied physics, electrical
engineering, geophysics, and aerospace engineering. A graduate student and an
undergraduate student participate in the project.
