
* 1715735
* Frame Compatibility: Discrete Versus Continuous Redundant Expansions, Strategies for Narrowing the Digital-Analog Gap
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,05/10/2017
* Bernhard Bodmann,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 256,977.00

The theory of compressed sensing promises to revolutionize remote sensing such
as radar, biomedical imaging, and perhaps even digital photography. The main
insight from this theory is that a compressible signal can be acquired with much
less effort than a signal with a high information content. However, these
results are commonly based on mathematical models for signals that are already
digitized and for sensors that measure randomly, which makes them somewhat
disconnected from realistic physical signals and apparatuses. This work explores
recent trends in narrowing the gap between theory and practice. Instead of
digital signals, models for analog signals are used to define compressibility.
The signal space includes the possibility of continuous changes without
producing artifacts in the signal recovery procedure. This idea will be applied
to radar, X-ray crystallography, and other sensing systems. The work is also
anticipated to have application to neural networks that form the basis for
modern machine learning algorithms. Although the application to machine learning
is entirely concerned with digital data, the use of continuous models ensures
that encoded information can be retrieved accurately.

Redundant, stable expansions with frames have become central to many
applications of mathematics in data science, signal acquisition, and
communications, from remote sensing to packet-based, wireless, fiber optical, or
quantum communications and recently in compressed sensing and super-resolution.
Despite the successes of the frame-based expansion and acquisition of signals,
there is often a mismatch between the stylized mathematical signal and
measurement models that are assumed and the corresponding physical models in the
analog domain. For example, signal acquisition is typically described by
specific linear functionals, not randomly chosen, unstructured ones. This
research project addresses the need to improve compatibility between continuous
and discrete representation spaces on a fundamental level. A typical model for
analog signals is given by infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces with a
reproducing kernel and an associated expansion with respect to a continuous,
highly coherent family of vectors. A natural measure of sparsity of a signal is
in this setting the minimal number of kernel functions needed in its expansion.
Signal acquisition is usually based on sampling from a group-invariant, discrete
family of functionals. The expected outcomes of the project include: (1)
accurate recovery for signals that are sparsely synthesized in a finite- or
infinite-dimensional reproducing kernel space and measured with physically
relevant sensing models, using a sparsity-inducing norm that is stable with
respect to continuous deformations; (2) phase retrieval, signal recovery based
on magnitudes of frame coefficients, in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces such
as multivariate Paley-Wiener spaces, which will be done using sparsity to
demonstrate injectivity of measurements, stability, and feasibility of recovery
algorithms in a general class of kernel spaces; and (3) a version of Mallat's
scattering transform in a redundant representation with approximate
invertibility based on phase retrieval and sparsity. The scattering transform
extracts nonlinear features from data that are powerful descriptors in
classification problems. It is designed from a viewpoint of desirable properties
in the analog domain, but its application is mostly to digitized data of limited
size, for which the claims need to be properly adapted. The investigators will
use phase retrieval and sparsity to demonstrate the approximate invertibility of
the transform, which is needed to verify the faithful encoding of data.
