
* 1715201
* Coherent Structures and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,05/26/2020
* Zhiwu Lin,GA,Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 223,564.00

Coherent structures, such as the elliptical or spiral galaxies in the universe,
or large scale vortex structures in the atmosphere and ocean, or surface water
waves, are observed in many natural phenomena. This research is aimed at
understanding the formation and evolution of such coherent structures (that in
some cases are amenable to mathematical analysis). A first question is their
stability, that is, whether they persist even if they experience perturbations.
Understanding the mechanisms of instability and stability is fundamental for
many applications. An example is the importance in plasma physics and
engineering of understanding mechanisms of instability, to enable design of
devices able to contain plasma long enough for practical fusion energy
production. Another topic is to understand the dynamical roles of coherent
structures. For example, how do we explain the appearance of the large-scale
structures observed in the atmosphere and oceans? What is the mechanism for an
initially unstructured state to approach a final coherent state? Such problems
are far from being thoroughly understood. Methods of mathematical analysis are
the primary tools employed in this investigation. The rigorous mathematics makes
it feasible to do stable numerical computations and to better understand the
phenomena found in numerical and experimental studies.

One focus of the project is the stability problem for Hamiltonian partial
differential equations with energy functional of infinite Morse index. They
include gravity water waves (and many long wave models), nonlinear Dirac
equations, ion acoustic wave equations, and Vlasov models for collisionless
plasmas. In contrast to the cases with energy functional of finite Morse index,
to date there are very few general tools for stability problems with infinite
Morse index. Several models, including the regularized Boussinesq equation and
two-dimensional Euler equation, will be studied, with the goal to develop some
general tools for stability problems of infinite Morse index. Another focus of
the project is the metastability of coherent structures and the persistence of
invariant structures under small dissipation. They include the metastability of
quasi-stationary flows of the two-dimensional Navier-Stokes equation with small
viscosity, and the inviscid limit of invariant manifolds of Navier-Stokes
equations. Hamiltonian and geometric structures of the fluid equations will be
explored in these investigations.
