
* 1715477
* Research and Education in Physical Mathematics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 08/01/2017,08/11/2017
* Michael Brenner,MA,Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 385,822.00

This project addresses several problems of current scientific and technological
importance, from fluid mechanics to biology. Specifically, the first project
studies the time dependent events that underlie fluid turbulence, events that
are too fast to have ever been resolved either in experiments or theory. These
events underpin the energy cascade in fluid turbulence, and have immense
technological importance. Resolving them is a long-standing problem in fluid
mechanics, which is highly related to the question of regularity of the Euler
equation. The second topic is a mathematical and computational study of the
shape of the nasal cavity, and how it affects the airflow and functionality of
the nose. It has long been known that the shape of the nasal cavity changes
dramatically across evolution, ranging from dogs with complex labyrinth like
internal cavities, to humans who have short internal cavities. This project aims
to develop a mathematical framework to understand how the origin of these
changes. The third project aims to develop new mathematical methods for aiding
drug discovery. Currently there is no efficient way to search the space of small
molecules to discover ligands that are relevant for drug targets. Such a search
must both find molecules that bind to relevant protein targets and don't bind to
unintended targets. Advances in high throughput screening has generated enormous
datasets for the interaction between proteins and small molecules. The PI and
his collaborators have shown that a method for associating ligands with protein
targets based on random matrix theory has higher accuracy than any other
published methods, and this project aims to develop this method further to
impact the drug discovery pipeline. The broader impact centers around both
personnel development of graduate students, undergraduate students and postdocs,
and the development of educational materials for teaching science and
mathematics through cooking. The teaching initiatives on science and cooking
have reached nearly 250,000 people through an online class.

The study of the events underlying fluid turbulence will focus on the collision
of two antiparallel vortex filaments. The PI and his collaborators recently
published an analysis suggesting that such a collision could lead to a cascade
of structures on ever smaller scales, due to the breakdown of a similarity
solution of the Biot Savart equations that asymptotically governs the collision.
These solutions will be tested both computationally and experimentally in the
experimentally realizable problem of the collision of two vortex rings. The
research team will numerically track the development of small scale structure,
compare them to parallel experiments, and develop a mathematical description of
the smallest scales in fluid turbulence. The study of the fluid mechanics of the
nasal cavity begins with CT images of noses from different organisms, together
with a CFD code for solving the flow field to generate the flows. The research
team then will develop an approximate analytical description of the flow through
a tortuous cavity that allows understanding of these results. Scaling laws will
be developed based on these solutions to arrive at a mathematical description of
the design principles. The study of protein ligand binding is centered around
deviations from the BBP threshold of the Marcenko Pastur distribution of random
matrix theory. By incorporating more information about the chemistry of ligands
into this description the research has the potential to improve predictive power
for utility in the drug discovery pipeline.
