
* 1715850
* Imaging Electrical Conductivities from Their Induced Current and Network Tomography for Random Walks on Graphs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2017,07/13/2017
* Amir Moradifam,CA,University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 132,249.00

This project focuses on two applications that utilize methods from the field of
inverse problems. The first concerns the mathematical analysis of the next
generation medical imaging methods and contributes to the theoretical foundation
of current density based imaging methods. Successful results will allow images
with significantly higher quality and accuracy than possible with current
medical imaging modalities. Such highly accurate imaging methods are crucial for
early detection, diagnoses, and treatment of cancer, and provide alternatives
for risky and invasive procedures and reduce the cost of treatment. The methods
also apply to the analysis of electrical networks with a prescribed current, and
will include the development of random walk models on graphs to describe
transitions in conductivity. Random walks on graphs arise in many areas of
science and the proposed research has direct impact in the analysis of computer
and social networks, cryptography, epidemiology, statistical physics, economics,
and biology.

The first part of the project focuses on the inverse problem of recovering the
electrical conductivity inside a body from the knowledge of the induced current
density vector field in the interior and Dirichlet or Neumann boundary
conditions. This hybrid inverse problem combines high resolution of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) and high contrast of Electrical Impedance Tomography
(EIT) to provide images with high resolutions and high contrast. It is closely
related to the weighted least gradient problems and 1-Laplacian equations with
variable coefficients, and more study is needed on the existence and uniqueness
of solutions of such problems. The second part includes the problem of
determining the conductivity matrix of an electrical network from the induced
current along the edges. It can be generalized to the inverse problem of
determining transition probabilities of random walk models on graphs from the
knowledge of the expected net number of times the random walker passes along the
edges. The results from these fundamental mathematical questions will contribute
to various seemingly unrelated specific real world applications and can be
extended to many other areas. This project brings to bear a variety of
mathematical tools from partial differential equations, calculus of variations,
theory of minimal surfaces, geometric measure theory, and numerical analysis.
