
* 1716057
* Nonsmooth Analysis and Numerical Optimization Techniques beyond Convexity
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2017,08/11/2017
* Mau Nguyen,OR,Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2020
* USD 119,984.00

Convex analysis and optimization play a crucial role by providing the
mathematical foundation and methods for solving problems in a variety of fields.
At the same time, recent applications in these fields require optimization
techniques beyond convexity. Although convex optimization techniques and
numerical algorithms have been the topics of extensive research for more than 50
years, solving large-scale optimization problems without the presence of
convexity remains a challenge. In this project, the principal investigator aims
to develop new theoretical results in convex and nonsmooth analysis, and new
numerical algorithms, for the optimization of nonconvex functions that are not
necessarily differentiable, especially functions that are the difference of
convex functions. Optimization problems of this sort arise in multi-facility
location, clustering, machine learning, compressed sensing, and imaging
applications. The investigator and his colleagues develop, implement, and test
numerical algorithms for solving such problems. With no requirement on
differentiability and convexity, these numerical algorithms bring new methods
for solving complex optimization problems in different fields of application.

This project aims to develop new theory of nonsmooth analysis and optimization
methods for solving optimization problems without imposing conditions of
differentiability or convexity. Based on a variational geometric approach, the
first goal of this project is to develop new results in nonsmooth analysis to
deal with optimization problems in which the objective functions are
nondifferentiable and nonconvex. This approach provides a systematic development
of nonsmooth analysis, making it accessible to researchers from different
fields. The second goal of the project is to develop numerical algorithms for
solving nonconvex optimization problems, especially those whose objective
functions are representable as differences of convex functions, and to apply
them to problems in multi-facility location, clustering and hierarchical
clustering, machine learning, compressed sensing, and imaging. The investigator
and his colleagues particularly focus on problems that involve different norms
or constraints, requiring advances in smoothing and initialization techniques.
They address the important issues of existence and uniqueness of optimal
solutions of the models, initialization techniques based on global optimization
methods, implementation of the algorithms for comparison and testing on
artificial and real data sets, and the convergence rate of the algorithms. The
results contribute to the development of nonsmooth analysis and its use in
building and analyzing numerical algorithms for nonsmooth optimization problems
that are not convex.
