
* 1716145
* Mathematics and Control of Systemic and High-Frequency Trading Risks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2017,06/26/2017
* Agostino Capponi,NY,Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,189.00

Understanding the dependence structure among defaults of financial institutions
is of fundamental importance for the design of policies aiming to enhance
financial stability. Contractual, legal, and business relationships among firms
may act as a conduit for the transmission and amplification of risks. Under
scenarios of financial distress, spillover effects on business counterparties
and more broadly on the real economic sectors can be significant. It is thus
fundamentally important that financial institutions, holding large portfolios of
fixed income securities, can quantify these risks and their systemic
implications before making hedging and investment decisions. Equally important
for financial stability is to explain the huge volatility spikes of asset
prices, periodically observed during flash crash events in markets dominated by
high-frequency traders. If these events were happening to a too-big-to-fail
institution, the market could be wrecked and government bailout would be
necessary, with enormous consequences on taxpayers.

This project will develop stochastic control techniques for solving fixed income
portfolio selection problems in the presence of contagion risk, and analyzing
intraday liquidity and price dynamics in high-frequency trading markets. In the
first part of the project, the investigator will study recursive systems of
nonlinear parabolic partial differential equations arising in the optimal
selection and hedging of fixed income portfolios. In the second part of the
project, he will develop new numerical techniques for analyzing second order
forward-backward stochastic differential equations with jumps, a class of
equations arising naturally in high frequency trading when controlling for the
inventory risk. The unique structure of these problems will present new
mathematical challenges in stochastic analysis, including the study of fully
nonlinear partial integro-differential equations, second order forward-backward
stochastic differential equations with jumps, and stochastic games associated
with these equations.
