
* 1716673
* Equilibria in Large Populations: Asymmetric Mean Field Games and Optimal Control
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,07/10/2020
* Rene Carmona,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 312,000.00

Since its inception about a decade ago, the theory of mean field games has
developed into an important source of progress in the study of the dynamical and
equilibrium behavior of large systems. The introduction of ideas from
statistical physics in the search for approximate equilibria for sizable dynamic
systems created new interest in the study of large populations of competitive
individuals with "mean field" interactions. The search for equilibria in a mean
field game is an attempt to identify and compute global statistics (macroscopic
behavior) of large populations of rational individuals who optimize their own
cost/reward trade-offs (microscopic behavior). The challenge is to understand
and quantify the way the behavior of individuals affects the overall conduct of
the population. Propagation of chaos and rational irrationality are terms that
have been used to describe the possible macroscopic impact of individual choices
at the microscopic level. This broad-brush description has its parallel in the
structure of the mathematical models and analytical tools used to describe these
phenomena. This project aims at a better understanding of the mathematics
underpinning the models. Special emphasis is put on realistic models
characterized by the presence of a small number of major players and a large
number of minor players interacting in a mean field manner. These models have
important applications in population biology (bee swarming, bird flocking, and
crowd motion), biology (circadian rhythm synchronization), sociology, behavioral
economics, and finance.

The project focuses on a class of equilibrium problems for which symmetry is
broken by the presence of two groups of individuals having conflicting
interests. These models can be cast as mean field games with major and minor
players. Special attention will be given to potential models that can be solved
as the optimal control of McKean-Vlasov stochastic systems. One goal of the
project is the development of numerical algorithms for the computation of Nash
equilibria, hence the focus on models with finite state spaces. The second part
of the project is devoted to the analysis of the recently-introduced mean field
games of timing and again, the extension to models with major and minor players
is a significant part of the research agenda. Finally, the project will compare
the body of work on mean field games with the strand of economic literature
concerning games with a continuum of players.
