
* 1716790
* Higher Order Nonlocal Models in Continuum Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, GOALI-Grnt Opp Acad Lia wIndus, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI, EPSCoR Co-Funding
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Petronela Radu,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 418,805.00

1716790 Radu

The investigators conduct an analytical and computational investigation of
integro-differential equation models that arise in three applications: dynamic
fracture in plates, image processing, and phase transitions. These are nonlocal
models: the model's mathematical description of what happens at any point of the
system can depend on what is happening at other points. This nonlocal dependence
complicates the analysis of the models, and the standard analytical tools and
results for local models (which are usually systems of partial differential
equations, often with derivatives of higher than second order) are not
available. In compensation, the nonlocal models need not require such smoothness
of their solutions as differential equation models do. This can be an advantage
in studying fracture and other inherently discontinuous or singular phenomena.
For these applications, the investigators study regularity of solutions,
existence and regularity for minimizers of energy functionals (which provide
information about the stability of solutions), and asymptotic behavior of the
solutions. These issues are important in local models as well, so advances here
help develop a theory for nonlocal models that parallels the theory for
classical local models. Such a theory would have wider consequences, because
nonlocal models are being explored in many other applications that involve
nonlocal interactions between parts of a system, such as biological aggregation,
as well as in applications in manufacturing, energy, and infrastructure that
involve fracture, images, or phase transitions. Graduate students participate in
the work of the project.

The investigators conduct a mathematical and computational investigation of
nonlocal models that arise in dynamic fracture in plates, in image processing,
and in phase transitions. The advantage of working with low-regularity solutions
to integro-differential equations is offset by the scarcity of mathematical
tools (such as compactness arguments) when working with these non-smoothing
operators. The investigators study the issues of regularity of solutions
throughout the damaged and undamaged domain and near the boundary, existence and
regularity of minimizers for nonlocal energy functionals, and asymptotic
behavior of solutions. They develop predictive models for dynamic fracture in
plates, and they study low-regularity solutions that show jump discontinuities
in phase transitions as given by doubly-nonlocal Cahn-Hilliard systems. To
tackle these problems, they adapt existing techniques (multiplier methods,
Fourier transform methods, asymptotic expansions, or DiGiorgi-type arguments)
from the local theory to the nonlocal framework, and develop new methods that
provide theoretical and methodological foundation for the study of nonlocal
models. Graduate students participate in the work of the project.
