
* 1720014
* Efficient High Frequency Integral Equations and Iterative Methods
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2017,07/24/2017
* Yassine Boubendir,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,063.00

The project is distinguished by its great wealth of potential scientific
applications and broad educational activities. Indeed, the numerical algorithms
to be developed in the research activities are applicable to realistic
configurations in physics, acoustic/electromagnetic, and other disciplines. The
major theoretical and computational difficulties in these fields result from the
presence of complicating factors such as complex geometries (including aircraft,
satellites, radars, antennas, etc.), high-frequency scattering, amongst others.
The obtained methods will provide the ability to simulate such systems
accurately in order to be applied to the design of engineering vehicles and
devices, including military and non-military radar, remote sensing satellites,
noise reduction, stealth technology, and many others that will be positively
impacted by the results of this proposal. The solvers obtained will be made
readily available to industrial scientists, which will contribute to maintaining
their competitiveness in particular in the aerospace industry. The educational
impact will be significant in several areas. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be rigorously trained in both scientific computing and mathematical
analysis in order to enable them to face future challenges in science and
technology. They will acquire the skills needed in state-of-the-art in applied
numerical methods, and this will provide them great opportunities to join high
technological industries and contribute in further advancing the U.S technology
while having a successful career.

The investigator plans to develop efficient and accurate algorithms for
acoustic/electromagnetic wave propagation problems in complex structures. The
new proposed research activities will have a significant impact in enabling
advances in numerical methods and mathematics, and will result in a new family
of numerical algorithms with enhanced capabilities over those currently
available. The investigator plans to develop a robust non-overlapping domain
decomposition method for the Helmholtz equation based on the utilization of
optimized transmission conditions on the artificial interfaces and appropriate
use of the adaptive radiation condition technique. This also will allow the
design of an effective algorithm coupling finite and boundary elements. In the
case of the high frequency regime, the investigator proposes to (1) use
asymptotic expansions of solutions of the Helmholtz equation, namely the normal
derivative of the total field, to rigorously develop a O(1) high frequency
integral equations solver, (2) analyze the stability and convergence of the
resulting algorithms, and (3) suitably combine high performance computing with
the new proposed methods to efficiently tackle real-life problems. Parallel
computing and mathematical analysis will be used to help achieve these goals.
