
* 1723516
* US-China Workshop on Impacts of a Changing Cryosphere on High Elevation Climate, Weather, and Aquatic Ecosystems
* DMS,GVF - Global Venture Fund, POP & COMMUNITY ECOL PROG, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, Physical & Dynamic Meteorology, Hydrologic Sciences, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, MacroSysBIO & NEON-Enabled Sci
* 05/01/2017,04/19/2017
* James Elser,MT,University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2019
* USD 72,872.00

This award provides travel support for US-based participants to the US-China
workshop on "Impacts of a changing cryosphere on high elevation climate,weather,
and aquatic ecosystems", to be held near Qinghai Lake, China in August/September
2017. Climate, weather, and aquatic ecosystems such as streams and lakes are
intimately connected to each other. This is especially true in mountain regions
where glaciers as well as permanent and seasonal snowpack have major effects on
physical (temperature), chemical (nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus), and
biological (microbes, algae, fish) features of streams and lakes. However,
mountain environments are experiencing very rapid changes in climate, even more
pronounced than global averages. Since mountain regions are like humanity's
"water towers", we need a better understanding of what these changing
environmental conditions mean for the quantity and quality of our water supply.
To best advance this understanding, scientists in different regions need to
compare their findings and share their best practices of analysis and discovery.
This project will support an intensive interdisciplinary workshop in which
scientists, mathematicians, and engineers from the USA and China will meet to
share data, develop collaborations, and make plans for further work to advance
our understanding of how a changing alpine environment might affect lakes and
streams and thus our water resources.

Ongoing climate variation is having major physical, chemical, and biological
impacts on global ecosystems. Aquatic ecosystems in mountain regions are
especially impacted due to amplified temperature increases observed at high
elevation and due to the sensitivity of key cryospheric components (glaciers,
snowpack) to changes in temperature and precipitation. The ongoing changes in
the cryosphere are widespread, complex, and affect a variety of key parameters
for alpine lakes and streams such as temperature, transparency, discharge, and
nutrient supply. The roles of natural variability versus external forcing in
driving observed changes in snow and glacier distributions, as well as high
elevation energy, water, weather, and biogeochemical cycles, need to be
investigated. Documenting, understanding, and forecasting these impacts is
challenging and requires broad interdisciplinary collaborations. To address
these global challenges, this workshop will bring together experts in limnology,
meteorology, atmospheric science, and hydrology as well as data science and
mathematical modeling from both the USA and China to coordinate research, share
key findings, identify major unanswered questions, and establish a network for
future collaboration. This award is co-funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering, the Divisions of Earth Sciences and Atmospheric and
Geospace Sciences of the GeoScience Directorate, and the Divisions of Biological
Infrastructure and Environmental Biology of the BIO Directorate.
