
* 1810826
* Asymptotic and Spectral Analysis and Control Problems for Aeroelastic Energy Harvester Models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/28/2018
* Marianna Shubov,NH,University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 238,171.00

The objective of this project is a rigorous mathematical analysis of
piezoelectric aeroelastic energy harvester models. An energy harvester is a
device that transforms the energy of mechanical vibration of an elastic
structure (a beam or an aircraft wing) into electric energy. Energy harvesting
is a newly emerging area. The goal of this research direction is to develop a
new technology for providing alternative sources of electric power and/or
recharging storage devices such as batteries or capacitors. The concept has
ecological ramifications in reducing the chemical waste and potential monetary
gains by significantly reducing maintenance cost. A piezoelectric energy
harvester consists of an elastic structure (e.g., a beam) and layers of a
piezoelectric material bonded to it. If the structure vibrates under an
influence of external forces (e.g., an ambient airflow) then each of the
piezoelectric layers undergoes a deformation which results in the appearance of
an electric voltage on the faces of the layers. This voltage produces an
electric current whose energy can be harvested. In this project the investigator
studies three increasingly more complicated aeroelastic harvester models, i.e.,
models of a harvester whose underlying elastic structure is an aircraft wing.
The project is a generalization of the results and models of two research
projects carried out by the investigator. The first one is a rigorous
investigation of aircraft wing models. It is a natural continuation of the
investigator's 15 years of work on mathematical analysis of aircraft wing models
and on wing flutter control. The second project is a detailed mathematical
analysis of an energy harvester model with the most basic underlying elastic
structure: the Euler-Bernoulli beam. The model, well known in engineering, was
studied numerically and validated experimentally. Mathematical analysis of the
model is presented in four recent papers by the investigator. In particular,
control problems for this model were analyzed.

A mathematical model of a piezoelectric energy harvester is composed of the
following: 1) the equation(s) of the underlying structure; 2) the equation of
the electric circuit formed by the electrodes covering the top and bottom faces
of the piezoceramic layer and by the external electric load; 3) additional terms
describing the direct and inverse piezoelectric effects. The goal of this
project is to investigate three piezoelectric harvester models with physically
realistic underlying elastic structures and similar electric circuits. I. The
structure is the bending-torsion vibration model describing a long slender
aircraft wing, not affected by an airflow (ground vibration wing model). The
model is given as a system of two coupled hyperbolic equations for the
transverse deflection and the torsion angle. II. The elastic structure is the
same bending-torsion wing model in an ambient incompressible air flow that is
normal to the leading edge of the wing. The structural equations contain
additional time-convolution integral terms representing the forces and moments
exerted on the wing by the flow. III. The elastic structure is a short stiff
structure in an axial (parallel to wing span) incompressible airflow (a palatal
flutter model for snoring/apnea.) The goals for the above models are: a)
derivation of asymptotic representation for the electroaeroelastic modes and
mode shapes; b) proof of the Riesz basis property of the mode shapes; c)
application of results to exact controllability and output tracking problems.
The long term goal is to extend the above program to compressible airflow cases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
