
* 1812734
* Dynamical Systems in Quantum Information Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2018,04/02/2020
* Anna Vershynina,TX,University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2021
* USD 159,997.00

The subject of this project is quantum information theory, which is a crucial
ingredient for the development of meaningful quantum technologies. Quantum
devices use quantum systems, such as electrons, atoms, photons, to encode and
process information. They make it possible to harness the effects of purely
quantum phenomena such as superposition (the ability of being in "two places" at
once) and entanglement (extremely strong connections between two, often quite
remote, parts of the system) in order to drastically increase the security and
speed of computational devices such as quantum computer. While entanglement
became one of the most valuable resources in quantum theory, many of its
attributes remain unknown. At present, one of the main technological challenges
in quantum information arises from the destructive effects of environment, the
effect known as decoherence. Decoherence is a partial loss of quantum
information through a channel, in other words, the introduction of noise into
the communication. This project will contribute to understanding how these
losses may be theoretically predicted and minimized. Students at different
levels will be trained through participation in this project. Another
educational objective of the project is to promote STEM subjects and improve
educational opportunities for students in Houston, TX, middle and high schools,
with?main focus on economically disadvantaged neighborhoods.

Two, often overlapping, research directions will be pursued in this project:
quantum information theoretic inequalities and dynamics of quantum systems.
Quantum information theoretic inequalities, such as monotonicity of quantum
relative entropy and strong subadditivity of entropy, are at the core of
providing a framework for what is theoretically possible to achieve in quantum
information. Dynamics of open quantum systems describing the effects of the
environment is notoriously challenging and vital problem. The principal goals of
the project are: (i) to improve understanding of the role of entropy in the
quantum setting through a sharpening of the monotonicity of different relative
entropies as well as the formulation/derivation of quantum versions of classical
information-theoretic inequalities; and (ii) to rigorously describe attributes
of quantum entanglement by seeking upper bounds for the speed of generation of
entanglement. This investigation is largely motivated by the need to understand
and control the decoherence in quantum channels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
