
* 1812666
* Critical Regularity, Selection Dynamics, and Condensation in Nonlinear Balance Laws
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/12/2021
* Hailiang Liu,IA,Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 314,550.00

In many mathematical models of physical reality, persistent patterns are formed
and maintained by a balance of competing influences. Such phenomena arise
naturally in fluid dynamics, evolutionary biology, quantum mechanics, and
others. Examples range from forming eddies and coherent structures in turbulent
flows to shock formation in gases, or natural selection in population dynamics,
or formation of Bose-Einstein condensate (a new state of matter) in quantum
mechanics. The goal of the current project is to develop novel mathematical
tools and numerical algorithms for analyzing how such competing effects achieve
dynamic balance or lead to critical solution behavior. The mathematical results
are expected to be fundamental, and contribute to a body of understanding that
promises to be useful to researchers across a range of disciplines. Critical
regularity is a fundamental problem in fluid dynamics, the study of which can
provide a deeper understanding of critical threshold phenomena occurring in
wider applications. The understanding of photon condensate can result in methods
which may potentially be suitable for designing novel light sources. This
investigation focuses on the study of dynamic behavior in areas strongly
motivated by applications and the theory of partial differential equations, with
research objectives ranging from critical regularity in nonlinear balance laws,
selection dynamics in trait-structured population models to energy transport in
photon scattering. The mathematical models have one striking feature in common:
the underlying dissipation is insufficient to prevent finite time singularity
formation, and the persistence of the dynamic behavior hinges on a delicate
balance among competing forces. These solution features depend on crossing a
critical threshold associated with the initial configuration and/or the
interaction kernels. High order numerical algorithms will be developed to solve
these problems, with a unified approach so that several intrinsic solution
structures are retained at the discrete level. Structure-preserving algorithms
as such are important in capturing the correct physics over long time
simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
