
* 1813501
* Validated Computational Methods in Global Analysis and Applications to Celestial Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2018,07/12/2020
* Jason Mireles-James,FL,Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 131,975.00

Celestial mechanics is the branch of mathematical physics that studies the
motion of planets, asteroids, and comets, and that facilitates design of safe
and efficient space missions. While the intellectual foundations of celestial
mechanics belong to antiquity, the field is more relevant than ever thanks to
the advent of space exploration in the twentieth century. Modern developments in
dynamical systems theory provide deep insights, and by now several space
missions have transformed inspired mathematics into successful practice. The key
to these developments is to understand certain landmark objects known as
invariant manifolds, and to study connections between them. In realistic
applications the only way to discover these landmarks is through numerical
computations. Due to the global nature of these computations, questions
involving errors and accuracy are both important and subtle. These issues are
treated with great care in the present project, ultimately leading to a
mathematically rigorous framework describing all discretization and truncation
errors. The results provide practitioners of scientific computing with
mathematically rigorous tools for quantifying computational errors, while
providing mathematicians with new methods for proving theorems. The investigator
applies this new framework to problems in celestial mechanics that have resisted
earlier analysis. Doing so requires substantial advancement of both analytical
and computational aspects of the theory. The resulting infrastructure will be
made freely available, and can be used to study other complex mathematical
models.

A central theme of the investigator's research program is the unification of
numerical and analytical methods for global analysis of nonlinear systems. This
project builds on the success of the investigator's earlier research,
demonstrating its scalability and parallelizability. The focus of the project is
global analysis in gravitational N-body problems, an area with many longstanding
unanswered theoretical questions and many opportunities for practical
application. One project numerically studies collision dynamics on a
compactified phase space, while another answers questions about global branches
of periodic orbits bifurcating from the polygonal central configurations of
Lagrange. A more computational aspect of the project develops a new approach to
cluster computing and archiving of invariant manifold atlases, providing deeper
understanding of the dynamics and new possibilities for space mission design.
Throughout, the work is guided by the principle that basic invariant sets like
equilibria, periodic orbits, and heteroclinic/homoclinic connections between
them are the fundamental building blocks for understanding complicated dynamics.
The resulting computer-assisted analysis is useful for studying other problems
such as those involving geodesic flows, mechanical systems on compact manifolds,
chemistry, and electrodynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
