
* 1813891
* Random Waves and Vortices: Flow Decomposition and Energy Fluxes
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2018,07/10/2018
* Oliver Buhler,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 320,000.00

This project is a theoretical fluid dynamics study aimed at improving our
understanding of turbulent atmosphere ocean processes at small scales, which are
unresolvable in today's global-scale computer models. Key components of the
project are the improved understanding of turbulent energy transfers from large
to small scales in the fluid, and the effect of turbulent advection on passive
floating devices in the ocean, which is aimed at extracting maximal information
from costly oceanographic measurements. Overall, the proposed work has broad
impacts within fluid mechanics, physical oceanography, and dynamical
meteorology, and its training aspects include both graduate and undergraduate
students.

The fluid dynamics of these complex systems is characterized by a nonlinear
jigsaw puzzle of intermingling turbulent waves and vortices, especially at small
scales, such as those relevant to submesoscale oceanography, for instance. Here
classical wave-mean interaction theory fails, direct numerical simulation of the
fluid motion with global computational models is not possible, and theoretical
innovations for diagnostic and predictive models are needed. In this connection
the project seeks to break new ground with a multi-pronged approach that
combines theory and numerical modelling in three problem areas. First, a
fundamental study of third-order structure functions in rotating stratified
turbulence is proposed, with the aim of better diagnosing spectral, scale-to-
scale energy fluxes from sparse observational data. Second, a recent diagnostic
wave- vortex decomposition method is to be extended to the increasingly
important case of data acquisition following a set of random Lagrangian tracers.
Third, a predictive model for interactions between waves and vortices is to be
improved by generalizing a certain asymptotic conservation law for slowly
varying waves to more general wave fields. The proposed research calls for non-
trivial mathematical investigations that involves various systems of multi-
dimensional PDEs, asymptotic analysis, stochastic modelling, and numerical
computation, all with an eye towards ultimate applications in the real world
that are relevant to atmosphere and ocean dynamics. This is a non-trivial
technology transfer between different branches of applied mathematics as well as
of several physical sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
