
* 1813695
* Geometric Measure Theory, Image Processing, and Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2018,04/26/2018
* Monica Torres,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 171,691.00

This project will provide a mathematical foundation for the novel numerical
methods used in image processing. Applications of image processing are
ubiquitous. They range from analyzing medical images, such as CAT or MRI images,
to forensic sciences, face recognition, satellite imagery, speech recognition
(acoustic imaging), etc. All of these applications are underlied by fast
mathematical algorithms that do the work of image enhancement and restoration.
To measure the difference between images, numerical methods under consideration
in this project use a so-called "earth mover's distance" (in a more general
context it is known as the Wasserstein metric). This is a novel application of
the earth mover's distances that promises a substantial speed-up of image
processing algorithms. Training, advising, and mentoring of graduate students
toward their doctoral degree is intertwined with the research tasks of the
project. The project will support at least 3 graduate students, two of them
female students. Â  This research is concerned with several diverse analytical
topics; the mathematical analysis is unified through techniques of geometric
measure theory. The numerical methods to compute the earth mover's distance are
based on a regularization and a minimization over a class of vector fields
satisfying a boundary condition. However, there is currently no theory
confirming either the existence of minimizers or the convergence of the
regularized problem to the original one. These questions will be addressed by
using techniques of calculus of variations, gamma convergence, and the theory of
traces of divergence-measure vector fields to deal with the boundary condition.
Simultaneously this project will consider several unresolved problems concerning
the theory of divergence-measure vector fields. Another important aspect of the
field of image processing to be investigated is the advancement of methods of
evaluating the image noise pioneered by Rudin, Osher, and Fatemi (the ROF
model). The research of this project will also include analysis of models for
segregation of populations using non-linear elliptic equations, with the goal to
understand the free boundaries that separate the populations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
