
* 1813027
* Machine Learning, Reservoir Computing, and Nonlinear Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2019,06/09/2021
* Edward Ott,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 284,039.00

The goal of this project is to obtain basic understanding of the mechanisms by
which machine learning can predict the evolution of nonlinear dynamical systems,
and to explore how to use this knowledge to improve existing machine learning
prediction and devise new capabilities. Achieving this goal would advance our
understanding of a host of potential important applications that can be
described mathematically by dynamical systems, ranging from gene therapies to
weather prediction. Graduate students are engaged in the research of the
project.

The investigator uses concepts from nonlinear dynamics and chaos theory to
obtain understanding of when, how, and why machine learning techniques are
effective in predicting the evolution of the state of a dynamical system,
including consideration of dynamical systems that are large and complex (e.g.,
spatially based systems). In addition, he considers the issue of "climate
preservation," by which is meant the ability of machine learning tools to
replicate the long-term ergodic properties of a dynamical system about which
little is known, from measurements of time series of its state evolution. The
investigator uses this ability to formulate machine learning tools for
determining ergodic properties (e.g., Lyapunov exponent spectra) of the dynamics
of the unknown system. Graduate students are engaged in the research of the
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
