
* 1813384
* Dynamical Systems Methods for Fluid Mechanics and Hamiltonian Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 10/01/2018,06/28/2021
* Clarence Wayne,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 292,646.00

The investigator studies the behavior of partial differential equations and
other infinite dimensional dynamical systems, and adapts and develops ideas
originating in the study of finite-dimensional dynamics to make qualitative and
quantitative predictions about the behavior of solutions of such systems. He
focuses primarily on questions arising in physical applications. Among the
questions he studies are the metastable behavior of fluid systems, whereby long-
lived structures like vortices appear in the flow on a relatively short time
scale, and then determine the subsequent evolution of the fluid for very long
times. He also studies the influence of localized structures like vortices on
the behavior of rotating, stratified fluid layers like the atmosphere. The
differential equations arise in a variety of different physical contexts and are
characterized by the fact that while the equations themselves are well known,
they are too complicated to solve explicitly except in very special or
physically unrealistic cases. Nevertheless, applications require at least a
qualitative understanding of the behavior of their solutions; this research
project aims to develop such an understanding. The project incorporates the
training of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows into all facets of this
research.

Among the specific systems that the investigator studies are: (i) nearly
inviscid fluids and weakly damped Hamiltonian systems like the Fermi-Pasta-Ulam
system using normal forms and the theory of hypercoercivity; (ii) invariant
manifolds and their implications for the behavior of: (a) unstably stratified,
rotating fluid systems, (b) the compressible Navier-Stokes equations and (c) as
a means of understanding the continuum approximation of kinetic systems, and
(iii) small-divisors in fluid mechanics and other infinite dimensional systems.
One feature that makes it difficult to apply dynamical systems ideas to partial
differential equations on unbounded domains is the interplay of effects due to
continuous spectrum with those coming from discrete spectrum. The planned work
on stratified fluids and approximation theorems for kinetic systems further
develops the theory of invariant manifolds to treat these problems. The study of
small divisor problems in the vortex sheet equations extends KAM-like methods to
a new class of infinite dimensional systems. The study of weakly viscous fluids
and weakly damped oscillator systems both leads to a deeper intrinsic
understanding of the origin of intermediate time scales in these systems and
illuminates the mathematical relationships between these two apparently quite
different physical systems. Graduate students and post-doctoral fellows are
included in the work of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
