
* 1814941
* Topological Analysis of Pattern-Forming Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2018,08/13/2018
* Patrick Shipman,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 392,486.00

Diverse phenomena in nature and the laboratory give rise to patterns such as
ripples, squares, or hexagons. Examples range from laboratory models of climate
in which a fluid is heated from below to hexagonal arrays of firing neurons in
the region of the brain responsible for spatial memory. Two classes of pattern-
forming systems motivate the work of this project. The first involves nanoscale
patterns produced by bombarding a solid surface with a broad ion beam. This can
produce a wide variety of self-organized nanoscale patterns. The self-assembly
of nanoscale patterns that occurs when solids are irradiated is not just
fascinating: in the future, ion bombardment may prove to be an important tool in
the fabrication of nanostructures. It is widely believed that the burgeoning
field of nanotechnology will lead to advances that will transform fields as
disparate as energy, electronics, and medicine. The second class of patterns
involves color changes in chemical systems in which a vapor reacts with a solid
or liquid. For example, a colored pattern may appear in a solution of an
important class of plant pigments called anthocyanins as it is exposed to common
atmospheric pollutants. These patterns are a part of the sponsored outreach to
elementary and high school students. In both of these systems, the patterns vary
from highly ordered ripples or lattices with a few defects to patterns so
dominated by defects that a lattice structure may not be easily recognized.
These defects limit the utility of nanostructures produced by ion bombardment.
They are also indicative of the underlying chemical or physical mechanism by
which the patterns form, and therefore help the investigators to understand
those mechanisms. In this work, the investigators develop mathematical tools to
understand the formation of defects. The tools are also applied to help propose
experimental methods to eliminate defects in nanopatterns produced by ion
bombardment. The tools also provide insight into the mechanisms driving pattern
formation. The research involves undergraduate and graduate students in
integrated theoretical and experimental work.

Defects are often prevalent in patterns produced in nature and the laboratory,
so that the patterns are far from ideal ripples or hexagonal lattices. These
defects can be interpreted as data sets that have topological characteristics.
In this project, the investigators apply methods of topological data analysis
(TDA) to patterns modeled by nonlinear partial differential equations. In
particular, the investigators and their colleagues develop methods to quantify
the order in a pattern using the output of various TDA methods. Experiments and
simulations suggest that long-wavelength deformations (i.e., the zero mode) can
play a significant role in the persistence of defects in a developing pattern.
The investigators test this hypothesis using a multidimensional extension of TDA
methods. The stability of defects is probed by deriving equations for the
amplitude and phase of the patterns. Methods of predicting where defects will
form as a pattern evolves are developed using TDA. Finally, combining TDA with
machine learning tools, the team determines parameters in models of pattern
formation from experimental data. The methods are applicable to any pattern-
forming system. However, two classes of systems provide focus for this work. The
first is the formation of nanoscale patterns when a solid surface is bombarded
by a broad ion beam. Using TDA, the investigators determine the nature of the
instability that leads to the formation of a hexagonal array of nanodots when
the surface of a binary material is bombarded, a subject of considerable debate.
The second class is a set of reaction-diffusion systems that we call
vaporchromatic experiments. In these experiments, vapor interacts with a
solution containing a polymer or pigment that changes color upon interaction
with the vapor. The team develops mathematical reaction-diffusion-convection
models for the formation of vaporchromatic patterns. The methods of analyzing
patterns using TDA are motivated by and tested on patterns produced both by
experiments and by numerical simulations of partial differential equation
models. Graduate and REU undergraduate students participate in the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
