
* 1814876
* Information and Randomness in Dynamic Games
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,08/14/2019
* Andrew Belmonte,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 242,472.00

Cooperation forms the cornerstone for all successful social species from ants to
humans. Yet the emergence of cooperation and fairness in biological and social
systems is one of the great puzzles. How did it arise that humans often seek
fair outcomes, when natural selection is inherently unfair? Evolutionary game
theory, a mathematical framework to capture the dynamics of decisions, provides
some answers. The theory finds applications in economics, military strategy, and
biology. This project develops a more extensive theory of distributed social
learning and emergent group dynamics, combining aspects of evolutionary game
theory with statistical mechanics and machine learning to explain the emergence
of cooperation, fairness, and other social dynamics that do not fit well into
traditional approaches. The mathematical framework developed can be applied to
problems in evolutionary psychology and artificial intelligence. In particular,
some results may help to inform policy makers on the origins of differing
behaviors in different societies. Graduate students are engaged in the research
of the project.

This project develops a coherent theory of distributed social learning and
emergent group phenomena in complex systems, merging aspects of evolutionary
game theory with statistical mechanics and machine learning. Using public goods
games and ultimatum style games as a foundation, the investigators study the
evolutionary dynamics of finite populations whose encounters are described in
game-theoretic terms using simple parameterized rules and random interactions.
An aspect of these evolutionary systems is convergence to non-Nash fixed points,
including a sensitive dependence on initial conditions and sample paths
realized. Basins of attraction for these fixed points are characterized using
techniques from topological data analysis. Using insights from statistical
mechanics, the distributions of potential population fixed points are derived
and related to the information content in the dynamical system; here the speed
of spatial interactions plays a role analogous to that of temperature in a gas
of interacting particles. Possible equilibrium states in these dynamical systems
are categorized, along with the corresponding equilibrium point distributions.
Quantifying information transfer among interacting or moving agents is an
additional goal of the project. So also is determining the impact of
commoditized information, whether beneficial or harmful, on equilibrium
distributions and convergence. Graduate students are engaged in the research of
the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
