
* 1814894
* Optimization and Equilibria with Expectation Functions: Analysis, Inference and Sampling
* DMS,PROBABILITY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2018,03/01/2022
* Shu Lu,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 272,407.00

Mathematical optimization and equilibrium problems have prominent applications
in machine learning, statistics, economy and business, health care, and many
branches of science and engineering. Solving these problems helps to gain
knowledge about the nature and structure of complex systems, and to better
design and control these systems by making efficient use of scarce resources.
There are numerous parameters in the formulation of each such problem. In many
cases the exact values of some parameters are not available due to the lack of
complete information, especially when such parameters describe future events. An
effective way to manage the long-term behaviors of complex systems under such
data uncertainty is to introduce probability distributions on the parameters and
use expectation functions in the problem formulations. To numerically solve
those problems with expectation functions, certain types of approximations are
commonly used. The investigators study properties of optimization and
equilibrium problems defined with expectation functions, relations between these
problems and their approximations, and methods to solve them. Of particular
interest is application of these ideas to study the electricity market
competition between renewable and nonrenewable energy sources. Results from this
project can be used to evaluate the well-posedness of a given problem, measure
the reliability of a solution obtained from a numerical procedure, and solve
certain types of these problems.

The investigators analyze the structure and properties of optimization and
equilibrium problems defined by expectation functions, develop inference
procedures and sampling-based optimization methods, and study an application to
the electricity market. Their first goal is to develop an efficient inference
method for the solution to the true optimization or equilibrium problem based on
a solution to its sample average approximation (SAA) problem. They expect this
method to work for a general framework that allows the SAA functions to be
nonsmooth, the SAA solution to be inexact, and the SAA asymptotic distribution
to follow a piecewise normal structure as in the cases of general constrained
optimization problems. They apply this method to predict the out-of-sample
performance of the SAA solutions. Their second goal is to revisit existing
importance sampling techniques to efficiently incorporate them into an iterative
optimization algorithm for minimizing the probability of a rare event under some
design parameters, and study properties of the probability function and compare
solutions of the original problem with those of its convex substitutes. The
third goal of the investigators is to study a stochastic equilibrium model of
the competition behavior between different types of energy generators in the
electricity market and to provide a novel generalization of the classical Nash-
Cournot equilibrium when the payoff functions are not concave.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
