
* 1814991
* Variational Problems and Partial Differential Equations on Discrete Random Structures: Analysis and Applications to Data Science
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/28/2018
* Dejan Slepcev,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 245,566.00

The investigator studies variational and partial differential equation (PDE)
approaches to problems of data science. Modern technology enables us to obtain
large amounts of data about virtually any aspect of the world we live in. The
goal of data science is to extract and interpret the information the data
contain. Achieving this leads to machine learning tasks such as regression,
clustering, classification, dimensionality reduction, semi-supervised learning,
and learning data representation (e.g. deep learning). These tasks are regularly
cast as optimization problems where one minimizes an objective functional that
models the desired properties of the object sought. The objective functionals
and the resulting minimization are often posed on the available data sample,
which leads to discrete variational problems on graphs and related structures
representing the data. The goal of this project is to develop a mathematical
framework to study variational and PDE-based problems on random data samples.
The investigator uses insights from the continuum-based variational problems and
PDEs to improve existing approaches in the discrete setting and introduce new
models and algorithms for pertinent problems of data science. Graduate students
are engaged in the research of the project.

The investigator adapts tools of analysis to the discrete random setting in
order to show the fundamental properties of the variational problems and PDEs on
such structures. He works on establishing and using the connection between
problems on random discrete structures and the continuum problems that arise in
the large-sample limit. In particular, he investigates the behavior of
Laplacian-based and p-Laplacian-based regularizations in semi-supervised
learning; studies stable ways to detect the boundaries of the data sets and
impose the desired boundary conditions; and develops accurate graph-based
discretizations for the continuum problems that the data sets approximate in the
limit. The second part of the project is devoted to gradient flows on random
discrete structures. Here the investigator studies stability and asymptotic
properties of such problems, as well as the properties of the nonlocal continuum
problems that they represent. Graduate students are engaged in the research of
the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
