
* 1814147
* The Kompaneets Equation, Anomalous Diffusion, and Brownian Entanglement
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2018,05/23/2018
* Gautam Iyer,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 346,699.00

This research project is devoted to mathematical study of questions arising in
the investigation of three natural phenomena; these studies are united by the
use of related mathematical tools. The first set of questions concerns
mathematically understanding behavior of photons in low-density plasmas. The
second set of questions concerns the behavior of particles in fluid flow. In
certain situations important for applications, particles diffuse in unusual
ways. This project investigates such "anomalous" diffusive behavior on
intermediate (as opposed to long) time scales. The third set of questions is
motivated by mathematically quantifying the entanglement of long polymer
molecules; it aims to quantify the winding of trajectories of the related random
walks. Each of these research projects involves graduate students and
postdoctoral associates, who will be broadly trained through the course of their
work.

This research will use tools from applied analysis, partial differential
equations, and probability. The first set of questions concerns the long-time
behavior of the Kompaneets equation, and focuses on understanding the formation
of a Bose-Einstein condensate. The second set of questions studies the small-
noise limit of passive scalar transport and other related models arising in the
context of fluids. While the long-time behavior of these equations is well
known, here interest is in the small-noise intermediate-time regime where an
anomalous diffusive effect is observed, and the limiting behavior is described
by a time changed Brownian motion and time-fractional equations. The third set
of questions studies the long-time "winding" or "entanglement" of Brownian
trajectories on compact Riemannian manifolds with boundary. This is closely
related to heat kernel estimates on covering spaces, and is motivated by the
study of the entanglement of long polymer molecules.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
