
* 1814091
* Systemic Risk and Mean Field Games
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2018,05/23/2018
* Jean-Pierre Fouque,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 273,754.00

The banking system can be viewed as a large network of agents in interaction,
entering in contracts and exposed to the risk of counter-party defaults.
Systemic risk corresponds to rare events of many defaults in cascade, disrupting
liquidity and the economy as a whole. This research project concerns modeling
this network in interaction and studying the limiting behavior as the number of
agents becomes large. The project studies Nash equilibria, whose limits are
described by so-called mean field games. The focus is on the effects of time
delays and randomness on the network itself. This research aims to help
understand and ultimately prevent the occurrence of systemic adverse events.
From the point of view of the regulators, it is important to rank institutions
according to their contributions to systemic risk; on the other hand, this
ranking needs to be fair to the banks. The research also aims to develop
mathematical tools to measure systemic risk and design fair allocation schemes.

Mathematically, systemic risk events in the network of banks correspond to a
large deviation principle describing the occurrence of the small probability
events in which a large number of participants are defaulting. The research
consists in using mean field game theory to derive large deviation of the finite
player games. The first goal is to consider the effect of delays in the game and
develop the corresponding theory of mean field games with delay. The second goal
is to study large deviations for games on stochastic networks. The main tool
will be to use the master equation for the corresponding mean field game,
specifically to explore how the stochastic nature of the network will affect the
rate function in the large deviation principle. The third goal is to develop a
duality approach to the systemic risk measures introduced in previous work, to
ensure fairness of systemic risk allocations to the participants.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
