
* 1815079
* Imperfect Patterns-Existence, Stability, and Essential Spectrum
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/20/2020
* Qiliang Wu,OH,Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 125,011.00

How do zebras get their stripes? How do cell membranes get their shapes and keep
from bursting into pieces? These two seemingly disconnected scientific topics
can actually be investigated via a general mathematical framework outlined
within this project. Such a study not only applies to the specific topics above,
but also to any physical systems arising from similar mathematical models, such
as sand patterns in deserts, cloud patterns in the sky, cell fission/fusion
processes, cast ionomers in solar cells, and network morphology in soapy water.
The aim of this project is to systematically understand imperfections of
patterns, which are ubiquitous in nature and pivotal in various scientific
settings and technical applications. The investigator studies defects in
periodic patterns, with an application to understanding the development of grain
boundaries in materials; he also studies defects in bilayers such as arise in
cell membranes. Part of the project includes research experience opportunities
for undergraduate students.

The investigator applies dynamical systems techniques, combined with functional
analysis, differential geometry, asymptotic analysis, and large deviation
theory, to study pattern formation, with an emphasis on the role of the
essential spectrum in the formation and stability of defects of periodic
patterns and bilayer interfaces. The most interesting and challenging case
occurs when the essential spectrum touches the origin; here he seeks explicit
illustrations of formation mechanisms of stripe patterns, amphiphilic
structures, and their imperfections. The classical Swift-Hohenberg equation
provides a prototype for rigorous studies of periodic patterns. Firstly, the
imperfections of periodic patterns to instantaneous, constant, and random
perturbations are investigated. Secondly, in the case of instability, the local
biases and the rotational symmetry of the system together give rise to various
line and point defects, such as grain boundaries, dislocations, and
disclinations. The investigator studies grain boundaries, providing a novel
functional analytical machinery to construct deformed patterns. He also
investigates defects of amphiphilic morphology in the functionalized Cahn-
Hilliard FCH) setting, suggesting mechanisms of the formation of lipid rafts,
end caps and Y-junctions. Here the essential spectrum of the linearized operator
at bilayer interfaces is continuous up to the origin but is not "simple." It
serves as a benchmark for understanding the role of essential spectra. Part of
the project includes research experience opportunities for undergraduate
students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
