
* 1816917
* Geometric Analysis for Classification and Reassembly of Broken Bones
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2018,08/16/2018
* Peter Olver,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 418,069.00

The reassembly of broken objects is a fundamental issue in many real-world
applications. The goal of this project is to apply modern machine learning and
geometric tools to the problems of classification and automated reassembly of
broken bone fragments from an archaeological context, to determine agents of
breakage (e.g., carnivore, hominin, etc.,), improve taxonomic identifications,
and better understand site formation processes through spatial analysis of
refits. The anthropological implications are expected to impact the study of
early human origins and dispersal, prehistory, culture, predator avoidance, and
social organization -- hunting, scavenging, food provisioning, etc. The project
relies on samples and data generated both locally by known agents and through
ongoing field work in Dmanisi, Georgia; if successful, these methods can be
applied to archaeological sites from all times around the world. The potential
impact of success is underscored by the April, 2017 announcement that, based on
the geometry of broken mastodon bones, humans settled the Americas 100,000 years
earlier than the standard estimates of 30-40,000 years ago, although this claim
remains highly controversial in the field. Accurate and precise methods of
determining the agent of breakage have not yet been completely worked out by
archaeologists, and hence a reassessment of their bone analysis would be of
supreme interest. Besides zooarchaeological applications, potential areas of
significant impact include computer-aided and virtual reassembly of other
archaeological objects (pottery, statuary, lithics and tools, etc.),
paleontology (dinosaurs and other fossils), art restoration, and computer-
assisted surgery, where the mathematical techniques can aid the surgeon to both
plan and undertake an operation while minimizing the invasiveness and impact on
the patient. Other areas where these techniques have already had some impact
include the reassembly of jigsaw puzzles, shredded documents, and whole
histological sections from digitized tissue fragments, as well as the diagnosis
of cancer in breast tumors and the distinguishing of moles from melanomas.
Graduate and undergraduate students participate in the research.

The project seeks to adapt and extend known geometric methods, data analysis,
and numerical schemes, particularly those based on continuous and discrete
invariant signatures, to the problem of analyzing and reconstructing broken
solid objects, with a particular emphasis on bone fragments. Notable success in
the automatic reassembly of non-pictorial jigsaw puzzles and broken surfaces,
e.g., egg shells, using differential invariant signatures, suggests that one of
the key goals of the project, the three-dimensional solid object reconstruction
problem, is attainable. In addition, new (to anthropological field work)
geometric tools of surface geometry -- principal curvatures, torsion and
curvature of three-dimensional break curves, histogram and other discrete
integral invariants -- are applied to analyze breakage geometry, starting with
controlled samples of ungulate (elk, cow, and goat) bones that have been broken
by humans using stone tools and by animals (hyenas in the Milwaukee County Zoo
and the Irvine Zoo in Chippewa Falls), in preparation for the eventual analysis
of field samples from Dmanisi and possibly other sites around the world, such as
Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania and The Cradle of Humankind in South Africa. This
analysis is used to develop machine learning algorithms, both fully supervised
and semi-supervised, for classifying bone fragments based on agent of breakage.
We map the bone fragments into feature spaces via computation of histograms of
geometric invariants, and train a machine learning algorithm, such as k-nearest
neighbors or support vector machine classifiers, to distinguish between
different agents of breakage. The controlled samples of ungulate bones broken by
humans are used as training data, and field data from the Dmanisi site are used
as testing data. Graduate and undergraduate students participate in the
research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
