
* 1816313
* Mathematical Foundation for Signal Processing on Spatially Distributed Networks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2018,08/11/2018
* Qiyu Sun,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 195,231.00

A spatially distributed data network consists of a large number of cooperative
agents that have data collecting, processing, and sharing capabilities. It has
been widely used in (wireless) sensor networks, smart power grids, and other
engineering and science fields, because it offers some practical advantages over
the more traditional form of data network that ships collected data to central
processing facilities. However, distributing the data processing tasks, such as
filtering, denoising, and compressing, raises some new challenges. While these
have received much attention in recent years, there still is a gap between
mathematical theory and engineering practice. The investigator works to develop
a mathematical foundation for signal processing on spatially distributed data
networks that has practical consequences for engineering applications. Graduate
students participate in the research. Graduate students participate in the
research.

The topological structure of a spatially distributed data network is described
by a sparse graph. Data processing on a spatially distributed data network is
performed by agents in the network; many of them can be described by well-
localized matrices and integral operators, in terms of which the network
behavior can in principle be described and optimized globally. But this could be
an impractically large optimization problem. The principal investigator studies
how to split a large network into a set of overlapping smaller ones whose
separate global optimizations can be used to approximate the global optimization
of the large network. In this way, he aims to develop a mathematical foundation
for signal processing on such networks that has engineering applications. Here
he emphasizes applied harmonic analysis and numerical analysis of well-localized
matrices on graphs, design of stable spatially distributed data networks, fast
algorithms implemented by agents in spatially distributed data networks,
phaseless signal reconstruction, and deep learning coupled to signal processing
on graphs. Graduate students participate in the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
