
* 1816551
* Stochastic Methods in Fluid Mechanics: Ergodic Properties, Statistical Sampling, and Uncertainty Quantification
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2018,07/20/2018
* Nathan Glatt-Holtz,LA,Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

Probabilistic frameworks provide fundamental descriptions of turbulent fluid
flows while on the other hand serving as an invaluable basis for quantifying
uncertainties in the modeling and measurement of these flows. While it has long
been understood that a probabilistic approach is indispensable, a wealth of
basic questions remain unresolved in the analysis and application of
probabilistic methodologies. Moreover, the field of probabilistic fluid dynamics
has been enlivened by significant recent theoretical and computational
developments, the ever-growing torrent of heterogeneous data corrupted by noise
and by the ongoing need for refined statistical tools for applications in
climate science and in geophysics.

Against this backdrop, this project undertakes a program of research at the
intersection of stochastic analysis, nonlinear partial differential equations
and fluid dynamics. A diverse collection of mathematical problems concerning
turbulent flows addressing both theoretical foundations and the quantification
of uncertainties in measurement will be considered. The research program centers
around the setting of infinite dimensional Markovian systems and their invariant
measures (i.e. statistically steady states) as a means of determining the robust
observability of statistical quantities. Here cutting-edge tools from
probability, computational statistics, ergodic theory and functional analysis
provide a unified basis for tackling challenging open problems and developing
novel theoretical foundations in: 1) The ergodic theory of invariant measures
for nonlinear Stochastic PDEs. 2) The dependence of invariant measures on
physical and numerical parameters. 3) The Bayesian computational setting for
incorporating noisy measurements to estimate degrees of uncertainty in fluid
flows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
