
* 1906186
* Microlocal Analysis of Inverse Problems in Electrical Impedance Tomography, Radar, and Seismics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2019,07/09/2019
* Allan Greenleaf,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 282,570.00

The project concerns inverse problems, which use mathematical models to describe
how measurements of waves, whether electrostatic, electromagnetic or acoustic,
in the near field (at the surface of an object) or in the far field (imaging
remotely) can be used to nondestructively determine features or physical
properties of interest inside or on the object. Such problems are ubiquitous in
the modern technological world; the ones in this proposal occur in medical and
industrial imaging, radar, and exploration seismology using acoustics. This
award will support work on three projects in the area of inverse problems
modeled by elliptic and hyperbolic partial differential equations. Progress will
lead to improved reconstruction, via nondestructive imaging or remote sensing,
of jumps and other singularities in material parameters of interest, such as
electrical conductivity, radar reflectivity coefficients, and acoustic sound
speeds. Graduate students will be trained in the mathematical techniques needed
for this analysis, adding to the STEM workforce with advanced training.

The goal of all three projects is to better understand the interaction between
the geometry underlying these inverse problems and the analysis, particularly
microlocal analysis, needed to improve reconstructions. These improvements will
follow from a better understanding of the microlocal geometry underlying
filtered back-projection methods. The first project will extend work already
under way on using complex principal type propagation of singularities to
improve the ability of Electrical Impedance Tomography to image inclusions
within inclusions. One possible application is to stroke diagnosis; another is
detecting defects in manufactured parts. The investigator will both try to
refine his earlier work on a two-dimensional model to produce sharper images and
extend the approach to the physically significant three-dimensional situation.
The second project will develop techniques for controlling the composition of
degenerate Fourier integral operators, needed in the study of Doppler Synthetic
Aperture Radar, refining and extending the current state of the art. The
analysis of linearized full wave inversion in the last project will require
decompositions of imaging operators, of Littlewood-Paley type but adapted to the
ray geometry of the velocity model, leading to improved seismic imaging
algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
