
* 1906361
* Novel Resolution Analysis of Reconstruction Algorithms in Tomography
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,07/22/2019
* Alexander Katsevich,FL,The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 170,897.00

A number of practically important imaging problems involve inversion of an
integral transform, that is, recovery of a function from its integrals over a
family of surfaces. Examples of surfaces are planes, spheres, ellipses, etc.
Applications include X-ray computer tomography (CT), ultrasound imaging, thermo-
acoustic and photo-acoustic tomography, Compton camera imaging, and many others.
Frequently, reconstruction is achieved by applying a linear inversion formula.
It is of fundamental importance to know how the resolution of the reconstruction
depends on data sampling. Despite the significance of this problem, not much is
known about the resolution of tomographic reconstruction from discrete data. For
general transforms, results are scarce and mostly semi-qualitative. The
objective of this project is to develop and rigorously justify a novel approach
to resolution analysis of a general class of transforms. The approach is based
on the analysis of how accurately the singularities of the function are
reconstructed. The project will provide a flexible theoretical framework for
computing the resolution of a wide range of algorithms that reconstruct from
discrete data. It will lead to a deeper insight into how tomographic algorithms
reconstruct singularities of an object, analysis of artifacts, detectability of
small objects, and open the opportunity for virtually unlimited further
exploration. The project provides opportunities and support for the training of
graduate students.

More specifically, the project encompasses the following general aims: (i)
analysis of resolution in the setting of the Generalized Radon Transform (GRT);
(ii) applications of the theory to address practical needs of imaging; and (iii)
numerical verification of the obtained formulas. The reconstruction problem is
formulated in terms of the GRT, which integrates over a fairly general family of
surfaces. The investigator plans to obtain explicitly the edge response of the
reconstruction as the data sampling rate increases. This setting is general and
covers a wide range of integral transforms. The idea of the approach is to
combine the tools of microlocal analysis and computational mathematics. This
approach will be applied to several more narrowly defined problems, including
analysis of resolution of common reconstruction algorithms. The results obtained
will be tested on numerical experiments. This will typically involve
implementing a reconstruction algorithm and comparing actual and predicted
resolutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
