
* 1906238
* Variational Methods for Materials Science and Mathematical Imaging
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Irene Fonseca,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 684,237.00

The mathematical theories and techniques developed in this project provide a
foundation for understanding aspects of imaging and of the properties of
materials. The use of self-assembly processes to manufacture modern
semiconductor nanostructures, quantum wires, and quantum dots is of pivotal
importance in microelectric and optoelectronic technologies, such as reflective
or anti-reflective coatings for optics, the fabrication of layers of insulators
and semiconductors for integrated circuits, quantum well lasers, and the
processing of nanoscale materials. We address the variational study of relevant
observed phenomena in nanowires and in the epitaxial deposition of a thin film
onto a substrate. We study phase nucleation in Lithium-Ion batteries, which are
central to advances in portable electronic devices, electric vehicles, and
renewable energy storage; phase nucleation is important in understanding charge-
discharge dynamics (poor cycle life) and other material limitations of these
batteries. In what concerns the mathematics of imaging, we pursue the analytical
investigation of image processing, restoration, and registration, which are
fundamental to the advance of computer vision, medical imaging, film
restoration, and scanning probe microscopy. These projects offer opportunities
for integrating research in applied analysis with the education of advanced
graduate students at the interface between mathematics and the physical sciences
and engineering. Graduate students participate in the research of the project.

What unifies these topics is that underlying energies involve higher order
derivatives in spaces with discontinuous admissible fields, multiple scales
interact, bulk and surface energies compete, and degeneracy of usually expected
properties prevails. Together, these difficulties prevent the use of well-
understood mathematical theories, and require new ideas and the introduction of
innovative mathematical tools. Contemporary methods in the calculus of
variations and nonlinear partial differential equations are used to study quasi-
static (elliptic) and evolution (parabolic) systems of equations in a range of
problems arising in materials science that span epitaxy, batteries, nanowires,
and phase transitions. These methods are combined in novel ways with multi-level
(machine learning) training schemes to study models for edge detection, image
segmentation, signal denoising and detexturing, joint image segmentation, and
image registration. Graduate students participate in the research of the
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
