
* 1907977
* A Computer-Assisted Analysis Framework for Studying Finite Time Singularities of the 3D Euler Equations and Related Models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,05/24/2019
* Thomas Hou,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 566,349.00

The Navier-Stokes equations have been around for more than 150 years. Physicists
use them to model ocean currents, weather patterns and turbulent flows behind a
commercial jet or ship. Mathematicians and physicists believe that an
explanation for and the prediction of both the breeze and the turbulence can be
found through an understanding of solutions to Navier-Stokes equations. Although
most physicists and engineers believe that the smooth solutions of the Navier-
Stokes equations will not break down without external forcing, currently there
is no theoretical guarantee that this is indeed the case. Our recent study
indicates that the Euler equations, a special case of the Navier-Stokes
equations with zero viscosity, could develop a catastrophic behavior if one
starts with a highly symmetric but perfectly smooth flow. Such a scenario
corresponds to a perfect storm in which all things that could potentially go
wrong indeed go wrong. Potentially singular behavior of the Navier-Stokes
equations could post tremendous damage to our environment, affect the safety of
our planes and ships, and our ability to do accurate weather forecasting. This
award will investigate under what conditions the Euler or Navier-Stokes
equations may develop singular behavior. The ultimate goal of this research is
to develop effective analytical and computational tools that would enhance our
ability to model and predict various complex phenomena in nature so that we can
have more confidence in the safety of commercial jets and ships, and weather
forecasting. Additional impact of this project will be the involvement of
graduate students. The interdisciplinary training they receive in this project
will be important for their future careers in mathematics and science.

The award seeks to understand whether the incompressible 3D Euler and Navier-
Stokes equations could develop a finite-time singularity from a smooth initial
condition with finite energy. A unique aspect of the research is the integration
of highly resolved numerical simulations and rigorous mathematical analysis. Our
strategy is to reformulate the problem of proving finite time self-similar
singularity into the problem of establishing the nonlinear stability of an
approximate self-similar profile using the dynamic rescaling equation. We first
construct a highly accurate self-similar profile using a high order numerical
method. We then use the energy method with carefully chosen singular weight
functions and take into account cancellation among various nonlinear terms to
extract the inviscid damping effect from the linearized operator around the
approximate self-similar profile. Our stability result enables us to prove that
the dynamic rescaling solution converges to the steady state self-similar
solution exponentially fast in time. Moreover, by introducing a cut-off to the
self-similar profile, we obtain a smooth initial condition with finite energy
that develops a self-similar blowup in finite time. The novel approach of
investigating finite-time singularity formation by studying the stability of
spatial profiles in the potential singular solutions also forms the basis of a
novel analytical framework for other nonlinear nonlocal systems of partial
differential equations and has the potential to be applied to study a larger
class of nonlinear dynamic problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
