
* 1907391
* Patterns, Geometry, and Growth
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, GOALI-Grnt Opp Acad Lia wIndus, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 08/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Arnd Scheel,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 510,003.00

Many physical systems spontaneously self-organize in regular patterns. Without
external control, they evolve into almost crystalline states showing stripes or
spots aligned in somewhat regular fashions. Examples range from the self-
organizational processes in early developmental states of the embryo to phase
separation dynamics in manufacturing processes such as dip-coating. In order to
control those processes and possibly harvest the self-organizational
capabilities for the manufacturing of micro-structured materials, one needs to
understand how the patterning is influenced by parameters and system geometry.
The investigator focuses on a particularly relevant situation in which patterns
arise through a directional quenching process where the patterned region expands
in space, either in an externally controlled fashion, or in a self-organized
growth process. It turns out that the result of patterning is very rigid, across
many physical and biological contexts, in the sense that the final pattern is
robust against imperfections and reproducible from many different initial states
of the experiment. The final pattern does however depend sensitively on growth
rates and quenching geometry. The investigator and his collaborators develop
analytic and numerical tools that enable systematic prediction and control of
resulting patterns, with the ultimate goal of designing processes that result in
a desired, pre-specified pattern. Graduate students are engaged in the research
of the project.

The investigator and his collaborators analyze prototypical systems such as the
Swift-Hohenberg or the Cahn-Hilliard equation in situations where the pattern-
forming region expands in time at a prescribed rate. In the simplest case, these
systems develop striped patterns with a fixed wavelength and orientation
relative to the direction of growth. Numerical tools developed for this scenario
allow for a systematic exploration of the relation between parameters and
resulting orientations and wavelengths. Analytic tools can guide the numerics by
exhibiting universal mechanisms such as pinning and detachment of structures.
Analysis also complements numerical studies in limiting regimes where
computational cost is prohibitively high. Both analysis and numerics focus on
the study of coherent structures, which are the simplest pattern-forming dynamic
states of the system. They are typically stationary or time-periodic in a frame
moving with the quenching interface, and asymptotic to a selected pattern in the
pattern-forming region. The first part of the project focuses on the formation
of stripes, or lamellar crystals, in simple model problems, where the growth
process roughly selects an orientation angle of stripes relative to the
boundary. The second part broadens the scope by including more realistic models,
different growth laws, and different preferred crystalline states. Graduate
students are engaged in the research of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
