
* 1907519
* Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Conservation Laws and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2019,04/19/2021
* Dehua Wang,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 294,999.00

This research project is devoted to developing new mathematical methods and
techniques for studying some nonlinear partial differential equations governing
the fluid flow and related applications. Their study is crucial for
understanding the dynamics of many applications critical for STEM including gas
dynamics, engineering, materials science, geometry, fluid turbulence, shell
theory, active systems in biology/biophysics, stochastic dynamics, and so on.
While the one-dimensional problems are rather well understood, the general
theory for the multi-dimensional case is mathematically underdeveloped. The
research project will advance knowledge of the fundamental areas of mathematics
and mechanics as well as applications; it will also provide opportunities for
students, including those from underrepresented groups and women, to receive
training in these important areas through participation in the active research
in applied mathematics.

The goal of the project is to investigate some nonlinear partial differential
equations arising from multi-dimensional conservation laws and related
applications. The research program focuses on the following topics: (1) the
existence and stability of transonic contact discontinuity in gas dynamics: this
is a free boundary and mixed-type problem, and this study will provide new
methods and shed light on the general multi-dimensional theory of conservation
laws; (2) the global smooth solutions to the Gauss-Codazzi equations of
isometric immersion of surfaces: a global smooth solution to the Gauss-Codazzi
equations yields a smooth isometric immersion of surfaces, and it is challenging
to find such a global smooth solution for general surfaces; (3) the weak and
strong solutions to the stochastic compressible Navier-Stokes equations with
various types of noise: the stochastic problems for the compressible flows are
underdeveloped and widely open, and many fundamental problems are difficult; and
(4) global solutions to the system of active hydrodynamics in biology: active
systems arise in many practical applications in biology/biophysics, and its
modeling and analysis are challenging due to its complexity, while fundamental
mathematical problems are widely open. The purpose of this research is to
develop novel analytic methods and efficient techniques for solving some
important problems in multi-dimensional inviscid and viscous compressible flows
and applications, and to gain insights into the general multi-dimensional
problems of conservation laws and emerging real-world applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
