
* 1907823
* Mathematical Control Theory and Analysis of Partial Differential Equations Coupled Across a Boundary Interface
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2019,11/19/2019
* George Avalos,NE,University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 213,787.00

In one component of this project, the investigators will study equations which
mathematically describe the flow of gas as it streams within a walled cavity and
interacts with a vibrating portion of the cavity's boundary. Within this
mathematical framework, the investigators will attempt to determine if the gas
flow and cavity wall displacement can be favorably altered or "controlled" by
means of the deliberate placement of forces which act on the cavity wall. The
accomplishment of this program objective could lend insight into understanding
and controlling the gas flows which are associated with high-speed aircraft and
natural gas pipelines. Furthermore, a mathematical model which has recently been
derived to describe a structure-fluid interaction in which an elastic body is
wholly immersed within a given fluid will be studied. This new mathematical
model differs from previous structure-fluid models, in that numerical
simulations of solutions to the new model suggest that the associated structural
displacements, as well as the fluid flow field, elicit a much more quiescent
behavior than previously thought. The investigators intend to mathematically
verify this observed "stability" for such structure-fluid dynamics. A successful
conclusion to this work could potentially enhance the understanding of cellular
dynamics: such structure-fluid interaction models have been invoked to describe
a nuclear body, within a cell, as it interacts with the surrounding viscous
cytoplasm. Moreover, a mathematical model which describes acoustic wave flow
within a structural chamber, with one of the chamber walls being flexible, will
be studied. In particular, it is intended to determine if the acoustic waves in
this structural model will die out as time evolves. Such a conclusion of wave
stability in this mathematical setting would have implications in real-world
control engineering: With a view of promoting a quiescent acoustic field within
the interior of an aircraft cabin, the stability results of the project could
conceivably be taken into account in aircraft fuselage design. In the course of
fulfilling the project objectives, graduate students, including first generation
university students and women, will receive training in the necessary
qualitative analysis and numerical computation.

The gas flow-cavity model described above consists of the 3D compressible Stokes
or Navier-Stokes flow equations coupled to an elastic plate equation which
describes the displacements of the flexible portion of the cavity wall. This PDE
system is subjected to cavity boundary control terms. The investigators will
determine the optimal regularity of solutions to such controlled (gas) flow-
structure PDE models under the influence of boundary control terms of prescribed
smoothness. Subsequently, they intend to solve the associated null
controllability problem with respect to the appropriate space of boundary
control functions. Moreover, in the aforementioned structure-fluid interaction,
the structure is composed of a "thick" and "thin" layer: the thick layer is
described by a 3D wave equation, while the the thin layer is described by a 2D
wave equation and constitutes the boundary interface between the thick wave
equation and the 3D fluid component equation. The investigators intend to
establish that classical solutions of this 3D wave-2D wave-3D heat PDE system
manifest at least a polynomial rate of decay, which would be in line with what
has been observed numerically. In addition, the rational decay problem for the
structural acoustic interaction, in which an acoustic wave equation within a
bounded domain interacts with a dissipative elastic equation across a boundary
interface, will be considered. Moreover, an algorithm which will confirm that
the polynomial rates obtained are optimal will be developed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
