
* 1908267
* Nonlinear Geometric Models: Algorithms, Analysis, and Computation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,07/30/2022
* Ricardo Nochetto,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 859,879.00

Fabrication and manipulation of new and smart materials, particularly in the
strategic areas of nanotechnology and biotechnology, require understanding of
nonlinear phenomena governed by geometric partial differential equations (PDEs).
At small scales, say micro and nano scales, surface tension and bending effects
dominate bulk effects, thereby making the actuation and control of small devices
a reality. This leads to scientifically interesting and technologically useful
configurations and dynamic behavior. Examples abound in biomedical sciences
(drug delivery vesicles, cell encapsulation devices, and sensors) and
engineering (photovoltaic devices, optics, energy storage, micromotors,
microgrippers, microvalves, and adaptive deformable mirrors). However,
microfabrication is time-consuming, expensive, and often erratic, which makes
the development of predictive computational tools of paramount importance in
engineering and science. This project deals with modeling, analysis, and
computation of geometric problems of interest in materials science, biophysics,
plasma physics, and robotics. It enhances modeling and prediction capabilities
and helps educate students and postdocs in exciting, mathematically and
computationally challenging, and practically relevant areas of contemporary
research.

Capturing the essential behavior of nonlinear phenomena with the simplest and
crudest models is fundamental in science and engineering. This allows for
understanding of basic mechanisms, the design and implementation of efficient
numerical methods for simulation and control of devices, and the analysis of
both models and algorithms. These crucial aspects of modern research are
incorporated into the following four intertwined projects: geometric PDEs with
constraints (bilayer actuators and prestrained films, shape optimization for
plasma confinement, and fully nonlinear PDEs); actuation of complex fluids
(liquid crystals actuated by electric fields and temperature, and ferrofluids
actuated by magnetic fields); nonlocal models (efficient solvers for linear and
nonlinear fractional diffusion and stochastic control); a posteriori error
analysis and adaptivity (high-order methods, fractional PDEs, and free boundary
problems). Numerical treatment of nonlinear geometric PDEs is a formidable
scientific challenge due to the dynamic deformation of geometries, the presence
of strong nonlinearities, and the development of self-penetrating structures and
topological changes. Efficient algorithms should optimize and balance the
computational effort and thus capture small scales without over-resolving
others, thereby leading to accurate interface description. This project develops
structure-preserving finite element methods (FEMs) with a posteriori error
control (adaptive FEMs) and multilevel solvers, which allow for the resolution
of problems with very disparate space-time scales with relatively modest
computational resources. The roles of geometry, nonlinearity, nonlocality, and
adaptive approximation permeate the research, from basic questions in numerical
analysis of nonlinear PDEs to applications in strategic areas of national
interest. Graduate and postdoctoral students participate in the research of the
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
