
* 1908891
* Localized Structures in Spatially Extended Systems: Fronts and Defects
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2019,05/25/2021
* Edgar Knobloch,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 425,458.00

Spatially localized structures such as fronts, defects, spots or pulses are
common in many continuum systems, and include pulses propagating along nerve
fibers, dissipative solitons in optical and chemical systems, localized buckling
of slender structures under compression, and oscillons in vibrating granular
media. Examples from fluids include localized convection, vortices and drops.
These diverse systems have two things in common: (i) they are dissipative
systems driven by spatially uniform forcing, and (ii) there is range of forcing
within which the application of different finite amplitude perturbations can
lead to distinct localized states. The investigator seeks to extend existing
theory in new directions, focusing on problems arising in materials science such
as the nucleation and growth of crystals from a supercooled liquid, and the
ordered and disordered structures that may result. These include structures with
short-range order but no long-range order called quasicrystals. The type of
structure that forms in turn determines the strength and other properties of the
resulting material and this depends strongly on the speed of the crystallization
process. The aim of the project is to provide a comprehensive understanding of
the mechanisms behind the different types of growth that take place at different
temperatures of the liquid both in this and in related systems. Two postdoctoral
students are engaged in the research of the project.

In this project the investigator and his colleagues study the properties of
spatially localized structures in two and three dimensions. Both conserved and
nonconserved systems are considered with a focus on phase field and dynamical
density functional theory models of soft matter crystallization from a
supercooled melt. Depending on the speed of this process, the resulting material
may be crystalline, amorphous, or a quasicrystal. Localized structures of each
type may serve as critical nuclei for the nucleation of the crystal and are
therefore of particular interest. The project focuses on the properties of these
structures, and the properties of the fronts that separate them from the melt.
Both steady and propagating fronts are considered and the processes that
determine the propagation speed are studied in detail. These include pinning of
fronts to the microstructure behind them and the interaction with the conserved
mass mode. The project also includes a parallel study of traveling pulses in
nonconserved systems and a detailed study of different types of defects where
pinning to microstructure is important. The techniques used by the investigator
include bifurcation theory, coupled with numerical branch-following and direct
numerical simulations of realistic systems. Two postdoctoral students are
engaged in the research of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
