
* 1908657
* Waves, Novel Two-Dimensional Materials, and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,07/03/2022
* Michael Weinstein,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 532,096.00

At the heart of many realized and envisioned advances in science and technology
--from communication networks to quantum computation -- is the ability to
robustly transport, channel, and manipulate forms of energy, e.g. electronic and
optical, on very small spatial and temporal scales. This is achieved by
fabricating novel media in which energy, which propagates as waves, interacts
with engineered microfeatures. A current example of a novel, naturally
occurring, medium of intense interest is graphene a one-atom thick mono-layer of
carbon atoms, arranged in-plane in a honeycomb structure, extending to the
macro-scale. Graphene is the most conductive substance known at room temperature
(electronically and thermally). This material has been at a center of a
revolution in Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science, known as the Two-
Dimensional Material. Many of the novel phenomena observed in graphene relate to
general mathematical properties of waves in media with novel symmetry, and hence
physicists and engineers have engineered and investigated materials with similar
general properties, dubbed "artificial graphene," with a view on applications to
optics, communications, information storage and computing. PI Weinstein will
study a range of problems in fundamental and applied mathematics related to the
existence, stability and transport properties of waves in such novel media, with
honeycomb structures as a paradigm for 2D materials, as well as questions
concerning the dynamics of waves in nonlinear systems. This work is firmly
aligned with Quantum Leap, one of the NSF's 10 Big Ideas. This award will
support one graduate student to be trained in a multifaceted approach to applied
mathematical research using modeling, analysis and computation, with emphasis on
applications of wave phenomena in complex media to the scientifically important
questions. PI Weinstein will investigate (A) Energy propagation along line-
defects in novel 2D periodic media governed by continuum PDE models,
topologically protected states and the relation between bulk properties of
periodic media and edge effects, and (B) Dynamics of coherent structures in
discrete and continuous nonlinear wave systems, in particular (i) transport in
nonlinear lattices and (ii) dynamics of a free boundary problem in compressible
fluids. (A) Many remarkable properties of 2D materials (e.g. extraordinary
conductivity) are related to the subtle properties of its band structure (the
collection of dispersion surfaces and eigenmodes of Floquet-Bloch theory) which
dictate energy transport. The conical singularities (Dirac points) of the
dispersion surfaces of graphene are at the core of its remarkable electron
mobility, and the topological properties of its band structure properties give
information about the types of energy-transport can occur when graphene is
interfaced with free-space or another material. Thus, it is through a
convergence notion from Analysis, PDE and Topology that one can make process
understanding these novel materials and their artificial analogues. (B) This
research is part of the PI's long-standing research program in nonlinear waves,
which now emphasizes i) coherent structure propagation in discrete nonlinear
dispersive systems and ii) the nonlinear PDE dynamics of coherent structures
with infinitely many internal degrees of freedom, as exemplified by the
nonlinear oscillations of a bubble in the fluid.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
