
* 1908918
* A Stationarity-Based Operator, Associated Fundamental Solutions and a Curse-of-Dimensionality-Free Algorithm
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2019,07/05/2019
* William McEneaney,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

The principal investigator (PI) will obtain "fundamental solutions" for classes
of nonlinear two-point boundary value problems (TPBVPs). TPBVPs are problems
where one is given some information about the initial state of the system and
about the terminal state with the goal of determining the remaining conditions
on the initial state such that the given terminal state conditions are met. For
example, one may have some data on the initial state (position and velocity) of
a space vehicle or asteroid, and would like to know what the other components of
that initial data need to be such that a specific desirable, or possibly highly
undesirable, terminal state will occur. Fundamental solutions are extremely
valuable; given such a solution, one does not need to re-solve the problem each
time the initial or terminal data changes. Hence, one can generate large sets of
solutions for varying possible data very rapidly. Applications in astrodynamics
include gravity-assist trajectories for interplanetary missions and analysis of
potential asteroid/comet impacts from partial data. This general approach will
be extended to obtain extremely rapid solution methods for the Schrodinger
equation of quantum mechanics. The Schrodinger equation is a partial
differential equation (PDE). Classical methods for obtaining solutions of PDEs
are subject to the famous "curse of dimensionality". Specifically, the dimension
of the space over which the PDE must be solved grows by three with the addition
of each particle to the problem, while such an increase of three in dimension
typically results in a growth in computational time by a factor on the order of
over 100,000. The "curse-of-dimensionality-free" (CODF) methods developed by the
PI and collaborators have massively reduced the computational load for certain
classes of high-dimensional problems. Previously, this approach was only useful
for first-order PDEs. Using this breakthrough, the PI will construct an
extremely rapid CODF method applicable to the (second-order) Schrodinger PDE.
This will allow researchers to study nonlinear effects in quantum systems that
were previously beyond the reach of our tools. The graduate students supported
by this award will be actively involved in research related to various aspects
of this project under the guidance of the PI.

New theory and tools in the areas of dynamics, control theory, analysis and
stochastic processes will be developed. Although the PI and collaborators
previously demonstrated that the least-action approach can be used to generate
fundamental solutions to TPBVPs in conservative systems, that was appropriate
only for short duration. The extension to arbitrary-duration TPBVPs requires an
extension of control theory to cover stationarity problems (i.e.,
staticization). This is an entirely new direction for the field. Dynamic
programming and Hamilton-Jacobi theory will be extended to cover cases where one
seeks a stationary point of the payoff. Generating fundamental solutions
requires a certain commutativity of staticization operators, which is highly
nontrivial. The fundamental solutions may be stored as finite-dimensional sets
of coefficients; the particular solutions for specific problem data are obtained
from the fundamental solutions through idempotent convolution against functions
encoding the boundary data. Also, generalizing tools from control of diffusion
processes, the PI will obtain an extension of the application of staticization
to complex-valued, stochastic problems, yielding a staticization-based
representation valid for certain second-order Hamilton-Jacobi PDEs. In
particular, representations for solutions of Schrodinger initial value problems
will be obtained via staticization of complex-valued action functionals over
controlled complex-valued diffusion processes. This will also yield a
fundamental solution and a curse-of-dimensionality-free method for such
problems. Extension of existence and uniqueness results for solutions of new
classes of degenerate stochastic differential equations will be obtained as a
necessary subtask.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
