
* 1908602
* Optimized Domain Decomposition Methods for Wave Propagation in Complex Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,07/23/2021
* Catalin Turc,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 133,181.00

The propagation of electromagnetic or elastic waves in a medium is distorted by
interfaces where the medium is discontinuous. This happens in many settings of
great practical importance, involving devices for communications, optics, remote
sensing, and geophysical exploration. To understand these interactions between
waves and the complex structures of the media through which they move, which
often involve multiple scatterers as well as multiple layers with different
material properties, requires resolving the complicated reflections and
transmissions that waves undergo in such environments. This in turn requires
large-scale numerical simulations. The investigator develops and analyzes high-
performance, efficient, accurate, and rapidly convergent algorithms for this
class of problems. His recent work with colleagues resulted in the development
of an efficient computational strategy that incorporates windowed Green's
functions within the boundary integral equation approach for the simulation of
interaction of waves with infinitely extending interfaces. This computational
framework enables simulation of transmission and reflection of waves by periodic
media at high frequencies. This project builds on these methods to enable high-
fidelity simulations of waves propagating in engineering structures such as thin
film solar cells and metasurfaces. Graduate students participate in the
research.

The investigator develops a family of algorithms that focus mainly on optimized
Schwarz domain decomposition (DD) methods, incorporate carefully designed quasi-
optimal transmission operators, and are amenable to simple yet effective
preconditioning strategies. Combining the merits of direct and iterative
solvers, this class of methods has emerged as a leading contender for solution
of high-frequency wave propagation in complex media. The computational
methodology underlying this work is based on boundary integral solvers that,
whenever applicable, can produce solutions to partial differential equations
with high-order accuracy and no numerical dispersion. The project leverages
recent advances introduced by the investigator and collaborators in the boundary
integral equation treatment of infinitely extending media (including periodic
media) and dielectric composite media, combined with the modularity and
parallelism inherent to DD methods, to enable simulations of realistic
engineering structures such as complex photonic or electronic devices. The work
affects a variety of areas of societal interest, including communication, remote
sensing, seismology, and optics. A major part of the project with wide
applications is the development of fast, highly accurate solvers for periodic
metamaterials, and use of the resulting numerical tools in detailed
investigation and design of photonic structures and metamaterials. Graduate
students participate in the research and are trained in the field of high-
performance scientific computing. Software packages for solution of boundary
integral equations that can be used for teaching and research purposes are made
available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
