
* 1909457
* Structured Random Matrices and Graphs in Signal Processing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2019,04/19/2021
* Palina Salanevich,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2022
* USD 106,869.00

Recent advances in science and technology allow us to collect and require us to
process large volumes of data of different types, ranging from routine user
information collected by electronic devises, such as geotags, to more
structurally complicated data obtained as a result of scientific experiments and
biomedical imaging. Solving the associated signal processing problems requires
an understanding of the underlying structure of data and finding its efficient
representations. Frames proved to be a powerful tool in signal processing,
providing redundant representations of signals that are useful for many
applications. In return, signal processing problems motivate the study of frame
properties. The primary objective of the project is to study connections between
frame theory, with focus on time-frequency analysis, and signal processing
problems, such as the phase retrieval problem, where a signal is reconstructed
from intensity measurements with respect to a frame. More precisely, the
investigator aims to study geometric properties of Gabor frames and their role
in analysis of the phase retrieval problem with time-frequency structured
measurements. Gabor frames naturally arise in such applications as speech
recognition, so obtaining results on phase retrieval problem with time-frequency
structured measurements would lead to advances in speech recognition technology
and provable guarantees for existing ad hoc methods. In many signal processing
applications, including social, transport, and epidemiology networks, data is
naturally associated with the vertices of a weighted graph that represents the
relations between data units. Processing of such data requires the development
of different signal processing tools that would take the underlying graph
structure into account. Another aim of the project is to extend classical
discrete signal processing tools and concepts to signals defined on graphs. This
would allow to solve classical signal processing problems in this generalized
setting and advance in such important applications as weather and traffic
prediction and brain imaging.

The project is centered around three main objectives that are closely connected
to each other, each addressing an important problem in the areas of random
matrix theory, Gabor analysis, and signal processing. The first research
direction is devoted to the study of geometric properties of frames. While
properties of random Gaussian frames with independent vectors are sufficiently
well-studied, very little is known about structured frames that are relevant for
signal processing applications. This motivates the study of structured
application relevant frames, such as Gabor frames. The investigator will focus
on such properties of Gabor frames as optimal frame bounds and frame order
statistics, with the ultimate goal of showing that Gabor frames have properties
that are essentially optimal for applications. The study of the optimal frame
bounds would allow to establish robustness of the signal reconstruction from its
frame coefficients, justifying the use of the frame representation of a signal
in practical applications. In the case of Gabor frames, the frame bounds depend
not only on the cardinality of the frame set, but also on its structure. In the
second research direction, the investigator aims to use studied properties of
frames to analyze the phase retrieval problem. Even though there are many
results on phase retrieval obtained for Gaussian measurements, the case of
structured frames remains wide open. The main reason for this is that geometric
properties of such frames are not yet fully understood. Getting new insights
into the properties of Gabor frames would lead to a substantial progress in the
development of the phase retrieval problem. In particular, obtaining uniform
bounds on frame order statistics would imply invertibility and stability of the
phase retrieval problem with Gabor frames. The third research direction of the
project focuses on various aspects of time-frequency analysis for graph-based
signals. The two main goals are to describe graphs for which Gabor frames have
properties similar to the classical case, and to study properties of graph Gabor
frames, depending on the underlying graph structure. To achieve the latter goal,
the investigator aims to use random graph theory. The generalization of such
cornerstone concepts as uncertainty principle and restricted isometry property
would allow to develop Gabor analysis toolbox for graph-based signals and
approach classical signal processing problems in this more general setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
