
* 1909849
* Intermittent Solutions of the Navier-Stokes Equations: From Onsager's Conjecture to Turbulence
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2019,08/01/2019
* Alexey Cheskidov,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 165,000.00

This project is to study some fundamental open questions concerning the Navier-
Stokes equations of fluid motion. These equations, widely used by physicists and
engineers for real-life applications, were introduced almost two centuries ago
to describe the motion of viscous fluids, such as air or water. However, some
essential questions, such as the existence and uniqueness of classical
solutions, are still not answered. Therefore, a notion of weak solutions, whose
existence is known, has been extensively used by mathematicians. The PI will
demonstrate a limitation of this notion by constructing weak solutions with
various unphysical properties. On the other hand, the developed technique will
allow the PI to study physical solutions that are expected to describe
turbulence. Turbulence, often referred to as the last unsolved problem in
classical physics, is a fundamental and ubiquitous hydrodynamical and
aerodynamical phenomenon occurring in nature, in engineering, and in
environmental applications. This research will involve graduate students and
postdocs.

Kolmogorov's theory of turbulence is based on the assumption that eddies are
densely packed at each length scale, which has been invalidated in numerous
experiments and numerical simulations. It turns out that the eddies are packed
somewhat loosely, a phenomenon called intermittency. In this project the PI will
study how the intermittency can be defined mathematically and measured
experimentally; how the intermittency affects regularity properties of weak
solutions to the 3D NSE and their ability to satisfy the energy equality; how
one can derive rigorous bounds on intermittency and justify scaling turbulence
laws for solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations (NSE). For instance, the PI
will analyze how the intermittency affects the ability of solutions to
anomalously loose or gain energy. As a result, intermittent wild solutions with
various anomalous properties will be constructed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
