
* 1909638
* Nonlinear and Non-local Models in Social and Ecological Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2019,05/07/2021
* Nancy Rodriguez,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 301,796.00

The goal of this project is the introduction of a theoretical framework to
understand and predict macroscopic patterns that are formed in many complex
social and ecological systems. This research is motivated primarily be the two
phenomena: the social and environmental interactions in social animals that lead
to development of territorial patterns; development of urban gentrification
patterns. Although conceptually different, these phenomena will be modeled by
very similar mathematical models that fit into the framework of reaction-
advection-diffusion (RAD) systems. RAD systems are the focus of this research;
their use will help to gain insight into complex social and ecological systems
where there is a need to understand macroscopic patterns. In this framework the
PI will work on incorporating real-world data to extract objective information
that will help shed light into what are the most influential factors leading to
the complex patterns which are observed in ecology and sociology. Associated to
this research project is a mentoring plan focused on advising underrepresented
minority students at University of Colorado Boulder majoring in a STEM field.
This will mainly be done through the initiation of a Society of Chicanos and
Native Americans in the Science chapter. The aim is to provide these students
with a network that can help them succeed in STEM.

The overarching objective of this research is to develop, analyze, and simulate
reaction-advection-diffusion (RAD) systems based on real-life observations and
data. For example, RAD systems that are data-driven must include heterogeneities
(spatial and temporal) as well as nonlocal operators, posing significant
mathematical and computational challenges. RAD systems also provide a perfect
framework to test hypothesis postulated by researchers in other fields, since
their solutions can serve as a probability density function for the use of
various methodologies, such as maximum likelihood estimation, to fit parameters
to data. The PI will take advantage of this framework to develop an
infrastructure (theory, algorithms, and software) targeted toward ecologists and
social scientists that will validate RAD-type models by fitting them to data
using appropriate statistical techniques. This research will contain three
interrelated projects: the first one will be centered around the modeling of
social and environmental interactions in social animals in order to understand
territorial patterns through the use of non-local and heterogeneous RAD systems;
the focal point of the second project will be on the development of a
methodology and numerical framework to incorporate (social) data in order to
test hypothesis developed by sociologists, with gentrification as a first case
study; the final project will focus on developing the theory for non-local
reaction-diffusion equations that arise from birth-jump processes, which are
very suitable models for processes for which birth and dispersal cannot be
separated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
