
* 1910282
* Mathematical Analysis of Novel Nonlinear Waves in Dissipative Optical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,05/03/2019
* Jianke Yang,VT,University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 291,627.00

This project theoretically investigates dissipative nonlinear wave systems in
optics, which exhibit novel and counter-intuitive properties such as
conservative-like behaviors and unidirectional wave propagation. Examples of
such optical systems include certain advanced lasers supporting unidirectional
light propagation along the edges of the laser cavity immune to scattering and
disorder, which holds promise as an optical diode in the design of optical
computers. Other examples include certain dissipative second-harmonic-generation
systems featuring soliton families with continuous ranges of powers, which may
be exploited for signal processing devices. Properties manifested in such
systems are intriguing, and they will be investigated comprehensively in this
project. Through advanced mathematical techniques and sophisticated numerical
computations, new insight will be gained on the operation of these optical
systems, so that their applications for optical diodes and nonlinear data
processing can be assessed and optimized. The problems undertaken in this
project are at the cutting edge of applied mathematics and optics.
Mathematically, this project ventures into the unchartered territory of
dissipative systems behaving like conservative systems, which opens new research
directions in the study of nonlinear waves. On the physical side, these studies
will lead to better understanding of next-generation laser devices, which will
have direct applications to many branches of optics and photonics.
Educationally, graduate students will be trained, and undergraduate honors
thesis and undergraduate summer research will be supervised, so that this
project will help train young talents in the STEM fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
