
* 1910180
* A Qualitative Study of Nonlocal Models in Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2019,05/24/2019
* Tadele Mengesha,TN,University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 184,410.00

This project supports the principal investigator's ongoing research program on
the close analytical examination of nonlocal models in mechanics. These
mathematical models are of relatively recent vintage and have proved to be very
effective for modeling certain challenging phenomena, such as fracture in solid
mechanics. For example, understanding how materials behave, their failure as
well as their strength when deformed, is crucial for their proper usage and also
for the design of new materials with potential impact on manufacturing,
materials engineering, and related technologies. For this purpose, models with
varied levels of success have been proposed in the past. The PI aims to develop
basic mathematical techniques that will deliver a sound analytical footing for
the recently proposed "peridynamic model" as well as other nonlocal models of
continuum mechanics. The findings will also be applicable to additional models
having similar structure, with applications in social and biological sciences.
The activities will not only contribute to the success and effectiveness of
attempts on modeling development and experimental validation but will also
ensure that future modeling and simulation efforts based on these nonlocal
theories will be more quantitative and reliable. This project will provide
opportunities and support for the training of graduate students. The Principal
Investigator will integrate the findings of the project into classroom teaching
and other educational endeavors.

This project concerns the development of theory and techniques for nonlocal
models in mechanics in general and for the peridynamic model in particular.
These models are characterized by their effective description of continuous as
well as discontinuous fields within a single mathematical framework by using
integral equations instead of differential equations. The models have been
successfully applied to better describe jump stochastic processes, anomalous
diffusion, and spontaneous formation and propagation of cracks in solids, to
name a few applications. However, the models have also presented the scientific
community with new mathematical challenges. This research is devoted to
exploring some analytical issues while at the same time laying the necessary
mathematical foundation for future studies of nonlocal and peridynamic models.
Issues to be addressed include demonstratiing well posedness of linearized
nonlocal models of practical interest, establishing a rigorous connection with
well-studied strain-gradient models, proving regularity properties of solutions
of nonlocal equations as a function of the data, and implementing variational
techniques to study some aspects of nonlocal nonlinear problems. The approaches
involve various tools that lead to extensions of classical mathematical concepts
and techniques to the nonlocal setting, including perturbation methods, calculus
of variations, and nonlinear functional analysis. Furthermore, the basic
mathematical infrastructure that will be worked out is likely to impact the
development of effective and reliable finite element methods and other numerical
schemes to solve complex engineering problems that involve nonlocality. The
research will make nonlocal and peridynamics-based modeling and simulation more
mathematically consistent, quantitative, and predictive in practical
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
