
* 1910824
* Collaborative Research: Self-Assembly and Aggregate Formation in Stratified Fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2019,07/01/2019
* Richard McLaughlin,NC,University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 254,000.00

The atmospheres, lakes, and oceans of our world typically involve density
variability, with layers of lighter fluid sitting on top of heavier fluid. In
this project, we are exploring a novel mechanism we have discovered through
which particles suspended within such layered systems are seen to attract each
other and self-assemble, forming large disc like clusters. The mechanism for
this attraction involves fluid flows which the particles themselves create from
being in a layered fluid. Such clusters occur ubiquitously in lakes and oceans,
where they can provide food sources for a variety of organisms, or result in
concentrations of polluting particles. The origins of these clusters may well
lie within this new aggregate formation mechanism under exploration within this
award. Graduate students will be involved in the project.

Specifically, the award will undertake a combined theoretical, numerical, and
experimental investigation of a newly discovered hydrodynamic interaction
between particles in a stratified ambient environment. Recent experimental work
by the PIs at the UNC Joint Fluids Lab have demonstrated that passive particles
suspended in a density-stratified environment interact through self-induced
flows which can result in approaching one and another over time until coming
into contact. Collections of many particles tend to aggregate and self-assemble
into large-scale 2D structures due to this newly identified attraction
mechanism. The project aims to characterize this newly-identified interaction
effect in nature for the first time, through novel asymptotic methods, numerical
simulations, and careful experimentation. The research will explore the complex
interplay between diffusion, advection, and geometry (through physical boundary
conditions) in inducing new collective phenomena. This requires developing novel
computational, asymptotic, and experimental methods for extracting quantitative
predictions from the parent Navier-Stokes equations coupled through the viscous
stress tensor to particles suspended in stratified environments. The new
asymptotic methods developed as part of this proposal will also prove useful for
a wider range of problems in fluid dynamics and potential theory.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
