
* 1911145
* Novel Computational Methods for Imperfectly-Mixed Chemical Reactions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2019,08/05/2019
* Stephen Pankavich,CO,Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 336,942.00

Many chemicals that move within fluids undergo reactions. Often these convert
toxic compounds into harmless byproducts. One such example is the cleanup of
gasoline that has leaked into a groundwater aquifer. Unfortunately, current
mathematical models and computational methods that assume the reactants are well
mixed fail to accurately predict the duration or rate of these reactions,
primarily due to the poor mixing of associated reactants. Recent studies show
that mixing-limited reactions play a dominant role in most Earth-bound systems
across a wide range of scales, including reactions in atmospheric plumes,
granular and fractured aquifers, sedimentary (e.g., petroleum-generating and
carbon-dioxide-sequestering) basins, hydrothermal areas, and ore bodies.
Imperfect mixing and modified dynamics also occur at the nanometer to micron
scale in space and picosecond to microsecond scale in time, revealing the
ubiquity of mixing-limited reaction, from molecular to global scales. Hence
imperfect mixing poses a significant theoretical and practical problem because
most current models of reactive transport in hydrological systems are based on
empirical adjustments to classical laws, which are built upon the flawed well-
mixed assumption. In order to make reliable predictions in such systems,
improved methods are critical for scientists and engineers, and ultimately
decision makers, stakeholders, and policy developers working in fields such as
environmental contamination and remediation. This project develops new
computational methods to simulate chemical transport and reaction dynamics, with
applications to a variety of fields, including climate-change related
atmospheric reactions as well as ecological and micro-biochemical systems.
Graduate students participate in the research.

The investigators recently developed new computational models that demonstrate
the need for new methods to simulate reactions in imperfectly-mixed chemical
systems. These stochastic Lagrangian methods directly track particle positions
and calculate reactions based on the probability that particles are co-located.
The methods correspond to perturbation expansions of the classical diffusion-
reaction equation and also match several benchmark experiments. In this project,
new algorithms are developed that account for random particle migration time and
the statistical structure of initial conditions to properly simulate subgrid
fluctuations. Preliminary studies show that the methods work well for
bimolecular reactions in simple systems, but it remains to be proven that such
techniques can be extended to more complicated reactions, geometries, and flow
fields. Additionally, the investigators build upon a continuum approach to
simulate reactions and track the growth of concentration perturbations. Finally,
they construct and extend Lagrangian numerical methods that are known to be
accurate and efficient, to benchmark theoretical results and facilitate large-
scale reactive simulations. The approaches are unified through detailed
mathematical analyses and applications to well-studied laboratory and field
experiments. Graduate students participate in the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
