
* 1933403
* Complex Analysis: Techniques, Applications and Computations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 09/01/2019,06/27/2019
* Stefan Llewellyn Smith,CA,University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 26,000.00

This award supports the participation of early-career US-based mathematicians in
the 4-month program "Complex Analysis: Techniques, Applications and
Computations'' to be held at the Isaac Newton Institute (INI) for Mathematical
Sciences (Cambridge, UK) from September 2 to December 19, 2019. The program
includes three workshops and sets of masterclasses (expository lectures given by
leaders in the field), and will give junior scientists, at a critical career
stage, a chance to participate in a workshop and masterclass in their research
area. The workshops are "The complex analysis toolbox: new techniques and
perspectives", from September 9 to 13, 2019; "Complex analysis in mathematical
physics and applications", from October 28 to November 1, 2019; and
"Computational complex analysis", from December 9 to 13, 2019. Complex variable
and analytic function theory play an elemental role in a diverse array of
applications and areas of mathematics. The classical work carried out over
decades in traditional fields is now providing the foundations and inspiration
for new and rapid growth in many exciting new directions. The INI program will
advance the field by bringing together key researchers working at the frontiers
of these new developments and will help steer future endeavors by identifying
the most important scientific challenges arising from the new techniques,
methodologies and insights. The program will also focus on elucidating the
unexpected connections between different branches of complex analysis that have
been emerging over the past few years. To this end, the program will encompass
mathematicians as well as physicists and engineers working on theoretical
aspects, computational methods, mathematical modeling and applications.

The award will be aimed at supporting participation in the workshops and
secondarily the broader program. The main impact will be the training and career
development of junior researchers. Bringing together scientific leaders for
extended periods will provide a synergistic forum for creative collaboration,
which will be particularly beneficial to the early-career participants who will
be supported. They will have the opportunity to learn from senior colleagues and
to highlight their work to the community, and will bring new ideas for their
research programs back to the US, thereby enhancing the mathematical sciences
infrastructure as a secondary impact of the award. The organizers will also hold
a moderated session discussing how complex analysis is taught, and exploring new
innovations in the classroom, including demonstrations. This will be
particularly useful for junior participants who may be embarking on teaching
careers. A diversity committee has been formed to identify promising diverse
participants (female or underrepresented minorities) and involve them in the
program and workshops. The website for the program can be found at
https://www.newton.ac.uk/event/cat and includes details about the workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
