
* 1935128
* Conference: Dynamics Days 2020
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATHEMATICAL BIOLOGY, Dynamics, Control and System D
* 12/15/2019,12/06/2019
* Per Sebastian Skardal,CT,Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 11/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The conference ?Dynamics Days 2020? will take place in Hartford, Connecticut in
January 3-5, 2020. Dynamics Days is an international conference focused on
nonlinear dynamics, chaos, and their applications which has been running in the
US for 39 years. During this time, it has established itself as one of the main
venues for the discussion of new ideas groundbreaking results in nonlinear
dynamics. The conference is characterized by covering a wide area of
applications, which promotes the exchange of ideas and dissemination of results
across different fields. The variety of topics attracts participants with
diverse backgrounds, including physics, mathematics, engineering, and biology.
This award provides travel awards to students and postdocs without other sources
of support. The conference webpage can be found at
https://sites.google.com/site/dynamicsdays2020/.

Dynamics Days 2020 will showcase research in areas including networks, fluid
dynamics, swarming, mixing, topological time series analysis, nonlinear waves,
social systems, and biological systems. The conference will have 15 invited
speakers, a similar number of contributed speakers, two ignite talk sessions,
and two poster sessions. Participants ranging from graduate students and
postdocs to senior researchers and faculty members will have to opportunity to
discuss and present their results in invited talks, contributed talks, ignite
talks, or poster presentations. In particular, younger participants will gain a
broad perspective of interdisciplinary research, and have the opportunity to
interact with leading researchers in the field. The participation of
underrepresented groups will be encouraged.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
