
* 1937229
* RTG: Applied Mathematics and Statistics for Data-Driven Discovery
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 04/01/2020,05/26/2021
* Kevin Lin,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,252,358.00

The simultaneous availability of large datasets, high performance computing, and
modern machine learning algorithms holds great promise to enable scientists and
engineers to rapidly discover hidden patterns in data, and to utilize these
patterns to understand the natural world in order to solve pressing practical
problems facing society. Realizing this promise requires addressing many
mathematical and computational challenges: in framing scientific and
technological problems for solution by data-driven approaches, in interpreting
and analyzing data, and in designing efficient and reliable algorithms. There is
an urgent need for mathematical scientists who are equally adept at wielding
modern applied and computational mathematics on the one hand, and the tools of
data-driven modeling, statistical inference, and scientific computing on the
other. Furthermore, as interdisciplinary research and development become more
common in industry, academia, and government, it is imperative that such
mathematical scientists be generalists, able to communicate and work with
specialists from diverse fields. This Research Training Group (RTG) addresses
this need by increasing the number of mathematical scientists capable of working
effectively at the interface of applied mathematics/statistics and modern data
science. By focusing on specific applications requiring both mathematical
innovation and data-driven modeling and by forming teams of mathematical
scientists and domain experts, the RTG will enable trainees to address new
challenges in innovative ways using their mastery of relevant mathematics,
statistics and data science, and domain knowledge. Recognizing the challenges of
advanced studies in STEM fields, the RTG will promote close, small-group
mentoring at all levels. The expected outcome is mathematical scientists adept
at working at disciplinary boundaries and intellectually equipped to tackle a
wide range of scientific and technological challenges. It is expected that some
of the trainees will continue in academia, where the proposed training
activities can be improved and propagated; others will work in industry and
government, applying their knowledge and skills to solve problems of practical
significance.

The RTG will support research on applied mathematics and data-driven modeling at
the University of Arizona (UA), which is home to a large and vibrant
mathematical science community. It is organized around a number of application-
centered Working Groups, with foci ranging from analysis of gene regulation data
to the modeling and forecasting of power grids. Each research project will
impact both fundamental methodology and practical applications. The Working
Groups are structured to enable vertically-integrated mentoring of RTG trainees
at all levels -- undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral, and to enable
trainees to work closely with Mathematics faculty and domain experts. Additional
training activities include courses on foundational topics, e.g., optimization,
machine learning, Monte Carlo methods, as well as practical skills such as
software carpentry. By providing research training at the interface between the
traditional domains of applied mathematics and the cutting-edge field of data-
driven modeling, the RTG will both advance scientific knowledge and increase the
number of US citizens and nationals with much-needed scientific and
technological expertise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
