
* 1938702
* OP: Collaborative Research: Development of Advanced Image Reconstruction Methods for Pre-Clinical Applications of Photoacoustic Computed Tomography
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY, Dynamics, Control and System D
* 03/16/2019,06/21/2019
* Mark Anastasio,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 06/30/2020
* USD 107,698.00

This collaborative research project will develop advanced image reconstruction
methods for pre-clinical applications of photoacoustic computed tomography
(PACT). PACT is a promising biomedical imaging technique, which has been
developed rapidly in the past decade, with applications explored in vascular
biology, oncology, neurology, dermatology, gastroenterology, and cardiology.
PACT can circumvent the limitations of many existing approaches and provide
detailed three-dimensional anatomical, functional, and molecular information
that can facilitate a wide range of biomedical studies. This research project
will dramatically improve image quality in PACT, which will accelerate the
widespread adoption of this emerging imaging modality. The project goals will be
accomplished through a collaboration that involves complementary high-level
expertise in the mathematical and biomedical imaging sciences.

The project aims at addressing several challenging problems in biomedical
imaging in terms of modeling and inversion from both computational and
experimental perspectives. (1) Advanced ultrasound computed tomography (USCT)
reconstruction methods will be developed for determination of acoustic
heterogeneities. (2) New photoacoustic computed tomography (PACT) reconstruction
methods will be developed to compensate for acoustic heterogeneities. (3) Novel
methods for joint PACT/USCT image reconstruction will be developed to
reconstruct the absorbed optical energy density and speed of sound distributions
simultaneously. (4) Innovative PACT reconstruction methods in heterogeneous
viscoelastic media will be developed for transcranial brain imaging. (5) The
value of the developed image reconstruction methods will be demonstrated for in-
vivo imaging of small animals. The resulting methods will open new venues for
applying these algorithms to wave-related biomedical imaging problems.
