
* 1954162
* 2020 Shanks Workshop on Mathematical Aspects of Fluid Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, ANALYSIS PROGRAM
* 03/01/2020,01/30/2020
* Gieri Simonett,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 02/28/2022
* USD 12,000.00

This award supports travel for US participants in the conference "2020 Shanks
Workshop on Mathematical Aspects of Fluid Dynamics" that will be held at
Vanderbilt University from March 14 to March 15, 2020. The field of fluid
dynamics has a long history going back to the works of Bernoulli and Euler.
Despite its long history, fluid dynamics continues to be an active and exciting
field of research, both in mathematics and in the applied sciences, with many
fundamental problems wide open. The award provides opportunities for early-
career researchers, researchers who are members of underrepresented groups, and
researchers without other sources of travel support to attend and participate.

The workshop will feature seven invited talks and short contributed talks by
young researchers. The invited speakers have been selected on the basis of their
outstanding contributions to the field of fluid dynamics and their high level of
activity in the field over the recent years. The workshop will provide an
opportunity for the dissemination and discussion of many cutting-edge results
and new techniques in the study of partial differential equations related to
fluid dynamics. In particular, the workshop?s participants will benefit from the
make-up of the group of speakers which incorporates researches working on
theoretical, numerical, and applied aspects of fluid dynamics. One of the
difficulties faced by researchers in the field is that the wide range of
techniques employed in the study of PDEs arising in fluid dynamics can lead to
fast specialization, many times preventing researchers working on similar
problems from communicating with each other. This workshop will help overcoming
such barriers, assuring that the vast amount of techniques available in the
field are shared among its members, and giving incentives to researchers to
pursue future collaborations. The small size of the meeting will facilitate
interaction between senior and young researchers. More details are available at
https://my.vanderbilt.edu/shanksfd2020/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
