
* 2004997
* Stochastic Portfolios, Controls, and Interacting Particles
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,05/11/2020
* Ioannis Karatzas,NY,Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 350,010.00

This award will focus on three areas of importance in financial mathematics: (1)
stochastic portfolio theory, (2) stochastic control, and (3) entropic gradient
flows. Stochastic portfolio theory is a mathematical framework for analyzing
portfolio behavior and equity market structure. It is descriptive as opposed to
normative, consistent with observable characteristics of actual portfolios
equity markets, and a theoretical tool useful for practical applications. In
addition, it provides insights into questions of outperformance and arbitrage of
market-structure stability, and of portfolio construction that results in
controlled behavior over long-time horizons for purposes of institutional (for
example, foundation, endowment, pension) investing. Stochastic control with
partial observations arises in the sequential detection of change-points, in
signal processing, in finance, in other contexts where learning about unknown
parameters, and where dynamic optimization must take place simultaneously and in
real time. Optimization problems that involve features of both control and
stopping arise, for instance, in tracking models, where one has to stay as close
as possible to a certain target by spending fuel, to declare when one has
arrived sufficiently close, and then to decide whether to engage the target or
not. It also arises in situations where one has to resolve the tension between
exploration (learning about unobservable quantities) and exploitation (taking an
actions that costs now, but yields benefits later). The third focus of this
project, the study of entropic gradient flows, complements the second law of
thermodynamics and pertains to phenomena where the entropy of the current
configuration, relative to the steady-state, not only decreases as the system
approaches equilibrium, but does so in the most efficient manner possible ? the
state follows a path of steepest possible descent for the entropy, in terms of
an appropriate distance on phase space. This has important implications for the
training of neural networks, for gradient descent algorithms in stochastic
optimization, and for optimal portfolio liquidation. The award will provide
graduate students with the opportunity for research experiences.

The PI will develop a theory of portfolios that does not rely on the existence
of equivalent martingale measures and allows the outperformance of one portfolio
by another. This theory will be based on local martingale deflators, the
optional decomposition theorem, and appropriate functional-analytic tools. It
will exclude only very egregious forms of what is commonly called arbitrage, and
help develop a simple, streamlined mathematical framework for finance with
complete answers to the basic questions of hedging and portfolio optimization.
This theory will cover markets with an arbitrary number of assets (such as bond
markets, or those with splits and mergers), open markets (with a fixed, finite
number of companies but of a composition varying with capitalization, such as
S&P 500), portfolio constraints, model uncertainty, and market stability via
models based on systems of diffusions interacting through their ranks. The PI
will work on stochastic optimization problems that combine features of optimal
control, stopping, and filtering of unobservable parameters or signals. Such
problems are notoriously hard to solve explicitly and little theory exists for
them. Finally, the project will explore the full range of applicability for a
tool the PI developed recently, using time-reversal and optimal transport
techniques: the trajectorial approach to the Otto calculus. The PI will study
its relevance for diffusions of McKean-Vlasov type, the training of deep neural
networks, and the steepest descent of the relative entropy along flows of Markov
processes, including on discrete structures with the help of appropriately
weighted Sobolev norms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
