
* 2005797
* Variational Methods for the Analysis of Unsupervised Learning Algorithms
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,07/15/2022
* Nicolas Garcia Trillos,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2023
* USD 179,877.00

Unsupervised learning can be described as the task of finding structure from
unlabeled observations. This is a fundamental task in scientific fields like
biology, material science, economics, and astronomy, where in a typical scenario
researchers possess a large number of unlabeled data, but only a few (or none)
expert labeled data points, as these are typically very expensive to obtain.
This project focuses on the mathematical analysis of data science algorithms for
unsupervised learning. Broadly speaking, the aim of the investigation is to
contribute to the development of mathematical foundations for data science and
artificial intelligence by providing rigorous mathematical theory supporting
methodologies used in practice, as well as by proposing principled novel ones.
The investigator will not only study individual algorithms, but find common
structure between them and highlight their otherwise unclear unity.

Among the many methodologies for unsupervised learning found in the literature,
graph-based methods occupy a prominent role, and they will be the focus of this
investigation. These are algorithms that rely on having access to similarity
graphs, which endow data sets with a geometric structure. Different graphs
capture different features of a given data set and hence are useful for
different tasks. The project will focus on the following concrete directions: 1)
the proposal and analysis of new algorithms for unsupervised learning inspired
by variational methods for evolution on metric spaces and in particular on the
space of probability measures over discrete and semi-discrete structures. In
this direction the main goal is to introduce a mathematical formalism for the
design of new learning methodologies, and to use this formalism in order to
build connections between seemingly unrelated statistical procedures like those
inspired by mode-seeking techniques as the ones based on spectral methods. Some
of the applications in mind go beyond unsupervised learning, and also include
the systematic testing of deep neural network architectures. The second
direction concerns the study of statistical properties of graph-based
unsupervised learning algorithms in settings where graphs capturing the geometry
of a data set are very sparse (below standard connectivity), or where data
generating distributions are degenerate and violate standard geometric
assumptions found in the literature. In this direction, the goal is to identify
the limits of sparsity that allow for meaningful learning, as well as to develop
quantitative statistical error analysis for solutions to non-convex optimization
problems on graphs built on data sets, for graphs that are connected to a ground
truth geometric model.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
