
* 2005262
* Stability and Bifurcations in Free-Boundary Models of Active Gels
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,06/25/2021
* Leonid Berlyand,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 365,921.00

This project is motivated by studies of active matter (also known as active
materials). Such materials are typically of biological origin, such as bacterial
suspensions and cytoskeletons of living cells, but they also include synthetic
systems such as artificial self-propelled particles. These materials exhibit
striking novel properties, and their theoretical understanding requires
development of new mathematical tools. A signature of many active materials is
motility, which is the ability to move spontaneously via the consumption of
energy from internal sources or from the environment. This project concerns the
development and analysis of mathematical models of a special class of active
material: motile active gels in a non-equilibrium state (for example, the
cytoskeleton of a living cell). The project focuses on free-boundary models, in
which unknown functions solve equations in a domain that, due to the phenomenon
of motility, is also unknown. The methodology under development will be
applicable in applied mathematics and will be relevant to materials and life
sciences as well as engineering. The graduate students participating in this
project will receive highly multidisciplinary training, enabling them to work at
the interface of mathematics, life, and physical sciences. The principal
investigator will also teach and mentor undergraduate students with an emphasis
on applications of mathematics to other disciplines.

Free boundary problems such as the Stefan, Hele-Shaw, and Muscat problems have
received significant attention since they are challenging from a mathematical
point of view and important for applications. The focus of this project is on
rigorous analysis of recently developed free-boundary partial differential
equation (PDE) models of active gels (gels in a non-equilibrium state). These
models are governed by nonlinear PDEs, unlike classical free boundary problems
and most recent tumor growth models. The principal investigator will perform
rigorous analysis of the existence and stability of stationary state, traveling
wave, and rotating solutions by developing novel analytical tools for
bifurcation analysis in the free boundary setting. The stability of these
solutions is crucial for biophysical applications since it allows one to
distinguish stable states from unstable ones that are rarely observed in
experiments. The project will demonstrate that linearized stability analysis of
these solutions is typically inconclusive, and new techniques for genuine
nonlinear stability analysis will be developed based on construction of novel
energy (Lyapunov type) functionals for free boundary problems with nonlinear
PDEs. Analytical and numerical results will be compared to experimental
observations of single cells and cell aggregates. A long-term goal is to provide
theoretical understanding of migration of cells that drives important biological
processes, for example, wound healing and the invasion of cancerous tissues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
