
* 2005444
* Topics in Kinematics and Geometrical Optics: Tire Track Geometry and Billiard Models
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2020,05/27/2022
* Serge Tabachnikov,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 348,000.00

The proposed research consists of two parts: models of vehicle motion and tire
track geometry, and models of elastic reflection in bounded regions and
geometric optics. In the first part, the investigator will study a variety of
concrete problems of vehicle kinematics. Direct applications involve pursuit
problems, control of tractors with many trailers, and preventing driving hazard.
The same mathematical methods apply to the study of other, seemingly unrelated,
applied problems, including stability of floating bodies and modeling of the
Josephson effect (Nobel Prize in 1973), important in the design of quantum-
mechanical circuits for quantum computers. In the second part, the investigator
will study fundamental problems of ray optics and models of mechanical systems
with elastic collision, such as the ideal gas. Although ray optics provides only
an approximation to a more precise wave optics, this approximation is accurate
enough for many applications, including laser beam shaping, trapping rays of
light and storing solar energy, control of light pollution, and invisibility.
Modern technology makes it possible to manufacture materials with unusual
reflecting and refracting properties and to create nearly ideal mirrors of
complicated shape, thus realizing geometrical optical designs in glass, metal,
and plastic. Most of the suggested problems admit both theoretical and computer
experimental study, in many cases the latter being the first step toward the
former. The investigator will actively involve undergraduate and graduate
students in his research program.

The proposed research has strong connections with the theory of completely
integrable systems, continuous and discrete, and it relies on a variety of
methods developed in this theory since the discovery of solitons in the 1960s
and, in particular, on the theory of discrete differential geometry. For
example, the problem of describing cylindrical bodies that float in equilibrium
in all positions is intimately related with the description of solitons of the
filament equation, a completely integrable system modeling the motion of fluid
and gas vortices, and the cross-sections of all known solutions to this
flotation problem are buckled rings (pressurized elastica), that also solve a
variational problem extensively studied in the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. In general, the theory of completely integrable systems makes it
possible to find explicit solutions to the differential and difference equations
that arise in the models; often these solutions are given in terms of elliptic
functions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
