
* 2006416
* Topics in Wave Propagation and Quantum Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 11/01/2020,05/19/2020
* Olivier Pinaud,CO,Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 10/31/2023
* USD 254,815.00

Wave phenomena are ubiquitous in nature, and are virtually in every aspect of
every day life. They are responsible for the sound we hear, the light we see,
and the data we receive on our personal devices. Understanding how to
mathematically model these waves, how to control them, and how to extract
valuable information from them is therefore an important question at the
intersection of various fields. The underlying physics principles behind wave
propagation are extremely complex, and mathematics has proven to be a crucial
tool in their investigation. At the core of this project are the theoretical
analysis and the simulation of wave phenomena, with an emphasis on three main
problems: how to focus energy with a minimal experimental apparatus; how to
infer physical properties of a complex medium using wave propagation; and how to
model waves in novel quantum devices. This project integrates research with the
training of the next generation of scientists in the field of applied
mathematics.

The main theme of research of the project is wave phenomena, including both
classical and quantum waves. There are three main components to the proposed
research. The first one originates from the recent groundbreaking experiments on
instantaneous time mirrors. The latter form a novel avenue for time reversal and
the control of waves, and is an exciting new topic for mathematicians to
explore. The second component concerns inverse problems based on stochastic
correctors, which are considered physical systems where forward data are
solutions to PDEs with small parameters and random coefficients. In these
systems, the data are asymptotically modeled by random correctors to a leading
term that is not accessible to measurements. The objectives are first to
characterize these stochastic correctors, and second to develop inversion
strategies based on these corrections to extract information on the system. A
typical example is the ?sea ice problem?, which involves random fluctuations
around a homogenized solution. The last component of this project concerns
quantum systems. The first problem is to develop the mathematical foundations of
quantum hydrodynamical models based on the entropy principle, and the second the
derivation of efficient numerical schemes for periodic Dirac operators, with
applications to the study of exotic phases of matter and the design of novel
quantum devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
