
* 2006741
* The Mathematical Theory of Black Holes with Matter
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2020,07/11/2020
* Elena Giorgi,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 04/30/2021
* USD 119,623.00

General Relativity is the fundamental physical theory of gravity and has a role
of primary importance in our understanding of the universe. The key equation of
General Relativity is due to Einstein, and black holes are its most surprising
solutions. Black holes occupy a central stage in our understanding of gravity
and tremendous progress in their research has been accomplished in the past
decades. They are expected to form as a result of gravitational collapse and are
surrounded by matter with which they interact. They are expected to radiate
energy away in the form of gravitational waves (as detected by LIGO) and settle
to a stationary state. Most mathematical models used in the study of such
evolution of black holes do not consider any matter or energy field present in
the spacetime: more precisely, they only assume the presence of the
gravitational field. This is called the case of the vacuum Einstein equation.
Even though the vacuum Einstein equation already presents many difficulties from
the mathematical point of view, they hardly represent a complete picture about
the physics involved. In order to obtain a realistic model for astrophysical
black holes, matter fields should be added to the Einstein equation to model the
surrounding of the black holes. This research is aimed at the study of black
hole stability both for the vacuum Einstein equation and for the coupled
equations with electromagnetic radiation. The plan of this research is to create
a rigorous and systematic approach to understand the interaction of
gravitational radiation with other matter fields present in astrophysical
objects. We plan to consider the interaction between gravitation and
electromagnetic fields, governed by the Maxwell equations, and develop a
rigorous and clear understanding of their interactions. Our approach is based on
the Teukolsky formalism. The Einstein-Maxwell equation has many features in
common with the vacuum Einstein equation, but also presents new substantial
difficulties related to the coupling of the gravitational and electromagnetic
interactions. One of the difficulties is to identify gauge-invariant quantities
which transport electromagnetic and gravitational radiation and derive the
partial differential equations they satisfy. We then plan to be able to
generalize the main ideas in dealing with those interactions to other matter
systems, like Einstein-Vlasov, null dust or complex scalar, which are of
fundamental importance in astrophysical systems. In general, in the case of the
Einstein equation coupled with matter fields, we expect to obtain coupled
hyperbolic PDEs with sources which interact one with another.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
