
* 2006372
* Small Scale and Singularity Formation in Fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,05/13/2020
* Alexander Kiselev,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 430,000.00

This award focuses on several directions in fluid mechanics. Fluids are all
around us, and we can witness the complexity and subtleness of their properties
in everyday life, in ubiquitous technology, and in dramatic phenomena such as
tornados or hurricanes. There has been an enormous wealth of knowledge
accumulated in the broad area of fluid mechanics, yet it is quite remarkable
that many of the most fundamental and relevant in applications questions remain
poorly understood. Of particular interest is the question whether solutions to
equations describing fluid motion can spontaneously form singularities.
Understanding singularities is important because they often correspond to
dramatic, highly intense fluid motion, can indicate the range of applicability
of the model, and are very difficult to resolve computationally. Moreover, there
are indications that mechanisms responsible for singularity and small-scale
formation are also involved in production of turbulence. The project aims to
analyze singularity and small scale formation process for some of the key
equations of fluid mechanics. Some equations with related structure inspired by
problems originating in biology will be considered as well. The award will
provide opportunities and research experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral scholars.

The award is concerned with analysis of several equations in fluid mechanics and
related models motivated by biological phenomena. The main theme is the analysis
of singularity and small scale formation in solutions. The surface quasi-
geostrophic equation comes from atmospheric science, and models evolution of
temperature near the Earth's surface. The incompressible porous media equation
describes flow of fluid of variable density through porous media. One research
direction will focus on better understanding of nonlinear mechanisms responsible
for fast generation of small scales and potentially singularities in the
solutions of these equations. Another direction aims to further analyze the Hou-
Luo scenario for singularity formation in the three-dimensional Euler equation.
The scenario was proposed several years ago based on extensive numerical
simulations, and so far all simplified models and settings that have been
analyzed rigorously suggest finite time blow up. Here the main goal will be to
better understand the boundary layer where intense growth of vorticity is
observed, and to design and explore models that are increasingly close to the
actual equation. The research will also include analysis of equations modeling
collective behavior and chemotaxis in biology. Here the focus is on analysis of
regularity, long time dynamics, and boundary effects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
