
* 2006172
* Singular and Spatially Heterogeneous Perturbations of Solitary Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,07/22/2020
* Jay Wright,PA,Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 165,000.00

Although quite different, waves on the surface of the ocean, vibrations in a
long molecule, oscillations in a superheated plasma, the dynamics of electricity
in power systems, and the motion of engineered materials have deep commonalities
from a mathematical point of view. The state of the art for the modeling,
analysis, and computer simulation of all these systems is very sophisticated.
Nonetheless, there are seemingly simple, physically-relevant effects that
profoundly complicate the way in which the systems are analyzed mathematically
and that make current methods insufficient. This project aims to advance the
mathematical treatment of waves to incorporate two broad classes of such
physical effects. The first of these is spatial, that is, the effects related to
the fact that a system is not uniform throughout its extent. For example, such
heterogeneity arises from including bottom topography in water wave models,
lamination in elastica, or structural variability in engineered materials. The
second are so-called singular effects. These include accounting for surface
tension in fluids, incorporating multiple species of ions in plasma models, and
introduction of defects in molecular chains. The project aims to (a) devise
models for these effects, (b) develop mathematically rigorous, broadly
applicable, and highly accurate quantitative descriptions, and (c) implement
novel algorithms for the simulation of such systems. The project will provide
research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

More technically, the goal is to understand how the above phenomena affect the
existence, stability, and (especially) dynamics of coherent structures in
nonlinear, hyperbolic and/or dispersive differential equations. Spatial
heterogeneity ruins translation invariance, an essential ingredient for the
existence of traveling waves. Singular effects are famously unpredictable.
Nevertheless, incorporating these sorts of effects need not eliminate entirely
the coherent structures. For instance, it may be that a traveling wave becomes a
nanopteron, which is to say a traveling wave that is the superposition of a
localized solitary core and a very small amplitude periodic wave. Nanopterons
are already known to exist in the gravity-capillary wave problem and a variety
of Hamiltonian lattice models. Another possibility is that a solitary wave
propagates seemingly unchanged for an extremely long time but eventually
deteriorates into dispersive waves. That is to say, the solitary wave transforms
into a long-lived transient, or metastable, solution. This project?s principal
aims are: identify systems that possess nanopteron solutions and establish their
existence rigorously; advance the rigorous nanopteron theory to be more
descriptive and to work in settings where the solitary core is large; devise and
implement high-order symplectic integrators for Hamiltonian partial and lattice
differential equations to simulate metastable solitary waves over very long time
scales; prove rigorously the existence of metastable solitary waves; and
identify new phenomenology related to spatially heterogeneous or singular
perturbations of solitary waves through analysis and simulation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
