
* 2006884
* Singularities and Error Bounds for Hyperbolic Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,05/06/2020
* Alberto Bressan,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 356,701.00

The Euler equations, introduced in 1755, provide a basic mathematical
description of the motion of fluids. While these equations are now extensively
used in physics and engineering, some fundamental theoretical issues have
remained unsolved. An outstanding open question is whether this model is
deterministic. In other words, knowing the present configuration of a fluid,
under which conditions can we uniquely predict its future behavior? Recent
numerical experiments, performed by the principal investigator and
collaborators, have identified certain initial states of the fluid which lead to
multiple solutions. The present project will investigate the basic mechanism for
which Euler's equations may fail to determine a unique solution. Specific
examples will be studied, containing one or more spiraling vortices, to
understand whether a similar loss of uniqueness occurs for compressible as well
as incompressible fluid flow. The analysis will be carried out by a combination
of theoretical and computational techniques. Rigorous estimates will be derived
on the difference between a numerically computed approximation and the
corresponding exact solution. The project will provide a training ground for
various graduate students and young researchers.

This project will investigate singularities of solutions to nonlinear wave
equations. In particular, the analysis will focus on a class of initial value
problems for the Euler equations modeling a two-dimensional, inviscid,
compressible, or incompressible fluid flow. Based on recent numerical
simulations conducted by the PI and collaborators, initial data having an
algebraic singularity at the origin are expected to provide the simplest
examples of Cauchy problems with multiple solutions, thus revealing a
fundamental obstruction toward the well-posedness of the governing equations.
This analysis will be carried out by a combination of theoretical and
computational techniques. In a neighborhood of a spiraling vortex singularity,
the solution will be studied by a suitable transformation of variables. On a
domain where the solution is smooth, rigorous a posteriori error bounds for the
numerical approximations will be derived. A related project will seek a
posteriori error bounds for discrete numerical schemes, such as the Lax-
Friedrichs and the Godunov scheme, in the computation of entropy-weak solutions
to one-dimensional hyperbolic systems of conservation laws.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
