
* 2006212
* Stratified Fluids and Completely Integrable PDEs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/02/2022
* Yilun Wu,OK,University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 163,999.00

In the study of water waves in the ocean and atmospheric waves in the air, it is
customary to use asymptotic models to replace general equations of fluid
mechanics. These models provide efficient descriptions of the underlying
dynamics by suppressing unimportant details of the fluid motion. This is
achieved by imposing certain scaling regimes of the wave amplitudes,
wavelengths, and fluid depths. This project is concerned with the development of
methods critical in the understanding of long-time behavior of some major
asymptotic models of the two-layer fluid problem. Such scenarios arise in
internal ocean waves layered by water of different salinity, such as are
important for medium-term climate modeling including the El Nino effect, as well
as long-term climate prediction. Sub-surface internal waves can also interact
with surface waves and produce phenomena like rogue waves that can damage or
destroy ocean vessels or fixed structures. To study the underlying equations
mathematically, special solution methods were proposed in the 1980s. These
methods attempt to transform the complicated nonlinear dynamics in the original
equations into well predictable linear dynamics. However, rigorous mathematical
analysis of the feasibility of these methods is missing. By carrying out a
combination of research and educational activities, the PI will develop the
mathematical theory for these methods, and make connections to partner
disciplines, while attracting prospective students into the related fields. In
the current project, the PI will develop complete integrability theories for the
Benjamin-Ono (BO) equation and the intermediate long wave (ILW) equation. They
are both 1D asymptotic models for the two-layer fluid problem. BO and ILW are
important nonlinear dispersive equations with Hamiltonian structures.
Furthermore, formal action-angle diffeomorphisms known as the direct scattering
transforms (DST) were conjectured to map the dynamics on phase space to angular
translations on infinite dimensional tori. If the DST can be inverted (IST), one
will have a powerful method to study long-time asymptotics of these equations.
However, currently there is no large data IST theory for BO, nor is there even a
small data DST theory for ILW. Like those for many other completely integrable
equations, the IST theories for BO and ILW can be formulated as Riemann-Hilbert
(RH) problems. Nevertheless, the RH problems for BO and ILW involve certain
nonlocal jump conditions. Lack of theory for nonlocal RH problems hinders the
solution of BO and ILW. For BO, the PI will use a newly discovered relation
between the scattering functions to reduce the RH problem to inverting a
Fredholm operator of zero index. The PI will then attempt to use a new identity
to show that this Fredholm operator has trivial kernel. For ILW, the PI will
recast the DST problem as inverting a convolution type operator and prove
certain uniform estimates on the convolution kernel. The PI will construct the
IST theory for ILW by regularization and solution in certain weighted spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
