
* 2006439
* Dimension Reduction and Singular Limits of Prestrained Structures
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/24/2020
* Marta Lewicka,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This project is directed at the study of properties and behavior of "prestrained
elastica". Elastica (elastic materials) are the solid materials which return to
their original shape and size after forces applied to them are removed. If an
elastic body is appropriately processed mechanically (e.g. rolled), thermally
(cooled non-uniformly during heat treatment), chemically ("nitrided" through
surface absorption of nitrogen) or exposed to inhomogeneous growth, stresses and
strains may develop in the body at equilibrium, leading to the material that has
been prestrained (strained in advance). A characteristic which singles out the
quality of prestraining in a body is that even in the absence of exterior forces
the body assumes a shape that is radically different from the same body without
strains. This phenomenon has been observed in different contexts: from growing
leaves, through liquid crystals (used in various displays), to polymer gels; it
is especially significant for materials formed as thin sheets. With the
advancement of wide manufacturing and use of the novel materials in the thin
film shape (molecular thin films, nanotubes, perforated domains, engineered
gels), it becomes especially important to gain a theoretical insight on how to
relate the prestrain with the elastic energy stored in the body. Attaining such
a theoretical insight is the overarching objective of this project. One of
applications of this research is controlling the structural properties of the
desired final product through fine-tuning its manufacturing conditions. This
project includes opportunities for the research training of students at various
educational levels and disseminating obtained results to research communities of
mathematicians and engineers.

The project has theoretical as well as applied aspects, representing
contributions to mathematical analysis, differential geometry, calculus of
variations, materials science, and engineering design. Specifically, the general
dimension reduction classification of prestrained elastic materials, with the
prestrain given through a Riemannian metric of arbitrarily large (or arbitrarily
small) curvature, as well as distributed across the mid-surface and the
thickness of the film, will be developed. Further, the curvature constraints
obtained in the process of dimensionally reducing the energy of a prestrained
thin film and corresponding to different energy and regularity of deformations
regimes, will be studied. This includes the rigidity and flexibility of Holder-
continuous solutions to the quadratic Monge-Ampere system in arbitrary spatial
dimensions. Finally, the project will involve the time-dependent and discrete
versions of the stationary continuum problems mentioned above, including the
random environment setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
