
* 2007008
* Stability of solitons and long-term dynamics of fluids
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,05/13/2020
* Alexandru Ionescu,NJ,Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 324,866.00

The main goal of the project is to study solutions of several important partial
differential equations. These solutions describe physical phenomena, such as the
dynamics of fluids, the motion of water waves, and gravitation, which can be
observed in daily life. We aim to analyze these solutions rigorously and to
recover quantitative and qualitative information about their behavior as
mathematical theorems. The research project involves graduate students and
postdoctoral associates, and connects ideas and methods in partial differential
equations, numerical analysis, geometry, and harmonic analysis.

The PI will study the long term dynamics of solutions of several important
evolution equations, such as the Euler equations in 2 and 3 dimensions, water
wave models, and the Einstein field equations of General Relativity. Six
problems of interest are explicitly identified as part of the project. These
problems concern the global stability of shear flows and vortices for the 2D
Euler and the generalized SQG equations, the long term dynamics of water waves
in a large box in 2D and 3D, and the global stability of solutions of the
Einstein equations with matter.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
