
* 2007157
* Mathematical Analysis of Topics from Materials Science
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,07/22/2020
* Xiang Xu,VA,Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 141,000.00

This project is devoted to the mathematical study of two important classes of
contemporary materials that are used in a variety of technologies: liquid
crystal materials and block copolymers. While liquid crystal materials are quite
common and are used, for example, for liquid crystal displays, the block
copolymer materials are less familiar. They possess a remarkable capacity for
self-assembly into ordered structures. The goal of this project is to
investigate several mathematical models of these materials to better understand
their structure, defects, and behavior. The project will provide opportunities
for the research training of undergraduate and graduate students. This project
will develop analytical and numerical study of some nonlinear partial
differential equations (PDE) modeling liquid crystals and block copolymer
systems. The principal investigator will address (1) several analytic problems
in both static and dynamic configurations in the framework of Q-tensor order
parameters, that include defect configurations around a colloid particle, a
physical condition and its mathematical role in the hydrodynamic system, loss of
initial physicality in all non-co-rotational hydrodynamic system, a gradient
flow dynamics generated by a singular potential; (2) the asymptotic behavior and
trend to equilibrium of classical solutions of the Doi-Onsager equation that is
derived in molecular theory to model rigid rod-like polymer molecules; (3) the
global well-posedness and stable, efficient numeric schemes of a gradient flow
dynamics modeling the self-assembly of block copolymers during time evolution.
The main ingredients and techniques involved in the study include methods from
elliptic and parabolic PDE, stability analysis, gradient flow theory in Hilbert
and metric spaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
