
* 2007759
* Stability and Dynamics of Invasion Fronts in Spatially Extended Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2020,05/20/2020
* Matt Holzer,VA,George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2023
* USD 252,772.00

This project concerns the development of mathematical techniques to predict and
explain features of front propagation into unstable states with applications in
physics, biology and chemistry. Unstable states arise frequently in applied
problems as system parameters are changed or new species are introduced into the
problem. The subsequent dynamics are often dominated by the formation of moving
interfaces called invasion fronts that propagate into the unstable state at
fixed speed and select some secondary state in their wake. This proposal is
built around expanding knowledge of these processes with a specific goal of
elucidating mechanisms leading to the emergence of invasion fronts and then
leveraging this knowledge to make predictions in actual systems of interest. One
portion of this work will develop new mathematical approaches to study the
effect of localized forcing on the spreading speed of interfaces in partial
differential equation (PDE) models. The second portion will develop predictions
and general principles for the dynamics of instabilities spreading over complex
networks. Two complementary avenues of research are proposed. One area of
proposed work concerns stability of invasion fronts with a focus on
understanding the role of external forcing in the selection of the inter-facial
velocity and subsequent dynamics. Since invasion fronts propagate into unstable
states, stability analysis requires perturbations of these fronts to be
sufficiently localized. This proposal will study problems where the forcing
function is also localized, but not sufficiently localized to fit into the
stability framework of the homogeneous equation. Success in carrying out the
projects described will lead to new mathematical approaches to the study of
stability of traveling waves and will clarify and explain some novel phenomena
that will be of interest to researchers working in applied problems. A second
area of proposed work concerns invasion fronts where space is taken to be a
complex network with local dynamics occurring at each node with coupling between
nodes via a graph Laplacian. The goal here is to leverage knowledge of front
propagation in the PDE setting to make concrete predictions related to the
spread of instabilities over networks. Applications include the spread of global
epidemics and that of invasive species in discrete environments. Successful
completion of this work will provide researchers working in this area with new
tools to estimate arrival times, provide a rigorous theoretical framework by
which to understand these spreading phenomena and provide insight into the way
features of complex networks influence arrival times of invasions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
