
* 2007040
* NSF-BSF: Group Invariant Graph Laplacians: Theory and Computations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2020,06/28/2022
* Xiuyuan Cheng,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2024
* USD 209,114.00

Data analysis is one of the central tasks in science and engineering. In many
data analysis applications, the processed data enjoy a natural underlying
structure. An important family of structures is known in mathematics as group
structures. Intuitively, a group structure means that not only the observed
points are valid data points, but also all data points generated by applying
some operation to the observed points. Incorporating this structure into data
analysis algorithms has the potential to significantly improve their speed and
accuracy, which are fundamental challenges in today?s Big Data analysis. In
particular, the developed methods have the potential to replace traditional
approaches like data augmentation. Exploiting group structure in data analysis
has been largely overlooked, especially in the context of graph-based methods,
which are pivotal tools in data analysis due to their robustness to noise and
outliers. This NSF-BSF joint project will study group-invariant graph-based
methods, which embed the group structure of the data into the processing
algorithms analytically. The theoretical merit of the project includes a
rigorous analysis of group invariant methods, thus bridging mathematics,
statistics, and computations. The impact of the project lies in its
applicability to a wide range of applications in high dimensional data analysis.
Software developed during the project will be shared publicly. The basic
framework of the project and its applications will be made accessible to
graduate and undergraduate students, and are suitable as student projects for
students from various STEM backgrounds. The results will also provide fresh
pedagogical materials for developing courses at the intersection of mathematics,
computation and data science. Finally, this joint NSF-BSF project provides a
unique opportunity for enhancing collaboration between U.S. and the Israeli
research groups, and in particular, establishing connections between young
mathematicians from the US and Israel at an early stage of their careers.

The goal of the joint research project is to develop a family of G-invariant
graph Laplacian methods, namely, graph Laplacians that are constructed to
incorporate group invariance analytically without any data augmentation. Using
representation theory, harmonic analysis, numerical analysis, and statistics,
the research will develop the mathematical framework for such methods, pursue
the theoretical analysis of their performance, develop their associated
practical computational algorithms, and demonstrate the resulting methods on
several applications in image data analysis. The research agenda consists of
four integrated activities: (1) Construct the G-invariant graph Laplacian for
general compact groups; (2) Prove the convergence of G-invariant graph
Laplacians to the manifold Laplace operator; (3) Derive efficient computational
tools for expanding and processing functions using G-invariant graph Laplacians;
(4) Apply G-invariant graph Laplacians for data de-noising. The implementation
of these goals builds upon and significantly enhances the analytical and
computational techniques of graph Laplacian methods that have been developed in
the field of computational harmonic analysis for more than a decade. The
contribution of the project lies in developing a new paradigm for high-
dimensional manifold data learning, and fills the knowledge gap in the current
understanding of graph-based methods. Specifically, the new paradigm will
significantly extend the existing set of tools for high-dimensional data
analysis, both in mathematical theories and in practical algorithms, and is
potentially applicable in a range of applications including metric learning,
shape matching, and imaging processing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
