
* 2008441
* Novel Image Reconstruction Methods in the Frequency Domain
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2020,07/11/2020
* Shari Moskow,PA,Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2023
* USD 324,988.00

The PI will develop faster and more accurate mathematical algorithms for use in
biomedical imaging, remote sensing, and novel optical device design. These image
construction problems generally involve large and complex systems. The PI will
build on recent theoretical breakthroughs to construct reduced systems which
allow for more straightforward and efficient mapping of the data to the unknown
physical quantities. The novel usage of the reduced models will for the first
time allow for the generation of internal physical fields from exterior data
only, providing a bridge to a broader range of modalities and experimental
settings. Once the reduced model is generated from a small data set, the
interior fields can be found for an arbitrarily large data set or for data given
in other formats. The knowledge of interior fields greatly simplifies the
imaging problems, and for certain applications such as medical ablation, it is
the interior fields themselves that are of interest. Several students will be
trained in the course of this research, including two full time Phd students.
Undergraduate students will work for six months full time on this research
problem as their co-op training. The PI continues to have a clear commitment to
diversity in mathematics and will make every effort to involve women and/or
underrepresented minorities in the co-op experience.

The PI will generate new reconstruction methods and develop further theories
which are crucial in medical imaging, remote sensing and nondestructive testing.
The main goals are to (i) use reduced order models to generate interior
solutions from boundary data, (ii) use these boundary data generated interior
solutions to solve inverse problems for larger classes of data sets, (iii)
derive, analyze and apply a new inverse Born series adapted to nonlinearity, and
(iv) use boundary corrections and transmission eigenvalues to image periodic and
nearly periodic microstructures. A new way of using reduced order models (ROMs)
for inverse problems is introduced, that is, by embedding the ROM back into the
continuous problem and generating interior fields from boundary data only.
Highly accurate interior fields will be used to apply the ROM to large data sets
to yield a completely new, fully nonlinear inversion method with low
computational cost. Interior fields are of interest in their own right for
applications such as medical ablation, and they provide a bridge between
classical inverse problems and multi-physics hybrid methods. A crucial
orthogonalization step in the procedure will be justified rigorously. New
inverse scattering series will allow us to reconstruct nonlinear scatterers
without the use of optimization or forward solvers except for that of the
reference medium. We will analyze the series, show convergence estimates, and
fully understand the series behavior. For microstructured media, asymptotics of
the forward solution will enable us to capture fine scale features. Boundary
corrections will be used to image the media along with transmission eigenvalues.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
