
* 2008154
* Stability issues in some biomedical, financial, and geophysical inverse problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/15/2020,12/09/2022
* Victor Isakov,KS,Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 05/31/2023
* USD 255,214.00

This research project will develop efficient numerical methods to solve
important inverse problems in economics, geophysics, national security, and
medicine. Some specific examples include locating underground caves and tunnels
from gravimetric data, inclusion of different conductivity by electromagnetic
prospecting, underground seismic prospecting, and monitoring the volatility of
financial markets. One of the goals is to use minimal gravimetric,
electromagnetic, and financial data to develop cheap, fast, reliable, and safe
diagnostic and exploratory techniques. Another goal is to increase the
resolution when prospecting by (acoustic and electromagnetic) waves of higher
frequencies without restrictive traditional assumptions of convexity on location
of sensors. The PI will participate in the forthcoming Industrial Mathematical
Clinic at Wichita State University as an outreach to local industrial companies
and will continue to direct (female) graduate students to contribute to national
human resources for contemporary science and technology.

The PI intends to study the fundamental issue of stability in the design of
efficient numerical methods. Since prospecting by (almost) stationary fields
(electromagnetic or gravitational) is severely ill-posed, he plans to find how
many parameters of a source, a medium, or an obstacle can be identified in a
stable way and what is the minimal amount of the data needed. When prospecting
by stationary waves of higher frequencies, a goal is to achieve a better
stability without convexity conditions on the locations of unknown objects and
sensors and to use needed analytically a priori constraints as
penalty/regularizing terms to design effective numerical methods. A particular
goal is to improve the electrical impedance tomography by 1) finding what is the
best resolution at low frequencies and the optimal number and location of
sensors to get this resolution and 2) determining how this resolution improves
with higher frequency by using the complete Maxwell system and what are
limitations due to the attenuation. Another research plan is to consider more
complicated and realistic basket options and to design faster and more reliable
methods for finding volatility from the market data. To better understand and
properly use stability one needs a substantial modification of available methods
and new ideas. One of the challenges is to demonstrate the uniqueness and
Lipschitz stability of an inclusion in gravimetry or in the electrical impedance
tomography from a minimal boundary data. Another challenge is to show better
stability for acoustic or electromagnetic sources without standard geometrical
(convexity) assumptions. Finally, the PI expects to design a stable recovery of
time independent coefficients of general (anisotropic) hyperbolic second order
equations from the boundary data generated by many interior sources. Complex
variable theory, energy (Carleman) estimates, Fourier analysis, and potential
theory will be used as tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
