
* 2008021
* Lie Groupoids and Infinite-Dimensional Dynamical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2020,05/27/2022
* Anton Izosimov,AZ,University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 217,000.00

This project aims at developing new mathematical tools for studying the motion
of fluids. Having an adequate mathematical language for their description is
crucial for understanding such phenomena as formation of air turbulence in
meteorology, as well as large- and small-scale structures in liquids and
plasmas. Despite much effort, many aspects of fluid dynamics are still poorly
understood and a breakthrough in this field only seems possible if a variety of
different mathematical tools is used. One of the most promising directions is a
geometric approach to fluids. This approach is known to work well for fluids
confined to a fixed domain. The goal of the project is to extend the geometric
language to more general settings, with applications including formation of
waves, ocean currents, insight into vortex instabilities, and the study of
motion of underwater vehicles. The investigator will actively involve graduate
students in this project.

Modern geometric fluid dynamics originated in the 1960s when V. Arnold proved
that the Euler equation for an ideal fluid describes the geodesic flow of a
right-invariant metric on the group of volume-preserving diffeomorphisms of the
flow domain. This insight turned out to be indispensable for the study of
Hamiltonian properties and conservation laws in hydrodynamics, fluid
instabilities, topological properties of flows, as well as a powerful tool for
obtaining sharper existence and uniqueness results for Euler-type equations.
Furthermore, Arnold's group-theoretic description of incompressible fluids has
also been shown to be applicable in many other fluid-related settings, including
magnetohydrodynamics, compressible fluids, semi-geostrophic and the Korteweg-de
Vries equations. However, the scope of applicability of Arnold's approach is
limited to systems whose symmetries form a group. At the same time, there are
many problems in fluid dynamics, such as free boundary problems, fluid-structure
interactions, discontinuous fluid flows, as well as multiphase and stratified
fluids, whose symmetries should instead be regarded as a groupoid. The aim of
the project is to develop a paradigm of infinite-dimensional Lie groupoids in
the context of various fluid-dynamical problems, as well as to apply this
paradigm to approach a range of concrete questions that are of interest for
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
