
* 2009753
* NSF-BSF: Modern Techniques for Signal Reconstruction from Moments
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/15/2020,07/13/2020
* Amit Singer,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Modern scientific applications produce an immense number of measurements, each
contaminated by multiple sources of error. Notable examples include state-of-
the-art technologies for imaging of biomedical molecules - such as single-
particle reconstruction using cryo-electron microscopy, X-ray free-electron
lasers, and X-ray crystallography - that produce vital knowledge to the process
of drug design and expand our understanding of the mechanisms of life. The
proposed research will develop various computational and mathematical tools to
process and analyze massively large and complex datasets. In particular, the
devised algorithms will assist researchers in extracting and analyzing
information from data acquired by modern devices to exploit their full
potential. A specific focus is given to establishing a solid theoretical
framework to address the mathematical challenges arising from such datasets.
User-friendly software will be made available in public repositories for the use
of the scientific community.

The first part of the research studies applications of the method of moments, an
appealing computational technique to process and analyze massively large
datasets, to a variety of models that appear in scientific and engineering
fields. This part includes deriving information-theoretic limits and
establishing provable algorithms for models with intrinsic algebraic structures,
for example, group and convolution actions, and high noise levels. The second
part of the research advances numerical techniques to recover signals from their
moments, entailing solving systems of polynomial equations. The novelty of the
project lies in the development of new computational methods, equipped with
sound mathematical theory, to recover signals from their statistical moments;
the focus is on problems that involve massively large, highly corrupted
datasets. The study will provide a variety of noise-tolerant solutions for
prominent signal and image processing tasks, such as alignment, classification,
detection, super-resolution, and phase retrieval. Particular objectives include
modifying the method of moments to sustain massive and noisy datasets with
outliers, developing scalable computational schemes for recovering signals from
invariant and approximately invariant polynomials, numerical methods for solving
large systems of polynomial equations, deriving new information-theoretic bounds
for high-dimensional data in extreme noise levels, and analyzing non-convex
optimization algorithms. These proposed methods have the potential to become
leading techniques for solving some of today's leading scientific problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
