
* 2009607
* Toward criticality of the Navier-Stokes regularity problem
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,06/24/2021
* Zoran Grujic,VA,University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 319,118.00

The problem of whether a singularity can form in a flow described by the 3D
Navier-Stokes equations is one of the major open problems in mathematical
physics. Its significance stems from the fact that the Navier-Stokes equations
have been widely used in science and engineering to model 3D fluid flows, and a
rigorous validation of the model in the regime of the intense fluid activity
(e.g., the pockets of turbulence encountered by the airplanes), and in
particular ruling out the singularity formation, is the key to more reliable
modeling of turbulent flows. Since the inception of the Navier-Stokes regularity
problem in the 1930s, there has been a 'gap' between what is needed to prevent
the possible formation of a singularity and what could be rigorously obtained
from the equations. The aim of the research to be accomplished under the award
is to bridge this gap and arrive at 'criticality'; this will not completely rule
out the formation of singularities, but will drastically restrict the possible
scenarios at which it might occur. Given the omnipresence of the turbulent
phenomena, both in nature and in the engineered world, the impact of the
research will extend beyond the boundaries of the discipline. In the domain of
mentoring junior scientists, the award will support a graduate research
assistant.

The research to be carried out under the award builds on a very recent work by
the PI and L. Xu demonstrating--for the first time--asymptotically critical
nature of the Navier-Stokes regularity problem. The methodology is based on the
study of a suitably defined scale of sparseness of the super-level sets of the
positive and the negative parts of the components of the higher-order
derivatives of the velocity field, and the sparseness is utilized via the
harmonic measure majorization principle (the positive and the negative parts of
the components are subharmonic since any smooth flow is automatically analytic
in the spatial variables). The sparser the super-level sets are, the more
efficient the harmonic measure majorization principle is in generating the
'self-improving' bounds on the sup-norm. Within this framework, it was
demonstrated that the 'scaling gap' between the regularity class and the
corresponding a priori bound shrinks to zero as the order of the derivative goes
to infinity, a manifestation of the asymptotic criticality. The main goal of the
research to be performed is to arrive at stronger and/or more classical
manifestations of the criticality. There are two natural avenues to take, toward
criticality with respect to the strength of the diffusion and toward criticality
with respect to the strength of the nonlinearity. These are exactly the two main
projects, the former will take place in the setting of the 3D,super-critical,
hyper-dissipative Navier-Stokes equations, and the latter in the realm of the
geometric depletion of the nonlinearity via the local coherence of the vorticity
direction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
