
* 2009317
* Asymptotic Analysis and Fast Computation for Predictive Design of Inertial Microfluidic Devices
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,05/12/2020
* Marcus Roper,CA,University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 263,158.00

In inertial microfluidic devices, powerful pressure pumps push liquid samples,
such as blood, through micron-sized networks of channels. The flows within the
channels can be used to separate particles within the samples, such as the cells
in the blood, by their sizes or shapes, deliver them to testing areas regularly
spaced chains, or to move them selectively from one fluid to another. Although
the devices have found many applications in sample testing and handling, there
is a lack of quantitatively accurate models for how particles move in the flows
created within a device. Without models that can be solved fast enough to test
possible device geometries, predictive modeling has been little used for
prototyping or optimizing the design of devices. Indeed, there is even
disagreement about the nature and number of forces that particles experience. In
this project, the PI will develop approximation methods that enable fast
solutions of the flow fields around devices. The goal of this work is to reveal
the types of forces that particles such as cells, experience within inertial
microfluidic devices, and to create and share robust simulation tools that can
be used by device-building groups on laptop computers. The PI will integrate
multiple educational and outreach elements, including mentoring of undergraduate
researchers and future high school math teachers to do frontier level research.
In addition, the PI will create high school math lesson plans and teaching
materials to be used by teachers across California, and provide direct outreach
to K-12 students through a math circle, and through the creation of videos
showcasing how applied math can be used to design and improve technologies.

Inertial microfluidic devices are designed to exploit finite Reynolds number
forces that cause particles to migrate across fluid streamlines, self-organize
into lattices, and get filtered into eddies. The forces arise from nonlinearity
within the Navier-Stokes equations, and are not captured by the fast, linear
solvers that are used for predictive design of regular microfluidic devices. The
PI will develop and exploit asymptotic tools for structure of the Navier-Stokes
equations that describe fluid flow and particle movements. The PI will also
dissect the asymptotic structure of the equations, in the limits of small and
order unity particle Reynolds numbers. In addition, the PI will expose the
dominant balances within the equations, and the matching conditions between
different dominant balance regions, focusing on the singular terms that shape
flows away from the particles. Analysis of dominant balances will enable a more
complete picture of the physical origin of the forces upon particles. Fusing
asymptotic and numerical methods will be used to develop low-complexity
representations, akin to the immersed boundary method, in which the particles
are modeled by a small number of geometry-capturing singularities. The models
will be tested experimentally, in collaboration with the group of Dino DiCarlo
at UCLA. Finally, the PI will use the hybrid numerical methods to predict how
particle size, shape, and background flow control particle trajectories. The
models will be used to create low complexity and low computational-cost
numerical simulations, packaged as a software tool called inFocus that can be
used directly by device designers to test device geometries and predict
function.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
