
* 2009980
* Integrable PDEs beyond standard assumptions on initial data
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,05/12/2021
* Alexei Rybkin,AK,University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 302,950.00

This project is devoted to the study of some fundamental problems of soliton
theory. A soliton is a special type of wave that shows a remarkable stability
when traveling through various media. Examples include such well-known phenomena
as tsunami waves and pulses in optical fibers. The first observation and
scientific description of a soliton was given by Scott Russell in 1834. The
equation describing what Russel had observed was derived in 1895 by Korteweg and
de Vries but it was not until 1967 when this equation, now called Korteweg-de
Vries (KdV), was solved in closed form by Gardner, Greene, Kruskal, and Miura.
Their method is regarded as a major achievement of the 20th century science. It
gave rise to soliton theory, applicable to broad classes of physically important
evolution partial differential equations, ranging from hydrodynamics of water
waves (rogue waves in the ocean) and nonlinear optics (propagation of
information in optical fibers) to astrophysics, atmospheric sciences, and
elementary particle theory. This project will develop novel approaches to extend
the theory to the physically and practically important cases of slowly decaying
waves, which are still beyond the reach of the current methods. The project will
have a very large educational component. The investigator is committed to
continuing his research experience for undergraduates program on nonlinear wave
phenomena. This program is designed to identify and mentor young scholars in the
field of applied mathematics. It is his intent to attract a diverse (gender,
ethnicity, disability) group of talented undergraduates into the program to
broaden the participation of underrepresented in the mathematical sciences
groups.

Integrable systems have been primarily studied in the connection with
propagation of waves initiated from rapidly decaying or periodic initial data.
In the KdV context, the corresponding solutions have a relatively simple and
well understood wave structure of running solitons accompanied by radiation of
decaying waves, or periodic wave-trains and their modulations. However, any
deviation from such data meets principal difficulties. The main thrust will be
put on understanding of the effect of slower decay (or even no decay) at spatial
plus infinity. Physical motivations include modeling rogue waves, nonlinear wave
propagation in (pseudo) periodic media with slowly decaying amplitude,
integrable turbulence, and propagation of coherent structures in noisy media.
From the mathematical viewpoint, it is an uncharted territory. Slower decay at
plus infinity causes serious complications at every step of the IST. The main
effort will be put on understanding how to make the method of the Riemann-
Hilbert problem, a modern powerful machinery of asymptotic analysis, work far
outside of the realm of classical problems. To this end, developing
direct/inverse scattering theory for long-range potentials will be required. The
investigator expects to find new types of solutions with far-reaching practical
applications, which include, but not limited to, the understanding of rogue
waves, soliton propagation on different backgrounds, and the study of
propagation of more general coherent structures in noisy media appearing in such
diverse disciplines as hydrodynamics, telecommunication, atmospheric sciences,
nonlinear optics, plasma, astrophysics, and other areas where integrable systems
naturally arise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
