
* 2009563
* Collaborative Research: Inverse Cascade Pathways in Turbulent Convection - The Impact of Spatial Anisotropy
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/27/2020
* Edgar Knobloch,CA,University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 195,000.00

The impact of rotation and thermal driving on stellar and planetary bodies is
readily visible in far-field optical observations. Such observations reveal the
presence of differentially rotating fluid atmospheres embedded with features in
the form of large-scale eddies and jets that greatly influence the climate of
the celestial body. Understanding the formation, evolution and global momentum
and energy balances of these features remains a challenging problem. Rotating
Rayleigh-Benard convection, i.e., a rotating layer of fluid heated from below,
represents a canonical paradigm for advancing our knowledge and is the subject
of this project. The ultimate aim of the project is to determine unambiguously
whether the large scale vortices (LSVs) observed in rapidly rotating Rayleigh-
Benard convection are a consequence of the proximity of the flow to shallow,
approximately two-dimensional turbulence or due to the ability of the LSVs to
shape the correlations among the small scale three-dimensional fluctuations that
appear to drive its formation. This determination appears to be fundamental to
understanding the propensity for shallow layer geophysical and astrophysical
flows to produce LSVs and jets and will open new directions for studying these
natural flows. Broader impacts of the project include the involvement of
graduate students and post-doctoral scholars in the research.

Large scale structures, including vortices and jets, are ubiquitous in
geophysical flows and play a fundamental role in energy transport in the
interiors and the atmospheres of minor planets, gas giants and stars. This
project is dedicated to providing a detailed understanding of the basic
mechanisms behind the spontaneous formation of large-scale structures from small
scale turbulent fluctuations. The ultimate aim of the project is to determine
unambiguously whether the large scale vortices (LSVs) observed in rapidly
rotating Rayleigh-Benard convection are a consequence of the proximity of the
flow to 2D turbulence or due to the ability of the LSVs to shape the
correlations among the small scale fluctuations that appear to drive its
formation. This determination appears to be fundamental to understanding the
propensity for shallow layer geophysical and astrophysical flows to produce LSVs
and jets and will open new directions for studying these natural flows. A
comprehensive examination of the split (forward and inverse) energy cascade that
appears characteristic of these flows is thus undertaken. This is accomplished
by utilizing (i) novel reduced asymptotic models that extrapolate to extreme
parameter settings, (ii) new reformulations of the Navier-Stokes fluid equations
that extend the computational capabilities of direct numerical simulations, and
(iii) theoretical analysis that dissects the amplitude-phase relationships
between the teleconnected large-scale structures and small-scale turbulence. The
new asymptotic modeling and rescaling approaches to the fluid equations provide
a unique capability of achieving physically realistic scale separation between
large- and small-scale fluid motions. Importantly, the fundamental mechanisms of
energy transport leading to the spontaneous formation of large-scale vortices
and jets constitutes a complex problem that reaches across disciplines in the
mathematical and physical sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
