
* 2009923
* Analysis and Simulation of Extremes and Rare Events in Complex Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2020,07/11/2020
* Matthew Nicol,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 368,669.00

It is vital to be able to accurately predict the probability of rare and extreme
events, such as heatwaves and hurricanes, in particular from climate models and
climate data. Better techniques to estimate the probability of rare events and
extremes are of obvious benefit to society, and will lead to better planning for
floods, heatwaves, and other exigencies. Prediction from computer simulations or
from real world data is an extremely challenging task. Brute force simulations
by computer are often not feasible; the number of computer simulations it
requires to obtain accurate estimates of the probability and form of rare events
is too high for this to be a useful method in practice. In addition to this, we
typically lack sufficient data to make confident predictions about rare events
and extremes from climate records. Two strands of research will be developed.
First, to develop a rigorous understanding of a technique from probability
called importance sampling in simple mathematical models with the aim to have a
firm foundation for their implementation in more realistic and complicated
climate models. Importance sampling in a sense makes rare events less rare and
allows reliable estimates of rare events in situations where brute force
simulations are not feasible. Second, a statistical technique called extreme
value theory will be developed in order to allow better estimates of the
probabilities of the duration of extremes, such as heatwaves, from climate
models and data.

The Principal Investigators will develop a technique from importance sampling
called genealogical particle analysis to speed up sampling by making rare events
more common. The steps enabling the speedup may be tracked and accounted for to
obtain more accurate estimates of rare events with less computational effort.
Extreme value theory for physical observables such as temperature, wind velocity
and energy for climate models will be developed and tested on simple climate
models and extended to determine the probability of the duration of extremes,
such as heatwaves, from time series data. Clustering algorithms based on
information theory will be developed to sort data from spatially distinct sites
to amplify the data available to better predict, for example, heatwaves and cold
spells. The investigation will be in part theoretical, numerical and data
analytic. Progress in this area would significantly improve our conceptual
understanding of rare events and extremes in complex systems such as the climate
and our ability to predict their behavior. The investigators past work on
extreme value theory has been recognized and cited by meteorologists; it has
detailed how extreme value theory should be applied to deterministic models. The
current research will be at the interface of applications and of general
interest to scientists modeling complex systems. In addition, the project will
provide excellent training in probabilistic techniques and data analysis for the
graduate students involved in the research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
