
* 2009644
* Collaborative Research: Designs and Theory for Event-Triggered Control with Marine Robotic Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/27/2020
* Zhong-Ping Jiang,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 60,000.00

This project will devise mathematical methods to control the behavior of
dynamical systems that arise in the field of marine robotics and other
engineering applications. The methods will entail event-triggered feedback
control, whereby the systems use feedback about their states and their
surroundings, help decide future optimizing courses of action, and where events
like potential violations of constraints are used to determine when to change
the controls. The project will seek finite-time control methods, which enable
control objectives such as tracking and station keeping to be realized by
prescribed finite-time deadlines. Using applied mathematics to control
ecological robotic systems will promote scientific progress, by leading to more
effective ways to understand the effects of pollutions, oil spills, or other
environmental stresses in complex, dynamic, and unstructured marine
environments. The work will be collaborative with two Ph.D. students whose
research at the interface of engineering and mathematics will help prepare them
for a wide variety of potential careers. The investigators will also deliver
presentations on elementary aspects of the project to grade school students in
Louisiana or New York. This outreach can help inspire a diverse, qualified cadre
of students to consider pursuing careers in engineering or mathematics. The
project's applied part will focus on algorithmic development and marine robots.
Additionally, this research will have the potential for applications in other
settings with event-triggered controls, safety or timing constraints, and
uncertainties, such as renewable energy networks or intelligent transportation
systems.

The project will help address significant challenges in control theory for
nonlinear control systems with communication or state constraints or
optimization requirements, using three strategies. The first will design event-
or self-triggered feedback controls for systems with time deadlines, whose
triggers are computed from output measurements, and which determine when to
recompute the control to avoid undesirable operating modes, with the goal of
ensuring finite time convergence. This will help overcome the obstacles to using
standard feedback controls, which require the user to continuously or frequently
recompute control values without optimizing cost criteria or meeting time
deadlines, and which therefore are less suitable in engineering applications.
This will build on the nonlead investigator's prior work in event-triggered
nonlinear control theory that developed several constructive design tools for
various classes of nonlinear systems. The second will develop robust forward
invariance methods under event- or self-triggered controls, which help predict
and quantify the degree of uncertainty that control systems can tolerate without
violating tolerance and safety bounds. This will build on the lead
investigator's prior work that computed bounds on allowable uncertainties in
marine robotic curve tracking. The third involves finite time learning-based
adaptive dynamic programming that approximates optimal policies, to help
overcome the curse of dimensionality that arises in traditional dynamic
programming. This will build on the nonlead investigator's prior work in
adaptive dynamic programming that proposed computational algorithms to learn
suboptimal controllers from input-state or input-output data. The work will
include applications to, and experiments with, underwater marine robots, where
event-triggering will cope with intermittent communication and constrained power
resources. Real physical marine robotic platforms will be used to explore
numerical aspects and to evaluate the mathematical algorithms.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
