
* 2009859
* Determining Degrees of Freedom in Nonlinear Complex Systems: Deterministic and Stochastic Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/02/2022
* Cecilia Mondaini,PA,Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 206,895.00

Almost every aspect of our physical world is described through a nonlinear
complex system, from the functioning of our brains to climatic changes. In order
to extract concrete information from such systems, suitable mathematical models
must be designed so as to capture the most relevant cross-scale interactions and
degrees of freedom. In this project the PI will investigate the efficiency of
methods for exploring complex system models under two main perspectives. First,
through techniques of statistical inference of physical quantities based on
observational data. Several applications fit within this scope, for example
determining the background fluid velocity field from measurements of the
concentration of a diluted passive scalar, such as dye. A second application is
the analysis of the long-time behavior of computable regularizations of certain
hydrodynamics models. More specifically, geophysical models describing the
motion of fluids over a rough surface and used to represent large-scale
processes in the atmosphere and ocean. A rigorous analysis of such fundamental
questions encompasses a wide range of mathematical tools. As such, the
techniques built here may allow for the development of efficient numerical
schemes in numerous applications, as well as the advancement of the associated
mathematical theory. In addition, this project presents an educational component
by including support for the mentoring of one graduate student, as well as
undergraduate research co-op support for one undergraduate student.

A rigorous and complete description of complex systems requires an analysis at
an infinite-dimensional level. In this project the PI will this infinite-
dimensional approach to analyze the efficiency of Markov Chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) algorithms, as used in the Bayesian approach to inverse problems. Of
particular importance are MCMC algorithms that are well-defined in infinite
dimensions, a property that allows corresponding finite-dimensional
approximations to beat the curse of dimensionality. This project will tackle
several open questions in this field, such as the derivation of mixing rates for
some infinite-dimensional MCMC methods and their corresponding finite-
dimensional approximations. The techniques to be used here rely crucially on
Foias-Prodi type estimates and the existence of a finite number of determining
degrees of freedom for certain dissipative evolution equations. Furthermore,
this project includes the study of the long-time behavior of certain
hydrodynamic models, such as the weakly damped 2D Euler equations subject to a
mild regularization. In particular, this will first be addressed through the
concept of determining forms, structures encoding the long-time dynamics of the
system based on knowledge on the trajectories of only a finite number of degrees
of freedom. Later, the system will be analyzed under the action of a stochastic
forcing term. Here, an interesting question consists in establishing the
convergence of invariant measures as the regularization parameter vanishes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
