
* 2009286
* Interfaces and Free Boundaries in Heterogeneous Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,07/03/2022
* William Feldman,UT,University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 163,688.00

This project aims to develop mathematical tools to study the large-scale
features of physical systems with small scale heterogeneities. The general goal
is the derivation of simpler "homogenized" macroscopic laws from complicated
microscopic structures. The focus is on systems involving phase interfaces:
motion of fluid-fluid interfaces in porous media, flame propagation in turbulent
flow, and, especially, liquid droplet contact lines on rough surfaces. Although
these systems are widely different, their mathematical models have important
common features. This project seeks to build a unified set of ideas to study
these problems. The theoretical derivation of macroscopic homogenized laws
allows for effective numerical simulations, which have predictive capacity for
the associated physical systems. Deeper understanding of the above-mentioned
systems has potential for broader societal benefits through connections with
engineering applications, for example, design of water repellant surfaces and
liquid droplet-based printing. The project contains potential research
opportunities for doctoral students, and, in addition to research activities,
the principal investigator will teach and mentor undergraduate and graduate
students.

In more precise terms the project is concerned with several partial differential
equation (PDE) models of propagating and stationary fronts in heterogeneous
media. The primary goals are of a rigorous analytical nature, but these aims are
deeply motivated by physical applications. In broad terms, the project studies
(i) singular and anisotropic features which can arise at large scales in
periodic media and (ii) problems in random media where novel quantitative
estimates need to be developed to control the dependence of PDE solutions on the
variations in the underlying medium. The first part focuses on a set of model
free-boundary problems (FBP) which arise in the study of capillary droplets on
patterned surfaces and in the study of certain discrete particle systems.
Homogenization of the microscopic structure leads to a new class of FBP. The
main objective of this part of the project is to establish rigorously this
scaling/homogenization limit and study the well-posedness properties of the
limiting FBP. The second part focuses on several physically motivated examples
of geometric Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) equations which lack the classical coercivity
assumption of homogenization theory. The expectation is that coercivity is
recovered at large scales through the averaging effect of the random medium, but
this has only been rigorously established in a limited number of cases. The
objective of this part of the project is to develop new techniques to study
weakly coercive HJ equations; in physical terms this often corresponds to
studying interface propagation near a de-pinning transition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
