
* 2009233
* Large Deviations and Metastability in Dynamical Networks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,05/06/2020
* Georgi Medvedev,PA,Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 226,397.00

We live in the age of networks. Our everyday lives depend on robust and
predictable performance of different technological networks around us (such as
power grids and communication networks). Human physiology relies on coordinated
activity of hundreds of cellular networks (for example, networks of neural cells
in the brain, cells in the heart and pancreas, to name a few). The patterns of
connections in real world networks can be complex and exhibit nontrivial
statistical properties. Understanding how the structural organization of a
network affects its dynamics is the principal challenge in the theory of
interacting dynamical systems that sets it apart from the theories for classical
spatially extended dynamical systems, such as partial differential equations or
lattice dynamical systems. The Principal Investigator (PI) seeks to develop a
systematic mathematical approach to the analysis of dynamical networks. Through
the development of new mathematical techniques and analyzing representative
mathematical models, the PI aims to elucidate the relation between the structure
and dynamics in complex networks. The PI is committed to teaching and training
students. A six-month long Research Co-op for two undergraduate students will be
organized in the course of this research. The PI will continue to organize
minisymposia on dynamical networks at conferences on differential equations and
dynamical systems.

This research advances the theory for interacting dynamical systems through the
development of new theoretical results and analyzing selected models. The PI and
colleagues identify new dynamical phenomena and study them using the combination
of tools from graph theory, probability, and analysis. The emphasis will be on
the effects of random spatial organization and noise on dynamics of large
networks. The following problems are addressed: the Large Deviation Principle
for interacting dynamical systems on random graphs, metastability in the
continuum Kuramoto model forced by noise, and synchronization and pattern
formation in the Kuramoto model with inertia. The Kuramoto model of coupled
phase oscillators plays a central role in the theory of synchronization with
many important applications in science and technology. In particular, the
analysis of synchronization and stability of clusters developed in this research
elucidates the dynamics emerging in high-voltage power grids.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
