
* 2009689
* Advanced Models and Algorithms for Large-Scale High-Dimensional Probabilistic Graph Structure Learning
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,05/23/2022
* Li Wang,TX,University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2023
* USD 402,323.00

With the rapid development of science and technology, vast amount of data has
been and is being collected in nearly all fields of science and engineering for
various practical purposes, such as medical data for advancing human knowledge
in diseases and treatments to save lives, image data from the solar system and
beyond for human's next frontier in space, and social network data for better
understanding the society and economic developments. But to make these aims
realities, data must be soundly analyzed to uncover what matters. While data
analysis has been around for centuries, today's data is much bigger in amount
and dimension and more complex, presenting notorious challenges to modern data
analysis. Often real world data is noisy and conceals inherent hidden structures
that can be concisely represented by graphs that use nodes for objects/events
and edges for relations between nodes. Existing approaches rely on pre- and
heuristically constructible graphs show their inability in handling nowadays
complicated data. This project aims to change the status quo by developing novel
mathematical models and efficient computational tools for scientists, engineers,
and medical professionals who can use the models and tools to unearth the hidden
structures to achieve scientific discoveries previously considered impossible.
The principle investigators will integrate their research activities of this
project with teaching and education, and will train undergraduate and graduate
students in computational mathematics, data science, and interdisciplinary
studies.

The proposed research will result in advanced models and efficient algorithms
for graph-based machine learning. Two major distinctions from existing graph-
based learning methods are (1) new models have a built-in probabilistic
component that can robustly deal with high noisy data, and (2) a dynamic graph
structure learning component that can uncover hidden graph structures concealed
in real world data and yet not obvious enough to be pre- or heuristically
constructed. The models have much wider applicability than existing graph-based
learning methods because graph structure is now a variable that will be
optimized over so as to yield an optimal hidden graph structure for a given data
set, and the algorithms not only are capable of producing robust embeddings with
simultaneously learned hidden graph structures but also will be made practical
for big data through landmark and low-rank matrix approximation strategies. The
proposed research will have potentially high impacts scientifically in areas
where analyzing high-dimensional datasets plays critically important roles, such
as data visualization, discovering structural patterns in computational biology,
brain networks and other areas. The project will open up a new research
direction in statistical machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
