
* 2010051
* New Directions in Mesh-Free Approximation with Localizable Kernels
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2020,07/27/2020
* Thomas Hangelbroek,HI,University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2023
* USD 142,465.00

Kernels and radial basis functions are valuable mathematical tools that are
commonly used to treat large and challenging computational problems. They enjoy
widespread use in a variety of branches of science and engineering, like
computational chemistry, machine learning, computer graphics, and geosciences,
where researchers wish to approximate, model, or extract information from
geometrically complicated data sets. This project is devoted to improving the
stability and speed of algorithms which use kernels, to apply these algorithms
to a number of important scientific problems, and to dramatically extend the
approximation power of kernels beyond the current state of the art by developing
a multi-scale, anisotropic theory of kernel approximation. Results will benefit
those scientific fields that use kernels as a computational tool. Throughout
this project, the investigator will continue his own research into these
problems, while mentoring graduate students by involving them in theoretical and
computational aspects.

This project involves exploiting local structures within underlying kernel
spaces to study linear and non-linear kernel approximation with non-uniform
geometry and multi-scale, anisotropic kernels. One aspect of this project treats
kernels of finite smoothness for which there exist highly localized Riesz bases.
Such bases confer a number of well-understood analytic benefits, but their true
promise is in improving kernel based algorithms; the investigator will employ
these local structures to stabilize and speed up computation, and to develop
novel mesh-free numerical methods for scattered data and partial differential
equations. Another aspect involves Gaussians and other infinitely smooth kernels
having extreme localization in both space and frequency. The investigator will
study and develop nonlinear approximation methods that use multi-scale,
anisotropic operations to treat functions which are sparse in a variety of
representation systems, employing techniques from harmonic analysis and
statistics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
