
* 2010046
* Novel Approaches to Wave Propagation in Random Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2020,07/22/2020
* Knut Solna,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2023
* USD 238,618.00

This project addresses mathematical challenges associated with imaging and
sensing in complicated environments. Remote sensing data can be used for
environmental monitoring of atmospheric pollution, for evaluation of health of
forests and crops, for detecting fine details on the earth's surface, and for
tracking of satellites and other flying objects. As ever more, finer-resolution
data becomes available, a better understanding of how these are affected by
clutter in the environment is important. Such understanding is also needed in
the context of designing schemes for imaging and communication through turbulent
media, of the type found for instance in the turbulent (cluttered) atmosphere,
as well as in the context of biomedical imaging. Further developments of such
techniques require a deep understanding of how the probing wave field is
affected by the local medium or tissue fabric, the clutter. The project also
involves techniques for better understanding and modeling of financial and
economic time series, which is useful for monitoring and stabilization of
markets. Important questions relate then to how one can design schemes for early
detection of when the fabric, the local clutter statistics, of the market is
changing and we are entering a new market regime. Similar challenges relate to
analysis of internet traffic, such as detecting changes to normal traffic flow
caused by an intruder. The project aims to develop fundamental mathematical
frameworks that allow one to deal with such important challenges, moreover, to
use modern tools associated with machine learning in the detection of fabric
changes. Graduate students will be trained through involvement in the research.

The challenge of a rigorous characterization of laser beams propagating through
multiscale media and interfaces is of fundamental importance both from the
physical and mathematical perspectives. This project studies new approaches that
allow one to model wave propagation in complicated non-classic media,
particularly through so called non-Kolmogorov turbulence. Such modeling is
becoming increasingly important in the context of propagation through the
atmosphere and furthermore in biomedical imaging. The analysis will involve
asymptotic analysis of statistical moments of fields governed by partial
differential equations with random coefficients and exploit scale separations in
the system. Novel imaging techniques increasingly make use of wave spectral
information, or information in the covariance structure for the polarization
modes of the wave field itself or its intensity, that is, speckle correlations.
To evaluate such imaging techniques based on wave spectral information, one
needs information about higher-order moments to assess image stability, or noise
level, and to optimize the schemes. A main objective of the project is to
further the theory that describes this statistical structure and, moreover, to
use it in the context of classic and deep learning imaging modalities.
Specifically, novel approaches for modeling wave propagation in multiscale and
complex media will be used in the design of imaging approaches that can detect
changes in the local tissue fabric in the context of biomedical imaging. The
investigator will also study modeling and estimation in the context of complex
economic time series with a multi-fractal character, with applications to
detection of market regime changes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
