
* 2038039
* RTG: Mathematics of Information and Data with Applications to Science
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, WORKFORCE IN THE MATHEMAT SCI
* 09/01/2021,05/20/2021
* Bjorn Sandstede,RI,Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,494,020.00

The big-data revolution has transformed many areas of engineering, industry,
mathematics, and science. For instance, data generated through genome-wide
association studies, observations from telescopes, and computational simulations
on petaflop computers provide tremendous opportunities to better understand the
world around us. These massive datasets also pose many challenges, and there has
been an explosion of research in recent years about how to manipulate, store,
and extract meaningful information from ever-larger amounts of data.
Mathematical analysis, algorithms, and insights have been and will continue to
be a crucial component of this research effort. This RTG project will focus on
the mathematical foundations and applications of data science and will catalyze
research collaborations that combine different mathematical perspectives to
address emerging challenges and opportunities. The mathematical challenges of
data science also present a unique and transformative opportunity to develop
more systematic and integrated training for the next generation; the project
will broaden and enhance the scope and quality of the educational and research
training provided to graduate students and postdoctoral fellows and will involve
more undergraduate students, particularly students from historically
underrepresented groups, in courses and research experiences in applied
mathematics, increasing the workforce trained in data science.

The project focuses on research and training in the mathematical foundations of
data science and its applications. The research projects have strong
interdisciplinary flavor, combining fundamental stochastic, statistical,
combinatorial, dynamical, and computational aspects with concrete applications.
Projects will involve collaborations with domain scientists from other
disciplines, including astrophysics, biology, engineering, and neuroscience.
Topics will include applying machine learning and Bayesian statistics tools to
deriving, analyzing, and simulating partial differential equations; designing
optimal closed-loop experiments using statistical inference; advancing
techniques in discrete optimization; developing combinatorial models in
neuroscience; understanding random projections of high-dimensional measures; and
constructing dimension reduction techniques that preserve relevant structure of
large data sets. The educational activities focus on vertically integrated
training of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows.
Training activities include a first-year seminar focused on the interface of
data and social justice, enhanced undergraduate and graduate curricula, summer
research experiences for undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows, and working groups for advanced graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows. The broader impacts include the recruitment, retention, and training of
a diverse cohort of applied mathematicians trained in data science. In addition,
the research planned in genome-wide association studies, design of closed-loop
neuroscience experiments, single-cell data alignment, image restoration,
simulation of Hubble data, self-assembly, inference of dynamical brain data, and
data compression and reduction aims to have impact in applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
