
* 2042144
* Collaborative Research: Analysis and Computation of Dynamics of Elastic Structures in Stokes Flow
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2020,08/08/2020
* Yoichiro Mori,PA,University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,043.00

Problems in which elastic structures interact with a surrounding fluid can be
found throughout the natural world and in engineering. Such fluid structure
interaction (FSI) problems include the flying of birds, the swimming of fish,
and blood flow through the heart and blood vessels. A particularly important
class of FSI problems are those at small spatial scales. The biophysics of cell
biological processes is a very important example of this. In such FSI problems,
the fluid can be treated as a very viscous fluid (Stokes fluid). This project
will study FSI problems in a Stokes fluid. The mathematical equations describing
FSI problems are generally difficult to study mathematically, but the relative
simplicity of the equations of Stokes fluids makes possible a detailed
mathematical study of this class of FSI problems. The research program is
divided into two parts. In the first, we study the dynamics of membranes in a
Stokes fluid. Such models are often used to describe the dynamics of the cell
membrane. In the second, we study the dynamics of filaments in Stokes flow. Such
models are often used to describe the dynamics of flagella of microorganisms and
sperm. A detailed mathematical study of such FSI problems will lead to a better
understanding of FSI problems in general and also to the development of
efficient computational algorithms in the simulation of such problems. This
award will also provide support for the involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students in the research.

Fluid structure interaction (FSI) problems in which an elastic structure
interacts with the surrounding fluid abound in science and engineering and are
studied intensively by computational methods by many authors. Despite their
importance, the governing partial differential equations and the numerical
methods for such problems are not well-understood from an analytical standpoint.
In this research, we focus on a set of canonical FSI problems in which the
elastic structures interact with a fluid obeying the Stokes equations. The
project consists of two parts. In the first, we will study the problem of co-
dimension one elastic interfaces immersed in Stokes flow. Building upon previous
work by Mori and collaborators on the well-posedness of the 1D elastic
structure/2D Stokes flow problem (Peskin problem), we shall extend the well-
posedness theory to more general and related problems including the problem of a
2D elastic surface in 3D Stokes flow. We shall also develop a convergence theory
for boundary integral methods for such problems and initiate a study to extend
these results to the convergence analysis of fluid-grid based methods. The
second part concerns slender body theory, which deals with the dynamics of thin
filaments in 3D Stokes flow. We have recently succeeded in providing the first
mathematical justification of slender body approximation, which we shall
leverage to further our analysis and develop new computational methods for
slender body computation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
