
* 2045027
* CAREER: Mean Field Games with Economics Applications: New Techniques in Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2021,07/03/2022
* Philip Graber,TX,Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 152,231.00

Mean field games are mathematical models of large-scale interactions between
rational agents. They can be used to explain complex phenomena in the economy,
such as business cycles and inequality, but we do not fully understand the
mathematical theory behind them. The project will develop new mathematical
techniques in the field of differential equations to determine the theoretical
properties of mean field games that arise in economics. This research will
contribute to a rational discussion of economics, and by extension public
policy, by determining which mathematical models are viable and how their
solutions behave. Moreover, the research is integrated with an interdisciplinary
education and outreach plan, engaging the public by showing the connection
between mathematics and social dynamics. The project will also develop courses
and seminars that use tested practices to integrate mathematics instruction with
the social sciences, with the cooperation of instructors in economics and
political science. Both research and education aspects of the project will
provide training to students at graduate and undergraduate levels, thus
contributing to the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce.

Mean field game theory provides useful mathematical models in economics using
coupled systems of partial differential equations, but their analysis is
rendered difficult by the presence of nonlocal and stochastic interactions. This
project will develop new techniques for partial differential equations to
determine whether these models are well-posed. The first objective is to prove
new results for forward-backward coupled systems of nonlinear, integro-
differential equations that describe macroeconomic phenomena. The second
objective is to prove new results for infinite dimensional equations that model
economic shocks. To achieve these objectives, the principal investigator will
develop new analytical techniques based on recent advances in nonlocal
equations, forward-backward systems, and the Master Equation for mean field
games.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
