
* 2103026
* Dynamics, Integrability, and Control of Mechanical and Physical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,06/04/2021
* Anthony Bloch,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,997.00

The project focuses on mechanical systems and control and has many applications
in industry, such as in the control of robotic systems and design of vehicles
and other complex mechanical systems, the design and control of quantum systems
used in quantum computing, and the analysis of coupled biological systems such
as interacting cells. The investigator will collaborate with engineers and
physicists at University of Michigan. Some of the research focuses on systems
with motion constraints which includes cars and robots with wheels, while other
parts focus on systems with impacts which includes robots with legs and the
study of legged locomotion. There are also applications to machine learning in
robotics particularly with respect to vision. In the quantum realm the
investigator will study the problem of steering one quantum state to another
which is key in quantum computing. In the biological regime the investigator
intends to study the control of cell type, which is key, for example, to stem
cell research. The program has a strong educational impact and ideas from it
will be used in teaching various subjects, including dynamical systems,
mechanics, robotics and control. Parts of the proposed activity are appropriate
for PhD projects and undergraduate projects.

The present project is a continuation of the investigator's study of the
geometry, dynamics and control of mechanical systems including Hamiltonian and
Lagrangian systems, integrable systems, nonholonomic systems, and gradient
flows. The investigator will study the dynamics of various mechanical systems
including integrable Hamiltonian systems in finite- and infinite-dimensions,
coupled Hamiltonian and gradient systems with applications to certain problems
in artificial intelligence, systems with impacts and nonholonomic systems,
optimal control equations on manifolds in both the smooth and discrete setting,
and the control and dynamics of quantum systems and certain biological systems.
He will analyze the geometry of integrable systems in various new contexts
including systems arising from certain optimal control problems including flows
on Stiefel manifolds, extensions of the Toda lattice flow and rigid body flows.
He will also study related gradient flows which have applications to certain
problems in computer vision and artificial intelligence. In addition, he will
study Hamiltonian systems with added mechanical dissipation. Further work
concerns the control and optimal control of quantum systems with Lindblad
dissipation which model open quantum systems and which have application to
problems in quantum computing. He will also study systems with impacts (hybrid
dynamical systems) including application to nonholonomic systems with impacts.
The theory of nonholonomic dynamics is the study of mechanical systems subject
to constraints imposed on velocities. Such constraints often occur in robotic
systems. In addition, he will consider the existence of periodic behavior in
various systems including systems with impacts and certain biological systems
that arise in synthetic biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
