
* 2105816
* Self-Organization, Stability, and Defects in Pattern-Forming Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2021
* Paul Carter,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 237,885.00

Self-organization is the process by which a system develops patterns or regular
structure in the absence of external guidance. This phenomenon of pattern
formation occurs in many natural and physical systems, for example the
organization of vegetation into patches in semiarid ecosystems, stripes and
spots which appear on animal coats, or the rippling of stretched thin films.
This project will advance the theory of patterns through the analysis of model
partial differential equations (PDEs) describing patterns in applications. A
particular focus will be the stability of patterns, or their resilience to
perturbations or environmental changes, as well as the formation and control of
defects, or imperfections, in pattern forming systems. In terms of application
areas, this project will contribute to our understanding of vegetation patterns
and the phenomenon of desertification and will explore the effect of
environmental conditions on pattern selection. Additionally, the project will
advance knowledge concerning the structure and control of wrinkling patterns in
stressed materials, as well as the formation and stability of various
morphologies in amphiphilic systems. Undergraduate students will participate in
the project through summer REU (research experience for undergraduates)
opportunities.

This project is organized around three primary topics: (i) stripes and spots in
reaction-diffusion-advection equations describing vegetation patterns, (ii)
defects and wrinkling patterns in (an)isotropic Swift?Hohenberg systems, (iii)
existence and stability of amphiphilic structures in density functional models.
These research topics will inform specific applications as well as develop and
advance the theory of planar (and higher dimensional) patterns; further, they
will examine the effect of anisotropy in pattern selection, stability, and
defect formation in example systems. This research builds on the existence and
stability theory of planar and higher-dimensional far-from-onset patterns
through the development and use of singular perturbation methods; these methods
will have broad applicability in reaction-diffusion-advection systems, and
singularly perturbed PDEs more generally. Specifically, tools will be developed
to analyze the appearance and stability of striped patterns, as well as radially
symmetric patterns such as spots and rings in the context of vegetation, and
cylindrical/spherical micelles and vesicles in amphiphilic systems. Spatial
dynamics and functional analytic methods will also be developed to construct
far-from-onset radial lattice patterns. Additionally, center manifold theory and
dynamical systems techniques will be used to analyze the stability of a variety
of defects in (an)isotropic systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
