
* 2106233
* On the Emergence of Small and Large Scales in Fluid Motion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2021,07/19/2021
* Theodore Drivas,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 160,858.00

Scales of motion, large and small, appear ubiquitously and spontaneously in
fluid systems. A typical example arises when cream is stirred into morning
coffee; the cream folds and filaments into ever decreasing scales, while the
motion of the coffee itself appears to form, out of these filaments, one large
swirl. In geophysical and astrophysical systems, spontaneous self-organization
into large-scale jets (e.g., gulf stream, Jovian jets) and vortices (e.g.,
oceanic gyres, hurricanes) is commonly observed. The prediction of the
amplitude, internal structure, and long-term behavior of these coherent
structures is of fundamental importance for weather prediction, climate science,
and astrophysics, among other fields. The main objective of the project is to
advance understanding of how such coarse and fine-scale features emerge in fluid
motion. The ultimate aim of this research is to give a first-principles picture
of the persistent structures and behaviors that emerge at long times in inviscid
and slightly viscous flows. The project will also provide opportunities for
involvement of graduate students in the research.

Fluid structures can be significantly larger than the scale of forcing and often
coexist as "laminar states" embedded in a sea of small-scale fluctuations. The
detailed form and behavior of these features depends in a highly nonlinear
fashion on the full range of scales of motion in the flow. The project will
quantitatively study the emergence of small and large-scale structures in
slightly viscous incompressible 2D fluids governed by the Navier-Stokes and
Euler equations. Regarding large-scale formation, branches of stationary Navier-
Stokes solutions that are sustained by (viscosity independent) forces and
connect to inviscid Euler states will be constructed. The forcing considered
will either be through the bulk (the Kolmogorov problem) or through a moving
boundary. The issue of selecting "correct" inviscid Euler solutions, in the
sense that they can be attained as viscosity vanishes, will be addressed.
Concerning small-scale creation, the project will study the direct cascade of
enstrophy and, in particular, how vorticity perturbations near stationary states
tend to get filamented by background large-scale shearing. Nonlinear instability
of steady states in strong norms and singularity formation at infinite time will
be investigated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
