
* 2106988
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics, singularities, and variational structure in models of fluids and clustering
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,04/29/2021
* Jian-Guo Liu,NC,Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 230,000.00

The mathematical structure of numerous important models of dynamic behavior in
science and data analysis is fundamentally related with optimality. Fluid
motions optimize kinetic energy over time. Many systems in physical and
information sciences tend to maximize entropy. Deep learning algorithms are
trained by optimizing parameters for clustering and classifying big data sets.
This project will improve our mathematical understanding of optimality
principles and dynamics in several models of substantial current interest to
researchers in a number of disciplines. These range from fluid dynamics and
network routing to statistical sampling and data science to aerosol physics and
animal ecology. Optimal transport theory will be used in a novel way to model
fluid mixture dynamics and understand how fluid surface singularities can form.
Gradient descent techniques will be investigated to analyze and improve the
convergence of high-dimensional statistical sampling and wave-shape
computations. Novel dynamical phenomena in merging-splitting models of
clustering will be sought in models relevant to aerosol particle growth in
atmospheric dynamics and the sharing of information in financial markets. These
investigations will stimulate young researchers and students to participate, and
will lead to results to be disseminated at conferences, research institutes,
seminars, and lecture series.

In particular, this project's research will focus on bringing ideas from
variational analysis to bear upon several specific topics of current interest:
(1) modeling how incompressible fluids may optimally mix through an entropy-
regularized multi-marginal optimal transport formulation, which ought to make
numerical computations feasible and may enable a precise characterization of
optimal dynamic pathways; (2) demonstrating the formation of singularities on
the surface of incompressible fluids in a scenario involving expansion from a
corner, through a novel perturbation analysis of a simple geodesic flow; (3)
establishing convergence of gradient-like flows to explain coherent-state
formation and improve statistical sampling, by developing the use of Lojasiewicz
estimates in infinite-dimensional nonlocal models; (4) identifying metastable
states and nontrivial temporal dynamics in kinetic models of aggregation and
breakup that lack a detailed-balance structure that would drive the syst em to
equilibrium.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
