
* 2106675
* Collaborative Research: Morphogenesis of First-Order Phase Transitions in Polar and Apolar Nematic Liquid Crystals
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,05/24/2021
* Oleg Lavrentovich,OH,Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 161,191.00

Liquid crystals are composed of rod-like or disc-like molecules that enable
these materials to behave in some ways like a liquid and in others like a solid.
This project is an exploration of the fundamental problem of analyzing the
configurations observed in phase transitions in liquid crystals. Principally,
the project will elucidate how the shape of the interface between different
phases is determined by a balance of elastic forces and surface tension. The
results will be of importance in mathematics, physics, and materials science
since development of various morphologies in coexisting phases is a ubiquitous
natural phenomenon. The acquired knowledge will bring about new and powerful
tools to experimentally control these morphologies, leading to new and exciting
applications. This interdisciplinary program further provides opportunities to
educate students in the mathematics and physics of liquid crystals.

The project will focus on the characterization and description of the overall
shape and internal structure of soft condensates representing nuclei of the
orientationally ordered phases shaped by bulk elasticity with disparate elastic
moduli and anisotropic surface tension. The proposed work will consider a broad
spectrum of liquid crystals, embracing nematic and cholesteric liquid crystals
that are described by non-orientable director line fields and experience
transitions into partially positionally ordered phases, and newly discovered
ferroelectric nematic liquid crystals that are described by the director and a
vector-valued electric polarization. The mathematical emphasis is on the
analysis of stationary variational problems for energies defined over vector-
and tensor-valued fields in two and three dimensions and associated gradient
flows, so as to describe the equilibrium configurations of liquid crystals and
dynamics of interfaces in a plethora of their phase transitions. The principal
novelty of the proposed work is that it will consider singular limits of liquid
crystal energies that impose severe geometric rigidity on admissible classes of
functions. The primary challenges to the analysis arise due to high
dimensionality of a target space and the need to consider singular asymptotic
limits that result in highly nonlinear constraints. The combined
analytical/experimental approach will be essential in that it will provide a
clear check of success for the analytical predictions; these predictions, in
turn, will guide the experiments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
