
* 2106255
* A New Approach to Imaging by Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2021,04/29/2021
* Fioralba Cakoni,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,000.00

In many areas of national importance, such as the design and manufacturing of
advanced and novel materials, public safety, medical imaging, and underground
exploration, it is essential to be able to image and perform nondestructive
testing of materials using electromagnetic, sound, or elastic waves.
Unfortunately, effective methods for testing complicated materials for
structural defects or for identifying unknown targets in an efficient way with
little a priori information are still in a state of infancy. This is
particularly the case for material that exhibits directional properties,
nonlinear interaction with interrogating waves, or peculiar geometric
structures, all of which are present in contemporary applications in the above
areas. In this project, the investigator and her graduate students will develop
entirely new techniques in inverse scattering theory that can handle the
aforementioned imaging problems, in order to obtain reliable target signatures
or usable information about objects being examined in computationally efficient
ways. The goal is to minimize dependence on a priori information describing the
physics and/or geometry of unknown targets as well as of mathematical and
computational complications arising from the complexity of the hosting
background. This study will combine practical applications with the mathematical
elegance of new imaging techniques that have recently led to establishing a new
field in mathematics called the qualitative approach or direct imaging
techniques.

This research is a multifaceted effort to develop fast imaging methods of
advanced and novel materials (including nonlinear materials) based on
generalized linear sampling methods and spectral parameters related to non-
scattering phenomena. There are three main projects:1) A Spectral Approach to
Imaging with Waves: Motivated by the theory of transmission eigenvalues, this
project proposes to develop a general framework for modifying the scattering
operator in order to provide new eigenvalue problems associated with the
scattering by an inhomogeneity. Particularly important is the determination of
these (real or complex) eigenvalues from the scattering data, together with
their relation to the material properties of the inhomogeneity. A major effort
of the investigator is to apply this technique to image complex structures,
including anisotropic/absorbing/dispersive media, thin layers, and meta-
surfaces. 2) Interior Eigenvalues and Non-scattering Frequencies: A necessary
condition for the non-scattering of a particular incident wave is that the wave
number (or a specified parameter) is an eigenvalue of an interior eigenvalue
problem defined on the support of the scatterer. On the other hand, the converse
is true if at an eigenvalue the corresponding eigenfunction is extendable
outside the support as a solution to the Helmholtz equation. Currently, only the
case of scatterers with a corner is understood. The investigator states a more
general conjecture and lays out a proposed approach to prove it. This project is
theoretical in nature, but if successful, it would lead to a more general
uniqueness result for the support of the scattering object with one incident
wave. 3) Initiate the Development of the Qualitative Imaging Approach for
Nonlinear Inhomogeneities. Despite the great interest and extensive research on
the theory and computation of qualitative (direct) inversion methods, nothing
has been done in connection with imaging media that exhibit nonlinear
interaction with interrogating waves, which is the case for many contemporary
engineered materials. This project aims to pioneer such a study.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
