
* 2107205
* Renormalization Group Flows, Embedding Theorems, and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2021,07/28/2021
* Govind Menon,RI,Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 277,225.00

A central theme in mathematics is to understand the nature of space.
Mathematicians use the term manifold to formalize the notion of a curved space
built by piecing together patches of more familiar Euclidean space. This idea
dates to the work of Riemann in the mid-1800s, yet several questions about
manifolds remain poorly understood. In the 1950s, Nash proved striking embedding
theorems identifying two distinct ways of thinking about manifolds, intrinsic
and extrinsic. One can imagine for example, the measurement of lengths on earth
by an ant crawling around (intrinsic) and the measurement of lengths on earth by
an observer on the moon (extrinsic). The main purpose of this project is to
revisit Nash's embedding theorems from a modern perspective, expanding their
range of applications to problems in science and technology. Approaches of this
project have applications to the description of disordered systems in physics
(such as turbulent fluid flows) and the design of algorithms for artificial
intelligence (such as manifold learning). The project contributes to the
development of the scientific workforce through the mentoring of graduate
students in PhD projects that include both rigorous mathematics and numerical
computations. A particular goal of the project is to visualize the embedded
manifolds in order to communicate Nash?s vision to a broad scientific audience
and the public at large.

The main technical goal of this project is to develop a new method to construct
Gibbs measures for nonlinear partial differential equations. The method relies
on lifting the PDE into a space of Gaussian measures and designing new heat
flows, termed renormalization group flows, that improve subsolutions of the PDE
into solutions through band-limited approximations at increasingly fine scales.
Both numerical and analytical approaches will be pursued. The analytical method
has its roots in Nash?s techniques, but its conceptual foundation is a Bayesian
description of the measurement of length, not the nature of the underlying
space. This shift in emphasis provides a framework that unifies the embedding
problem for Riemannian manifolds with that of metric spaces and graphs. It
identifies the problem of critical exponents for embeddings with the study of
critical exponents in statistical physics. The numerical counterpart to these
analytical methods is a new class of stochastic interior point methods for the
solution of nonlinear PDE. The primary goal here is to explore the idea that PDE
may be solved by optimization techniques, such as relaxation, semidefinite
programming, and Markov chain Monte Carlo methods, rather than the traditional
methods based on spatial discretizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
