
* 2107808
* Collaborative Research: Applications of Symplectic Geometry to Frame Theory and Signal Processing
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2021,06/02/2021
* Thomas Needham,FL,Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 173,980.00

Applications in signal processing require efficient signal representations which
are robust to noise and data loss. Signals are therefore frequently represented
with respect to a redundant dictionary called a frame. Frames are standard tools
in applied mathematics, computer science, and engineering, and have found uses
in application domains such as wireless communication, coding, and speech
recognition. Special families of frames are designed for specific signal
processing applications to provide optimal efficiency and robustness. The
collection of frames with prescribed data forms a complicated set of matrices
called a frame space. Basic features of frame spaces are not well understood,
which means even simple-sounding questions about the possibility of
interpolating between frames or about the probability that a random frame has
good properties remain unsolved. In this project these questions are viewed
through the lens of symplectic geometry, a field with roots in classical
mechanics which is designed to exploit the sorts of symmetries that arise in
frame theory. This project will apply techniques from symplectic geometry to
give new insight into the geometric structure of frame spaces, providing new
theoretical results resolving these longstanding questions as well as practical
algorithms for generating uniformly random frames for use by the broader frame
theory and signal processing communities. A significant component of this
project is to introduce ideas from frame theory and symplectic geometry to new
audiences, from school-age students and hobbyists through interactive
demonstrations, to graduate students through formal research training, to non-
expert mathematicians and engineers through expository writing surveying the
practical applications of symplectic geometry.

This project will apply tools from symplectic geometry to address three
specific major open problems in frame theory. The first aim of the project is to
use symplectic techniques to derive probabilistic guarantees that a frame drawn
randomly from a given frame space (for example, the space of unit-norm tight
frames) enjoys desirable properties, such as the Restricted Isometry Property
from compressed sensing. The key insight driving this project is that symplectic
geometry provides a new coordinate system for frame spaces with convenient
measure theoretic properties. This observation also has implications for the
second aim of the project, which is to develop novel algorithms for efficiently
sampling frame spaces. Frame spaces are inherently hard to sample with direct
methods because of their complicated geometry and topology, but the new
symplectic frame space coordinates will lead to an efficient family of Markov
chain algorithms for sampling frames. These algorithms will provide practical
benefits as a tool for experimentally exploring statistics of frames such as
eigenvalue distributions of partial frame operators and for generating random
frames for compressed sensing applications. The third aim of the project is to
extend these symplectic techniques to handle generalized frames, including
fusion frames and operator-valued frames, providing probabilistic guarantees and
sampling algorithms in this setting, with applications to compressed sensing of
signals with block sparse structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
