
* 2107891
* New Sampling Algorithms and Inverse Spectral Methods in Scattering
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2021,07/07/2021
* Isaac Harris,IN,Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2024
* USD 190,838.00

Non-destructive testing has many applications in engineering and medical
imaging. Innovations in non-destructive testing have given rise to new imaging
methods such as electrical impedance tomography (EIT), which can be used in
medical applications as an alternative to more expensive imaging modalities. In
many other instances as well, one needs to determine the interior structure of
an object with little a priori information using acoustic or electromagnetic
waves. This project aims to develop new algorithms for fast and accurate
reconstructions that will be able to determine interior features. The
investigator and graduate students will study new methods and applications for
imaging techniques such as EIT. The primary result of the project will be new
mathematical techniques for shape recovery that are largely independent of
unknown physical properties of an object.

The research has three parts that are connected to the analytical and
computational aspects of inverse scattering. The first project is to develop new
theoretically rigorous and computationally simple regularization algorithms for
the factorization method. The project will focus on electrical impedance
tomography, where the theory will be extended for an operator mapping a Hilbert
space into the dual space. The goal is to develop the analytical framework for a
new algorithm for shape reconstruction. The second project is to extend the
applicability of the direct sampling method (DSM) to near-field data as well as
reduce the number of measurements needed. These are simple algorithms for shape
reconstruction stable with respect to noise in the data but requiring
measurements from many sources and receivers. The aim is to develop the
resolution analysis for new DSMs. The new methods involve transforming near-
field data into far-field data and applying factorization of the far-field
operator. The third project is to study new transmission eigenvalue problems
arising in inverse scattering. These eigenvalues can be used to estimate or
determine if there are defects in a scatterer. The reconstruction methods
studied in the first two parts of the project correspond to shape
reconstruction, whereas the study of these spectral problems will lead to
parameter identification. Results of the research are expected not only to allow
recovery of a scattering object but also to provide information about its
material parameters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
