
* 2107856
* Multiscale Effects and Tail Events for Infinite-Dimensional Processes and Interacting Particle Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,04/29/2021
* Konstantinos Spiliopoulos,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 255,783.00

Probabilistic models are commonly used to represent physical, biological, and
financial phenomena that are often too complex to solve, approximate or even
simulate on computers. One of the challenges facing applied mathematics and
probability is to obtain accurate and provably efficient methods to approximate
and simulate a range of complex systems using probabilistic models. The primary
purpose of this research is to rigorously investigate problems related to
multiscale systems, rare events, and related simulation methods. The principal
investigator (PI) is interested in studying stochastic dynamical systems that
may have different time scales and quantifying related events that may be rare
on a given time scale but can have important consequences for the system itself.
The questions of interest in this project are motivated both by fundamental
mathematical questions and by a broad array of questions in other branches of
science. Examples range from estimation of rare event probabilities in chemical
physics, hydrodynamics, coupled chemical reactions with spatially-dependent
diffusion, to population genetics and opinion dynamics. This research project is
integrated with an educational program that is designed to help in the training
of undergraduate and graduate students in applied mathematics, physics,
engineering, and chemistry in the exploration of rare events, multiscale
processes and their analysis and simulation.

The PI is interested in the large deviations regime (tail events) as well as in
the moderate deviations regime (the gap between the typical center and the tail
of the distribution). Due to the lack of explicit solutions, one has to rely on
approximation and simulation methods and for this reason rigorous development of
provably efficient approximation methods and simulation Monte Carlo methods is
essential. In a closely related direction, the PI develops a rigorous theory of
metastability for infinite dimensional dynamical systems that may have multiple
scales, interacting with the rare events of interest. Moreover, the PI is
interested in the effect of multiple scales on tail events associated to
interacting particle systems. Systems of interacting diffusions arise in many
areas of science, theory of random matrices, mathematical biology, neural
networks in machine learning and optimization, construction of Kahler-Einstein
metrics, opinion dynamics, finance, and engineering. The proposed work leads to
the development of a rigorous mathematical framework that allows to design
provably efficient algorithms associated to modeling of rare events. It will
crystalize concepts and methods that are not well understood such as the effect
of metastability on Monte Carlo methods and of multiple scales on large
deviations and Monte Carlo methods for stochastic dynamical systems in infinite
dimensions and for interacting particle systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
