
* 2107956
* Hydrodynamics of Collective Phenomena and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2021,05/18/2021
* Roman Shvydkoy,IL,University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Among the various collective phenomena observed in nature there are many that
resemble the motion of a fluid. Such examples are abundant in biology, for
example, a large flock of birds swinging constantly changing shape or a school
of fish swirling in a milling pattern. Other examples include crowd dynamics and
social networking, for example the formation of friend-clusters on social media,
or dynamics of opinions among a large group of individuals. Examples also arise
in technology, such as the coordinated fight of an escort of unmanned aerial
vehicles or satellite navigation. All of these large systems are governed by
models similar to those we use to study motion of a liquid, like water or gas. A
set of new ideas on how to study this analogy recently developed into a new
mathematical subject, called Hydrodynamics of Collective Behavior. This project
will analyze hydrodynamic collective models both from the point of view of their
mathematical properties and with a view towards their applications to self-
organized dynamics and emergent phenomena.

Central to the project will be analysis of the so-called Euler Alignment Systems
(EAS for short). Particular focus will be placed on justification of a class of
isentropic EASs via the hydrodynamic limit from a noisy kinetic Fokker-Plank
model. In the framework of systems with singular communication introduced in
PI?s earlier works, the project sets forth a program of research on
understanding topological interactions prevalent in many biological systems.
Such interactions enrich the models with a possibility of more diverse
collective outcomes and, from theoretical perspective, endow them with a
fractional parabolic structure. The regularity theory exploiting this parabolic
structure will be developed in the context of unidirectional flocks.
Applications of this research will be made to several fields of mathematics
including the so-called opinion mean-field games and finding their Nash
equilibria, alignment of interfacial profile in two-fluid porous media problem,
and modeling turbulent energy cascade in 2D inviscid fluid flows.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
