
* 2108161
* RUI: Asymptotic and Numerical Techniques in Mathematical Modeling of Membrane Filtration
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,12/19/2022
* Pejman Sanaei,NY,New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 33,927.00

Membrane filters ? thin sheets of porous medium ? find widespread use in
applications such as water treatment, various purification processes in the
biotech industry, removing impurities from the blood in kidney dialysis, beer
clarification, and mask production, among many others. Membrane filters
represent a multi-billion-dollar industry worldwide, and many major
multinational companies maintain a keen interest in improving and optimizing the
membrane filters they produce, in terms of both performance and cost. It is
notable that the experimental literature far outweighs the theoretical and
numerical; among the theoretical and numerical literature, there is a paucity of
studies that offer first-principles, predictive mathematical models and
simulations. This project aims to develop novel mathematical models with
potential for significant impact in bridging this gap. The long-term goal is to
improve and optimize membrane filters, in terms of both performance and cost.
The project will involve students in the research.

Filter performance depends strongly on key features of the porous membrane,
including membrane thickness, internal pore structure and shape, pore
connectivity, and variation of pore dimensions in the depth of the membrane. The
complexity of the coupling between the membrane morphology, which evolves
dynamically during the filtration process, and the details of the particle-laden
flow, including possible stochastic behavior of the particles, make filtration
and fouling a challenging predictive modeling problem. This project presents a
coherent, first-principles approach to model both stochastic effects of particle
dynamics and variations in internal membrane structure. The research aims to
formulate and analyze novel mathematical models to investigate the evolution of
membrane filters with complex internal structures by using asymptotic and
numerical techniques. These models will be compared to observations,
experiments, and data from industrial partners to understand more fully the co-
evolution of membrane internal structure and flow in the context of porous media
and membrane filters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
