
* 2108502
* Nonlinear Dynamics of Colloidal Rotors: Chaos and Order
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,05/18/2021
* Petia Vlahovska,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 404,999.00

Tiny, micron-sized particles called colloids find ubiquitous uses in engineering
and biomedical applications, for example, microfluidics and drug delivery, and
consumer products, like paint. In recent years, there has been great effort to
assemble colloids into new functional materials with designer architecture using
electric and magnetic fields. Of particular interest are colloids that spin
(rotors), because in such systems the flows stirred by the rotating particles
add to the electrostatic interactions thereby vastly expanding the possible
structures. This project will study the theory of dynamics of colloids placed
between two planar electrodes in order to understand the mechanisms of the
field-driven particle assembly. The project integrates knowledge across the
fields of applied math, fluid mechanics and soft matter, which will be very
beneficial for the training of the students associated with the project.
Visually appealing experiments will help educate the public about mathematics
and fluid dynamics.

This proposal is concerned with a theoretical investigation of the dynamics of
rotating colloids powered by the Quincke effect, which is the spontaneous
spinning of a dielectric sphere in an applied uniform electric field. The
Quincke rotor dynamics in free space is described by the Lorenz equations and
the system has gathered attention as one of the physical realizations of Lorenz
chaos: at high electric fields the sphere spins irregularly around a fixed axis.
However, the dynamics of Quincke rotors in confinement is strikingly different
than that in free space. An individual rotor displays three-dimensional motion
with periodic reorientation of the axis of rotation. Collectives of hovering
Quincke rotors are found to self-organize into stable clusters or snaking
chains. This project will investigate the electrohydrodynamics of particles
placed between two planar electrodes. The novel mathematical challenges are many
and include analytical solutions of single particle dynamics near boundaries,
careful consideration of pair-wise hydrodynamic and electrostatic interactions
in confinement, and integration of these analytical results into a Stokesian-
dynamics-based algorithm for a very large numbers of particles. Benchmark
experiments to complement the mathematical research are proposed to justify and
validate the mathematical models and to ensure that the research has impact both
in and beyond the applied mathematics community. Educational impact includes
bringing direct experimental experience in fluid dynamics and soft matter
research to applied mathematics undergraduate and graduate students at
Northwestern University. The emergent behavior of the Quincke rotors will likely
open new research directions across various fields, e.g., non-equilibrium soft
matter, materials engineering, and fluid dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
