
* 2108175
* Recovery of Material Parameters and Friction Laws Associated with Earthquakes, Interseismic Slip, and Tidal Deformation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,05/13/2021
* Maarten de Hoop,TX,William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2024
* USD 208,000.00

The study of earthquake physics remains highly challenging because of its
complex dynamics and multifaceted nature. This research takes on the challenge
of mitigating the impacts of earthquakes through mathematical understanding. It
holds the promise of producing fundamentally new insights in fault physics and
advancing the knowledge of friction laws, nucleation and rupture dynamics,
localization of (micro)seismicity, crustal rheology, and monitoring stress and
material properties. Determining the friction during an earthquake is required
to understand when and where earthquakes occur. While this case cannot be
reasonably studied in isolation, it is a central thrust of the research. A study
of earthquake physics comprises nonlinear (segmented) fault dynamics, formulated
as an inverse problem. Faults have nontrivial geometry, dependent on material
properties of juxtaposed crustal blocks changing in time, stress, and general
rheology of Earth?s crust and upper mantle and large-scale deformation. Tidal
forcing will be exploited to enable the study of buoyancy structure deep in our
planet's interior. Results will yield procedures for monitoring and obtaining
invaluable information about rheology and microstructure in the subsurface,
which could also be employed in geothermal exploration and carbon dioxide
sequestration. The project offers, via collaborations, a unique
interdisciplinary educational experience for the students giving them a much
broader appreciation of the importance of novel techniques and real-life
implications. The investigator will study inverse problems associated with
earthquakes, interseismic slip, and tidal deformation. These inverse problems
are defined through systems of partial differential equations describing
elastic-gravitational deformation and waves, coupled to nonlinear rate- and
state-dependent friction laws on faults, as well as extensions to viscoelastic
and nonlocal elastic behaviors accounting for microstructure and complex
rheologies. The key advances will pertain to determining friction during an
earthquake, gleaning information about friction laws on faults also during
interseismic deformation, in conjunction with recovering anisotropic elastic /
viscoelastic / nonlocal-elastic material parameters in the crust and fault zones
exploiting ruptures, dislocation, and microseismic clouds as sources as well as
tidal forcing of the Moon. The rigorous study of possible rapid recovery of a
moment tensor (earthquake magnitude and focal mechanism for early warning) from
prompt elastogravity signals will be included in the analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
