
* 2108524
* Nonlinear Resonant Wave Interactions in Density-Stratified Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2021,07/19/2021
* Wooyoung Choi,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,959.00

Nonlinear internal waves and their interaction with surface waves have been
frequently observed in density-stratified oceans, where the temperature and
salinity vary with depth. In particular, nonlinear resonant interactions have
been known to play a crucial role in the long-term evolution of surface and
internal wave spectra. In addition, recent observations from remote sensing have
shown that internal waves can substantially change the surface expression of the
ocean. Therefore, a better understanding of the dynamics of nonlinear surface
and internal waves and their interactions is crucial in many disciplines,
including physical oceanography, environmental science, and ocean and coastal
engineering. Ultimately this information would help researchers working on
climate change as the transfer of energy and momentum across the air-sea
boundary and in the interior of the ocean is fundamental to their work. This
project will address several aspects of the dynamical interaction of internal
and surface waves through a combination of modeling, numerical simulations, and
experiments at the newly developed wave research laboratory at NJIT. The project
will also provide opportunities for the involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students in the research.

This project will study numerically the recently developed explicit Hamiltonian
system for multi-directional waves in two-layered flows and will derive reduced
models for near-resonant interactions between narrow-banded 2D surface waves and
a large amplitude long internal wave. With keeping realistic oceanic conditions
in mind, the project will study the effects of wave direction, bandwidth, and
high-order nonlinearity on the modulation of surface waves induced by internal
waves and the subsequent energy transfer between the two wave modes. The focus
is on the evolution of a packet of short surface waves satisfying the so-called
group resonance condition, which requires the group velocity of the packet to
match approximately the phase speed of a long internal wave. This condition can
be easily met under realistic oceanic conditions. The mathematical models will
be then validated for one dimensional waves with fully nonlinear numerical
solutions of the Euler equations obtained via an unsteady conformal mapping
technique and previous laboratory observations. The theoretical approach for
two-layered flows will be extended to three-layered flows, and the conditions
for resonant interactions between the first two internal wave modes and their
dynamics will be studied. In addition to time-periodic resonant interactions, a
special resonant interaction with no energy exchange will be examined to find
traveling wave and steady-state solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
