
* 2108209
* Diffusive Regularization in Kinetic and Fluid Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,05/18/2021
* Andrei Tarfulea,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 198,664.00

Kinetic equations form the mathematical basis for modeling and understanding
high-energy gases with large-scale interactions and are used to predict the
motion and radiation of plasmas, e.g., in industry and astronomy, as well as
fluid flows at high speed and low density, for example, supersonic flows.
Despite their complexity, these models often see manifestations of the second
law of thermodynamics, which push the gas or fluid towards a state of maximum
entropy, which is, statistically, easier to predict. This project explores the
finer details that determine whether such models remain in a chaotic regime,
manifesting as turbulence, shocks, and plasma echoes, or thermalize, becoming
smoother and converging to an equilibrium. These phenomena are explored in two
main contexts: in the regularity properties, continuation criteria, potential
shock formation of the Boltzmann and Landau equations, and versions with large-
scale electromagnetic interactions; and in the enhanced diffusivity of fluid
equations where effective viscosity grows with local turbulence, a family of
models originated by Kolmogorov and used in oceanography. The project also
provides training and research opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students.

This research examines the construction and implementation of novel regularizing
mechanisms in two important contexts. First, the investigator will apply their
recent discoveries in kinetic mass spreading to probe the current frontier of
the regularity program for the Boltzmann and Landau equations. For these models
of high-energy gases and plasmas, the collision interaction is known to behave
roughly like a fractional Laplacian operator with highly nonlocal and possibly
degenerate coefficients. These intricacies are major impediments to the well-
posedness theory. Nevertheless, the current state-of-the-art grants that smooth
unique solutions exist for as long as certain macroscopic quantities remain
under control a priori. The investigator's recent work establishes that half of
these quantities are in fact controlled dynamically, yielding more precise
estimates for the solution. This project extends these results to wider scopes,
domains with boundary, rotationally symmetric configurations, and settings with
electromagnetic interactions, and pairs them with existing estimates from the
regularity theory for fluid equations. Second, the project will investigate
novel a priori bounds that can be derived from non-isothermal fluid equations
where the local temperature influences the viscosity. The investigator's prior
work has demonstrated a unique mechanism for enhanced dissipation arising from
thermal viscosity and in developing maximum principles for coupled non-
isothermal models. These effects are examined in the Navier-Stokes-Fourier
system and in models of porous media type and of turbulent dissipation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
