
* 2108682
* Collaborative Research: Infinite horizon risk-sensitive control of diffusions with applications in stochastic networks
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2021,03/11/2022
* Ari Arapostathis,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 276,422.00

This research will advance mathematical analysis in stochastic control and make
important contributions to applied probability and stochastic networks. The
research will also have an impact on real-world applications in large-scale data
centers, manufacturing, telecommunications, healthcare, inventory, and service
systems, providing skills and tools to manage them effectively. Such systems can
often be modeled as a stochastic network, with multiple jobs and many servers,
and complex network topology. The operations and management of these
sophisticated networked systems are subject to many risk factors under various
random environments. This research will develop advanced methods and algorithms
to provide solutions that mitigate the potential operational risks in a large-
scale network model system. The model system roughly describes the system
dynamics in large-scale parallel server networks. The research will provide
approximate optimal scheduling and other operational policies. Risk-sensitive
control has the advantage of achieving good performance in the presence of
disturbances and uncertainty. It also limits large fluctuations since it
penalizes higher moments of the running cost. The investigators will incorporate
their findings into the existing graduate courses in stochastic networks and
control, and disseminate them through seminars on relevant research topics. The
research involves a team of interdisciplinary researchers, including those from
underrepresented minority groups, and provides training opportunities for
graduate students with new mathematical skills.

The objectives of the research are: (1) To develop a comprehensive theoretical
framework for the study of eigenvalues of elliptic systems and integro-
differential operators to address the associated problems in infinite-horizon
risk sensitive control (IHRS) of regime-switching and jump diffusions. (2) To
develop the techniques required to establish asymptotic optimality and study the
associated stochastic differential games and large deviation characterizations.
(3) To study the large-time asymptotic behavior and relative value iteration
algorithms, which form the basis of rolling horizon control and reinforcement
learning methods. This research will greatly advance the theory of eigenvalues
of integro-differential operators and elliptic systems and produce ground-
breaking methodologies for risk-sensitive control of diffusions (with jumps) and
regime-switching diffusions. On the analytical side, this research will greatly
contribute to the current efforts in the literature concerning nonlinear
eigenvalue problems in unbounded domains. A wealth of results on variational
characterizations, maximum and large deviation principles, and the associated
Feynman-Kac semigroup for nonsymmetric operators are expected to be obtained.
Another important contribution of the proposed research is analyzing large-time
asymptotic behavior, which includes the study of relative value iteration
algorithms and rolling horizon control. The research will also advance the
understanding of the risk-sensitive asymptotically optimal scheduling policies
for large-scale parallel server networks, including those in random environments
that give rise to jump-diffusion and regime-switching diffusion limits. New
methods involving the equivalent stochastic differential game and spatial
truncation techniques will be developed to prove lower and upper bounds for
asymptotic optimality. Last, but not least, this research aims to close the gap
between probabilistic and analytical methods, aiming to improve the interaction
between the two communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
