
* 2109199
* Mathematics of Revealing Inaccessible Objects Using Linear and Nonlinear Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2021,05/13/2021
* Katya Krupchyk,CA,University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2024
* USD 253,482.00

The project is concerned with the mathematical theory of inverse problems.
Inverse problems arise in numerous medical and seismic imaging applications as
well as in exploration geophysics and non-destructive evaluation, where one is
interested in producing images of an inaccessible interior of a medium from
measurements performed in the exterior. Typically, in order to reveal the
internal structure, one measures the response of the medium when probed with
different kinds of waves, ranging from electromagnetic waves to X-rays.
Recently, it has been observed that nonlinear seismic responses may give
additional information concerning the interior structure of the Earth.
Similarly, nonlinear ultrasound techniques in medical imaging may provide better
images since the contrast in nonlinear media parameters is usually larger than
that in the linear parameters. The project strives to develop significantly
prominent mathematical methods where the nonlinear interaction of waves is used
to bear on challenging inverse problems coming from applications. These novel
mathematical techniques may lead to significant advances, in particular in
medical and seismic imaging. One of the specific focuses of the project is the
Electrical Impedance Tomography problem for nonlinear anisotropic media, an
imaging modality with applications in biomedical imaging and non-destructive
testing of mechanical parts. An integral part of the project is concerned with
the educational training of graduate students.

The project consists of four research topics. The first topic deals with partial
data inverse problems for nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations
(PDE), where nonlinear parameters of an unknown medium are to be determined from
measurements performed along a small portion of the boundary. Despite the great
significance of such inverse problems and their ubiquity in applications, they
are among some of the most fundamental open questions in the field. The goal
here is to solve such problems for important nonlinear PDE, including the
quasilinear anisotropic conductivity equation, building upon the recent advances
by the investigator and collaborators, and to work towards the solution of these
open problems in the linear setting. The second topic is devoted to the
geometric version of the anisotropic Calderon problem, where one seeks to
determine potential in the Schrodinger equation on a compact Riemannian manifold
from boundary measurements. By introducing a nonlinearity, the goal is to solve
the anisotropic Calderon problem for the nonlinear Schrodinger equation in
geometric settings for which the corresponding inverse problem in the linear
case is still open. The third topic deals with inverse problems for the
fundamental systems in physics and geometry, such as the anisotropic Maxwell and
Yang-Mill?s systems. The fourth topic is concerned with inverse problems for
nonlinear hyperbolic PDE on manifolds with boundary, aiming to exploit the
nonlinearity as a tool to solve some of them in cases when the linear
counterpart is open.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
