
* 2109002
* Topics in Stochastic Control: Finance, Epidemics, and Machine Learning
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2021,07/19/2021
* Yu-Jui Huang,CO,University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2024
* USD 273,374.00

This project, consisting of four main topics, aims to create integrated
knowledge across mathematical finance, mathematical epidemiology, and machine
learning. Topic 1 explores a new method to resolving time inconsistency in
optimization. For example, long-term financial planning in a society must
confront time inconsistency (as different generations may not agree on an
optimal financial planning strategy). The fixed-point approach to be developed
will provide a convenient technical tool for policymakers to find equilibria
between generations, or strategies acceptable to all generations. Topic 2
integrates economic analysis into traditional epidemic modeling. It will capture
how an epidemic alters individuals' behaviors and how this change of behaviors
ultimately influences the epidemic's evolution. The aim is to facilitate
policymaking that anticipates people's reactions to an epidemic. Topic 3
approaches student loans from two complementary angles: how the debt accumulates
over a student's years of study and how to repay the debt in a cost-efficient
way. This study aims to provide individual borrowers with real savings and
policymakers with concrete quantitative tools. Topic 4 devises new types of
gradient flows to strengthen techniques in machine learning. It will provide
rigorous mathematical foundations for the design of algorithms and more
flexibility to accommodate unknown dynamics. Undergraduate and graduate students
will be involved in this project.

The project will develop the fixed-point approach (Topic 1) by merging theory
for stochastic flows of diffeomorphisms with convergence theory for stochastic
processes. Such a link will give new convergence results for functionals of
controlled diffusions and would allow equilibrium controls to be characterized
as fixed points of an operator and conveniently found via fixed-point
iterations. Behavioral models for epidemics (Topic 2) rely on a three-population
model of consumption behaviors of the susceptible, infected, and recovered. The
associated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation involves unusual nonlinearity
due to controllable jumps, which will be approached by a combination of
viscosity solutions techniques. A student's debt accumulation and optimal
repayment (Topic 3) will be investigated through a mean field game whose
Hamiltonian may not admit a maximizer and a random-horizon control problem with
a stochastically evolving constraint. Resolving them will demand a vanishing
viscosity method based on generalized solutions to a mean field game system and
a random-horizon stochastic Pontryagin maximum principle. New types of gradient
flows (Topic 4) will be driven by (i) a Langevin-type McKean-Vlasov stochastic
differential equation (SDE) or (ii) a coupled system of a Langevin SDE and a
controlled diffusion. Interconnections among SDEs, nonlinear Fokker-Planck
equations, and HJB equations will be investigated to uncover the gradient flows'
invariant distributions. This will facilitate new stochastic gradient descent
approaches to both static and dynamic optimization in the space of probability
measures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
