
* 2110036
* RUI: Multiscale Methods, Singular Limits, and Spectral Problems Related to Materials Science
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2021,07/07/2021
* Silvia Jimenez Bolanos,NY,Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 206,452.00

The overarching theme of this Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
project is the development of mathematical tools to study models related to
applications in engineering, materials science, and mechanics. The investigator
and her collaborators address questions pertaining to elasticity, photonics, and
multiscale analysis of heterogeneous media. The considered applications span a
wide range of problems in biology, physics, and engineering, these include
growing tissues, engineered swelling or shrinking gels, and high-speed
computing. The project provides opportunities for undergraduate research
experiences. The investigator is committed to the training of undergraduate
students, particularly from underrepresented groups in mathematics, through
hands-on research, high-quality teaching, and external educational and outreach
events. The project comprises four principal research topics. Prestrained
Elasticity, where the investigator tackles questions on the derivation of
dimensionally reduced models for thin prestrained films, via methods of calculus
of variations, in connection with the analysis of existence and regularity of
isometric immersions of Riemannian metrics. Bloch Waves in Three-Dimensional
High-Contrast Photonic Crystals, where the objective is to develop analysis for
the electromagnetic wave propagation inside three-dimensional photonic crystals
made from high contrast inclusions, and to investigate the propagation band
structure. Multiscale Analysis of a Coupled Problem of Stokes Flow with Magnetic
Janus Particles, where a multiscale approach is developed to describe the
behavior of Janus particles in a viscous non-conducting fluid in presence of an
externally applied magnetic field, and to understand the crucial role of the
characteristic features of these two-phase particles. Homogenization for a
Variational Problem with a Slip Boundary Condition, where the investigator and
her collaborators use the two-scale convergence to obtain the homogenized model
for a periodic mixture of an elastic solid with a slightly viscous fluid, under
the Navier slip condition posed on their interface.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
