
* 2204722
* Nonlocal Reaction-Diffusion Equations and Wasserstein Gradient Flows
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,07/25/2022
* Olga Turanova,MI,Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 230,826.00

Partial differential equations arise throughout science and engineering as
models of biological and physical phenomena. This project concerns the
theoretical and numerical analysis of an important class of equations, including
ones that model the development of cancer tumors, describe the growth and spread
of living organisms? populations, and underlie certain algorithms for robotic
swarms. The results are expected to shed light on the mechanisms driving these
phenomena and have potential for application in medicine and engineering. The
project has an interdisciplinary component, provides mentoring and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and includes outreach in
the community to promote STEM disciplines among new generations. The research
will focus on three main interconnected topics: (1) the study of qualitative
properties of solutions to nonlocal reaction-diffusion equations arising in
biology and ecology; (2) the development and convergence analysis of
deterministic particle methods for partial differential equations, with an
emphasis of their adaptation to robotic swarming, made in collaboration with
engineers; and (3) the theory of gradient flows on the space of measures. A main
aim of the project is to extend the gradient flow formulation to nonlocal
partial differential equations and to partial differential equations, such as
reaction-diffusion equations, that are not mass-preserving. The project will
also lead to the development, implementation, and study of numerical methods for
both local and nonlocal equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
