
* 2204943
* Multilinear Operators and Microlocal Analysis of Electrical Impedance Tomography, Radar, and Seismology
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2022,04/22/2022
* Allan Greenleaf,NY,University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2025
* USD 303,127.00

This research project uses mathematical models to describe how measurements of
waves, either electrostatic or acoustic at the surface of an object, or radar
observations made remotely, can be used to determine physical properties of the
object. Such non-destructive imaging is widespread in the modern world, and the
need for higher precision and broader applicability drives continuous
improvement in the technology. The modalities to be studied in this project
occur in medical and industrial imaging, remote environmental sensing, and
exploration seismology. One is relevant for stroke diagnosis or detecting
defects in manufactured parts. Another would support low-power radar imaging. A
third will better justify algorithms for extracting information from exploration
seismology data. By further improving and refining these imaging methods and
providing training in the techniques needed, the project will contribute to the
development of noninvasive imaging and remote sensing and strengthen the
scientific workforce.

The investigator will work on four projects. The first three projects are from
inverse problems for partial differential equations, specifically in (A)
electrical impedance tomography, (B) Doppler synthetic aperture radar, and (C)
linearized seismic imaging. Techniques will be developed to detect jumps and
other sharp features that might be present in the physical parameters being
imaged. The fourth project will be in (D) harmonic and microlocal analysis,
which involves multilinear operators similar to those encountered in the first
three projects. Work on Project D will relate the size of a point cloud to the
size of certain sets of point configurations in the cloud. Project A will use
propagation of singularities for complex principal type operators to improve
images obtained from electrical voltage and current measurements. In Project B,
the investigator will refine an earlier model, for example by incorporating
double reflections to improve imaging of walls and corners. The justification of
linearized full wave inversion in Project C will lead to improved confidence in
the accuracy of acoustic, seismic imaging algorithms, and possibly other
improvements. Project D will develop new methods for showing that configuration
sets have nonempty interior. Multilinear operators used in inverse and those in
configuration problems have strong similarities, and progress on Project D will
be applied to Projects A, B, and C.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
