
* 2204519
* Variational Analysis: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,07/25/2022
* Boris Mordukhovich,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 08/31/2025
* USD 250,000.00

This project aims to investigate mathematical aspects of optimization and
control. The research will focus on practical models in engineering design of
control systems, socioeconomics, robotics, nanotechnology, and behavioral
sciences. Investigating and solving such models using advanced mathematical
methods will promote the progress of science and enhance national security.
Understanding mobile robot modeling, dynamic models for nanoparticles in
nanotechnology, and marine surface vehicle modeling will be particularly
important for national defense. The research will provide opportunities for
training Ph.D. students, including those from underrepresented groups.

The research aims to develop variational analysis methods and generalized
differentiation, emphasizing numerical algorithms and applications. The research
will focus on a broad spectrum of theoretical and algorithmic issues in first-
order and second-order variational techniques with applications to various
problems. Specifically, the investigator will focus on constrained optimization
with smooth and nonsmooth data in finite and infinite dimensions, bilevel
programming and facility location, variational inequalities and equilibrium
systems, new challenging classes of problems in dynamic optimization and optimal
control with irregular constraints, parabolic quasi-variational inequalities,
and stability of nonsmooth control systems and feedback stabilization. The
first-order and second-order generalized differentiation results will be
applicable to design novel numerical algorithms to solve optimization, control,
and related problems. The algorithms will be implemented in practical modeling.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
