
* 2204618
* Bridging the Gap between Discrete and Continuous Partial Differential Equations in Medical imaging
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,07/28/2022
* Erkki Somersalo,OH,Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,998.00

In non-invasive or minimally invasive medical imaging, the goal is to form an
image of internal structures of the human body based on measurements performed
outside of the body without harming the patient. While the visible part of
medical imaging comprising the imaging devices is based on engineering and
physics, the image formation and retrieval of pertinent information relies on
sophisticated mathematical models and efficient computational methods. This
project will address two specific imaging problems, breast cancer screening and
stroke detection and classification. Breast cancer screening by mammography is a
standard process. However, it is known that, in particular, when the breast
tissue is dense, which is the case in 10-40 percent of US women, the risk that a
radiologist misses a cancerous lesion is significant. The project will
investigate a novel computational idea of using mammography images at different
pressure levels and comparing the tissue displacements to estimate the elastic
properties of the tissue that are known to be affected by certain cancer types
that often remain undetected. Another medical imaging problem addressed in this
project is stroke classification by a portable and inexpensive electrical
impedance tomography device. It is known that the prognosis of ischemic stroke
depends heavily on how early the therapy can be initiated. About 15 percent of
stroke patients who made it to the hospital in time were diagnosed with a brain
hemorrhage. The therapy meant for ischemic stroke patients would be fatal. A
portable classification method suitable for an ambulance could be crucial for
diagnosis to save many lives in an emergency. The idea is not new, but the
mathematical and computational problems continue to be challenging. This project
will focus on the computational challenges in the problems described above and
in other mathematically similar problems that cover medical imaging. The results
will also be useful in non-destructive material evaluation and geophysics,
including other application areas. The project will also include a strong
educational component through the involvement of graduate students who will work
on their doctoral dissertations on topics central to the project.

The project will address mathematical and computational questions associated
with the inverse problems of distributed parameters in the Bayesian
computational framework, a general methodology that integrates the data with
other information about the unknown that may be available. Distributed
parameters such as electric conductivity of the brain tissue, or elastic
properties of the breast tissue, are typically represented by coefficient
functions of partial differential equations (PDEs) that relate these properties
to the measurements corresponding to boundary values or samples of the
corresponding solution. In order to handle the mathematical model numerically, a
discretization of the model is necessary. The discretization of a continuous
model for computing the numerical solution is an approximation of the exact
model. Therefore, it introduces a discrepancy between the ideal and
computational models. These problems are sensitive to any perturbation of the
data. Thus even a small modeling error may have disastrous effects on the
algorithms if not properly addressed. Therefore, controlling the modeling error
in inverse problems will be crucial and challenging. In the approach proposed in
this research project, discretization of the continuous model will be based on
an underlying metric, coupled with the unknown through a hierarchical Bayesian
model. The underlying discretization metric itself will be modeled as an
unknown, and its estimation will be part of the inverse problem. The two
selected medical imaging applications will serve as outstanding test problems
for the methodology, and because of their importance, they will justify the
theoretical effort of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
