
* 2204896
* Universality in Nonlinear Waves and Related Topics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,07/27/2022
* Peter Miller,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 246,740.00

This project studies the phenomenon of universality in the context of models for
the motion of large waves in several physical settings such as surface water
waves and electromagnetic waves in optical fibers. Universality refers to
situations in which the same or very similar wave patterns appear despite the
waves being set into motion by quite different mechanisms, or even in quite
different physical systems. For instance, rogue waves on the sea surface are
frequently characterized as consisting of a large central peak with a
distinctive dip on either side. It does not matter much the conditions under
which the rogue wave appears ? the pattern is nearly always the same. The aim of
this research is to determine what patterns should be expected, as this
knowledge can be used in applications ranging from device design to disaster
mitigation, and why they occur. Furthermore, because modeling is a process that
involves numerous ad-hoc assumptions, it is important to understand which
features predicted by a model are independent of those assumptions, and
universality gets to the heart of this question. Graduate students and early-
career researchers will join the investigator in this study, which enhances its
impact beyond scientific inquiry and into education and training of the next
generation of scientists.

Mathematically, the study of universality is related to asymptotic analysis,
specifically involving double-scaling limits to localize the coordinates near a
point of interest, while a parameter in the model or solution becomes large. The
investigator will study such double-scaling limits in various asymptotic models
for nonlinear waves given by integrable evolution equations. Broadening the
scope slightly, several specific questions involving asymptotic analysis of
mathematical models for nonlinear waves will be addressed, including (i)
determining the small-dispersion asymptotics of solutions of the defocusing
nonlinear Schrödinger equation and the intermediate long-wave and Benjamin-Ono
equations; (ii) analyzing the features of a new family of transcendental
solutions of the focusing nonlinear Schrödinger equation termed "rogue waves of
infinite order"; (iii) studying the degeneration of specific solution families
of Painlevé equations. The investigator will combine and further develop
techniques from the fields of integrable systems and asymptotic analysis to
address these questions. Anticipated outcomes include a first proof of universal
wave breaking in the defocusing nonlinear Schrödinger equation, new results on
the small-dispersion asymptotic behavior of solutions of the intermediate long-
wave equation (a nonlocal model for internal waves in stratified fluids
interpolating between the shallow-water Korteweg-de Vries limit and the deep-
water Benjamin-Ono limit), development of a new analytical technique for
asymptotic analysis of nonlocal Riemann-Hilbert problems, and the discovery of
new information about the solution space of Painlevé equations and the focusing
nonlinear Schrödinger equation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
