
* 2204240
* Modeling, Analysis, Optimization, Computation, and Applications of Stochastic Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/2022,04/26/2022
* Gang George Yin,CT,University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2027
* USD 356,558.00

This project aims to study stochastic systems in which random disturbances play
a significant role. This research will encompass the study of the dynamic
behavior of mathematical models and applications in areas of ecological and
biological systems, wireless communication, financial engineering, networked
systems, and systems in control engineering. The research will focus on model
systems under the random influence, switching among different configurations,
and complex structures. The results will provide an understanding of the
fundamental properties and the basic features of such modeling systems. This
project will provide training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. The research will promote diversity and inclusion, increase public
scientific literacy, and enhance interdisciplinary collaborations and the STEM
workforce.

This project will encompass analysis and computation of several important topics
from emerging and existing applications in networked systems, control
engineering, optimization of systems, wireless communications, biology, ecology,
economics, and social networks. (1) It aims to develop a new methodology for
analyzing switching jump-diffusion type Kolmogorov systems. Novel features to be
studied include non-local behavior due to the jumps, and uncertain environment
modeling using random switching. Long-standing fundamental issues such as
minimal conditions needed for persistence and extinction in population dynamics
will be addressed. (2) Treating discontinuity in the iterates and non-smooth
dynamics in the limits for stochastic approximation algorithms is vitally
important. This project will focus on this issue from a new angle. Stochastic
differential inclusion limits will be obtained and used to ascertain rates of
convergence and to improve asymptotic efficiency for the first time. (3)
Although nonlinear filtering is an area deemed to be well developed, computation
remains to be the main challenge because of the infinite dimensionality. This
project aims to develop a methodology based on machine learning and neural
networks with a new approach using adaptive learning rate recursion, leading to
potentially more efficient computational methods. (4) A key in numerically
solving nonlinear stochastic differential equations is to treat high
nonlinearity and numerical finite time explosion. This project will develop a
class of algorithms to handle the problem. A novel idea will be the use of
randomly generated growing truncation bounds. Convergence and rates of
convergence will be developed. (5) In response to the urgent need to handle
coupled equations in networks, this project will focus on the study of coupled
switching jump diffusions. By using ideas from dynamic systems and coupling
methods in probability, this project aims to obtain stability and stabilization
with impact on networked systems. Extensive numerical experiments and
simulations will be performed to complement the mathematical analysis and
algorithm design. It will open a new domain for further research in mathematics
with a broader range of applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
