
* 2204912
* Analysis of Free Boundaries: Contact Lines and Viscous Traveling Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2022,07/13/2022
* Ian Tice,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 368,549.00

Fluids with free boundaries occur universally in nature. At a human scale, we
encounter them daily in our cups of coffee or on the surface of a pond.
Important examples at smaller scales include the flow of blood and air through
our cardiovascular and respiratory systems, while examples at larger scales
include the Earth's ocean and atmosphere or even the hot plasma on the surface
of a star. Since free boundaries are so common and occur at so many scales, it
is important to understand the role they play in fluid mechanics. The main
scientific goal of this project is to contribute to the understanding of such
free boundaries through the mathematical study of the partial differential
equations that describe their dynamics. This involves not only the application
of existing mathematical tools to these problems, but also the development of
new tools and techniques, which in turn may be useful in the study of other
problems. The project also aims to contribute to the development of the next
generation of researchers at multiple levels: at the undergraduate level through
the project's Summer Analysis Program, which will provide undergraduate research
opportunities to eight students; and at the graduate level through graduate
research and mentoring.

This project aims at studying fundamental questions of well-posedness and
stability for two long-standing open problems in interfacial mechanics. The
first is the contact line problem, which deals with the dynamics of a triple
interface between a viscous fluid, a solid, and a vapor phase. This component of
the project aims to verify the soundness of a recently proposed continuum model
of contact lines. This has the potential to make a serious impact in the science
of triple-phase junctions, to open many new lines of research, and to further
the applications of contact line dynamics. From an analytic perspective, it will
also create and further develop bridges between energy methods, the functional
calculus of differential operators, and elliptic regularity theory, which will
be useful in many other contexts. The second problem is the viscous traveling
wave problem. While the existence of traveling wave solutions to the free
boundary, incompressible Euler equations has been known for nearly a century,
progress on the corresponding Navier-Stokes problem only began recently with the
work of the PI and collaborators. The proposal aims to build on this work to
construct traveling wave solutions in more general contexts and to study their
dynamical stability and vanishing viscosity limits. It is important to account
for the viscous case because, while many fluids have small viscosity (or more
precisely, the fluid configuration has large Reynolds number), small does not
mean zero, so all fluids experience some viscous effects. Developing the viscous
theory also opens the possibility of connecting the viscous and inviscid cases
through vanishing viscosity limits, which could potentially yield insight into
the zoo of known inviscid solutions. In particular, it could lead to a selection
mechanism for physically relevant inviscid solutions. This work will also
contribute fundamental new tools in the theory of function spaces, which will be
useful in other traveling wave problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
