
* 2204614
* Dynamics and Non-Dissipative Approximations of Nonlinear Nonlocal Fluid Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2022,06/13/2022
* Mihaela Ignatova,PA,Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 184,670.00

The modeling of hydrodynamic and other field theories usually starts with
simpler description of the phenomena ? in the form of partial differential
equations ? and then adds correction terms to better account of the underlying
physics. Prototypical of this situation is the addition of viscosity to the
Euler equations for an incompressible flow, resulting in the Navier-Stokes
equations. The addition of these corrections often have profound consequences,
such as making the solutions of the equations better behaved, i.e., regularized,
and physically more realistic, but also add further complexities due to the
introduction of nonlocal effects and additional spatiotemporal scales and
manifested, for example, in the development of boundary layers. This project
addresses these issues by investigating the mathematical consequences of various
regularization approaches on hydrodynamical models arising in practical
applications, such as geophysical fluid dynamics and electrochemistry. The study
includes the formulation of effective approximations when the regularization
effects are weak, and their use to find new approximation methods to compute the
solutions to these problems in those regimes. The project will also provide
training opportunities for graduate students and postdocs.

The project is aimed at establishing global regularity for critical, non-
dissipative Kelvin-Voigt (KV) approximations of hydrodynamic equations. The
models considered include the surface quasigeostrophic equation, the inviscid
porous medium equation, Darcy-Boussinesq equations, and electroconvection
equations in non-Newtonian and porous media. Successful resolution of these
problems requires the introduction of novel ideas and analytical tools. The
project is to investigate the long-time behavior of solutions of the models and
of their KV approximations, including studies of nonlinear stability and
instability of specific steady states, and studies of formation of small scales
and blow up. The project addresses the validity of the limit of vanishing KV
approximation in the equations. The project introduces specific partial KV
regularizations of the Navier-Stokes equations, aiming to establish their zero-
viscosity limit in the presence of boundaries, their Prandtl expansions and
associated Prandtl equations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
