
* 2205751
* Partially Observed Systems in Finance: Statistical Inference and Optimization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,05/13/2022
* Sergey Nadtochiy,IL,Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 284,860.00

This project is concerned with the analysis of dynamical systems whose
components are not perfectly observable at all times. The examples of such
systems are numerous: e.g., any received radio signal is subject to noise, the
temperature in some parts of the ocean may not be known exactly at all times but
is correlated with the known temperatures in other locations, a price of a house
may not be known precisely before it is sold but it is correlated with the
transaction prices of similar properties, etc. In this context, the PI will
focus on two questions: how to efficiently estimate the unknown parameters of
such systems given historical data, and how to choose these parameters in order
to maximize a given objective. The concrete applications that motivate this work
arise from Finance and Economics: namely, from the problem of estimating the
parameters of unobserved price process of a financial asset (e.g., a stock price
between transactions) and from the question of optimal contract design (e.g.,
what is the optimal structure of fees that brokers should charge to their
clients, if the latter have proprietary knowledge about the market). In
addition, the results of this work will contribute to the general methodology
for estimation and optimization of partially observed dynamical systems and,
hence, be applicable to many other problems arising in social and natural
sciences. Participation in the project will provide good training opportunities
for both graduate and undergraduate students.

This project consists of two lines of research on the stochastic dynamical
systems with partial observations. The first is concerned with the problem of
statistical inference of unknown parameters in partially observed diffusion
models. In particular, the PI will investigate the large-sample properties of
maximum likelihood estimators (MLEs) for partially observed diffusion models,
and will develop approximation methods in the case of degenerate diffusions
where the likelihood function cannot be computed directly. This research is
motivated by the problem of estimating the unknown parameters in latent price
models of market microstructure. The second line of research is concerned with
the design of optimal contracts in the presence of information asymmetry between
the principal and the agent. The information asymmetry that the PI will consider
is different from the classical moral hazard type and stems from the difference
in the exogenously given filtrations to which the actions of the principal and
of the agent are adapted. Such optimal contract models lead to challenging
stochastic control problems with informational constraints. The second line of
research is motivated, in particular, by the problem of designing optimal
brokerage fees in financial markets. The results of the proposed research will
make significant contributions to both theory and applications. The first line
of research (concerned with MLEs) is expected to advance the mathematical
foundations of Statistics and to develop new computational methods for parameter
estimation in partially observed systems. These results will be applied to
specific problems in market microstructure (such as the reconstruction of the
true unobserved price of an asset and the estimation of price impact) as well as
to inference problems in other areas (e.g., Computational Neuroscience). The
results of the second line of research (concerned with optimal contracts) will
contribute to the theories of stochastic control and optimal contract design.
These theoretical results, in particular, can be used to develop better
understanding of the effects of intermediaries (brokers) on the financial
markets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
