
* 2205117
* Nonlinear Control and Observer Designs for Flow-Transport Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2022,08/02/2022
* Weiwei Hu,GA,University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 120,000.00

Understanding mass transport, fluid mixing, and their asymptotic behaviors via
feedback control of the flow advection poses fundamental yet highly challenging
mathematical problems in fluid dynamics, ecology and population dynamics,
biochemical engineering, industrial and systems engineering, and many other
areas. Developing efficient and operational protocols for optimal mass transport
and mixing, heat transfer, and for identifying the attributes and long-time
behavior of flow-transport related dynamical models, especially under limited
experimental data and/or resources, has attracted increasing attention in both
academic and industrial communities. This research aims to place these problems
within a flexible and rigorous mathematical system and control framework, and to
develop solution strategies based on infinite dimensional system control and
estimation tools. This research will support the investigator?s long-term career
goals of promoting interdisciplinary collaboration and education among different
research groups at the institution by advancing knowledge and exploring real-
world applications. This research will also greatly support the investigator's
efforts to recruit and retain students in STEM areas, especially those from
underrepresented minorities, and to provide them with solid mathematical
training and valuable interdisciplinary education to pursue their future
studies.

The project will focus on the development of nonlinear feedback laws, which
utilize information of the system?s own state, for control and stabilization of
a broad family of flow-transport problems newly emerged in real-world
applications, including suppression of singularity in chemotaxis and quenching
of reaction-diffusion. Such feedback laws are aimed at achieving a balance
between the efficiency in real-time implementation and the accuracy in steering
the system behavior. Since it is often neither practical to obtain the full
state information nor to enable control everywhere in space-time, this research
will focus on the use of partial system measurement or sampled data, together
with optimization strategies to establish the effective observer-based output
feedback controls with sparse structure.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
