
* 2205590
* Analysis of Singularity Formation in Three-Dimensional Euler Equations and Search for Potential Singularities in Navier-Stokes Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,07/13/2022
* Thomas Hou,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 358,993.00

Navier-Stokes equations have been around for more than 150 years. Physicists use
them to model ocean currents, weather patterns and turbulent flows behind a
commercial jet or ship. Most physicists and engineers believe that the smooth
solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations will not break down without external
forcing. On the other hand, a recent study by the PI indicates that the Navier-
Stokes equations could develop a catastrophic behavior if one starts with a
highly symmetric but perfectly smooth flow. Such scenario corresponds to a
"perfect storm" in which all things that could potentially go wrong indeed go
wrong. Potentially singular behavior of the Navier-Stokes equations could post
tremendous damage to our environment, affect the safety of our planes and ships,
and our ability to do accurate weather forecasting. The purpose of this project
is to investigate under what conditions the Euler and the Navier-Stokes
equations may develop singular behavior. The understanding of this question
would enable us to avoid catastrophic behavior of the fluid flows in nature. The
ultimate goal of this research is to develop effective analytical and
computational tools that would enhance our ability to model and predict various
complex phenomena in nature so that we can have more confidence in the safety of
commercial jets and ships, and weather forecasting. Additional impact of this
project will be the involvement of graduate students. The interdisciplinary
training they receive in this project will be very important for their future
careers in mathematics and science.

Whether the 3D incompressible Euler equations develop finite time singularities
from smooth initial data has been a longstanding open question. Built upon the
results obtained from the prior NSF support, this project aims at providing a
rigorous proof of the potential finite time singularity in the 3D Euler
equations with smooth initial data and boundary. A major approach of the
research is to prove the existence and stability of an approximate self-similar
profile with a small residual error for the 3D axisymmetric Euler equations.
Numerical computations will first be conducted to construct an approximate self-
similar profile with a very small residual error. A crucial step in the analysis
is to obtain linear stability for the approximate self-similar profile through a
dynamic rescaling formulation. Linear stability will be established by obtaining
sharp functional estimates with appropriately chosen singular weights and using
space-time estimates with computer assistance. The new techniques and tools
developed during this project are likely to have an impact in the neighboring
areas of mathematics. Another proposed project is to look for potential singular
solutions of the 3D Navier-Stokes equations using specially designed initial
data with periodic boundary conditions. The approach relies on using the dynamic
rescaling formulation to solve the axisymmetric Navier-Stokes equations and to
avoid the potential numerical instability induced by the frequent changes of the
adaptive meshes in recent computations. The successful execution of this
research would provide valuable insight to the Clay Millennium Problem on the 3D
Navier-Stokes equations and become an important step towards its ultimate
resolution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
