
* 2205434
* Dynamics of Partial Differential Equations: Topological Implications for Stability and Analysis in Higher Spatial Dimensions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,07/22/2022
* Margaret Beck,MA,Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 429,761.00

Mathematical equations known as dynamical systems and partial differential
equations are used to model a wide variety of processes, including ecological,
biological, and physical applications. Mathematically predicting solution
behavior provides a mechanism for predicting real-world system behavior, and
also for predicting how such behavior will change as system parameters are
varied. Stable states are attracting, and thus stable states are those that are
mostly likely to be observed. Topological properties related to stability are
those that are robust under sufficiently nice deformations, and can therefore be
used to make predictions about large classes of systems, possibly without
reference to the finer details of the equation under study. Although much is
mathematically understood about models with only one space dimension, there are
many interesting open questions about higher spatial dimensions, which is
particularly relevant for applications. This project is focused on developing
theoretical tools for predicting the long-time behavior of solutions to these
types of equations. This project will also support efforts to train women PhD
students and conduct outreach work, such as a week-long summer math camp for
high school students.

This project is focused on developing theoretical tools for analyzing the
dynamics associated with a large class of partial differential equations (PDEs),
including reaction-diffusion equations and fourth-order systems such as the
Swift-Hohenberg equation, in both one and higher spatial dimensions.
Understanding such systems requires predicting not only what types of solutions
will exist, but also their stability, which has direct consequences for their
observability in the real-world. There are two primary goals: (i) Investigating
topological implications for stability in higher-order PDEs and systems of PDEs;
and (ii) Analyzing solutions to PDEs in spatial dimensions greater than one. The
first goal is connected with the results of classical Sturm-Liouville theory for
scalar, second order eigenvalues problems. However, for fundamental reasons that
theory cannot be directly extended to higher-order systems, and so truly new
methods must be developed. The second goal will be achieved by developing a
useful spatial dynamics, which refers to treating a distinguished spatial
variable as a time-like evolution variable, for systems in multiple spatial
dimensions. This will allow one to apply the tools of dynamical systems theory
to understand the associated solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
