
* 2205663
* Critical Phenomena in Coherent Structure Formation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/2022,07/12/2022
* Arnd Scheel,MN,University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 285,000.00

Large complex dynamical systems often self-organize into simple coherent
behavior. Describing, analyzing, and computing the dynamics of these self-
organized structures is at the center of understanding processes ranging from
crystallization, self-assembly, or material hardening, to the emergence of
patterns and function in living organisms. The principal investigator (PI)
studies the role of coherent structures both in organizing the dynamics of
systems through the selection of patterns and shape, but also in their role for
validating models through quantitative predictions. The first part of the
project is concerned with invasion processes, where a new structure propagates
in the system after a sudden change in parameters. This invasion process is
poorly understood and computationally challenging. The PI will develop new
analytical and computational tools to systematically analyze, predict, and thus
validate models. The second part of the project is concerned with point defects
that arise in soft matter. Point defects both organize the system dynamics, but
also present challenges to macroscopic, homogenized descriptions of large
systems. The proposed work further develops analytical and computational methods
that aim at a fine description of the shape of the core of point defects and
their effect on the medium far away from the core. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be engaged in the research of the project.

The PI will analyze invasion fronts and point defects. Invasion fronts describe
the propagation into an unstable state across many scientific areas, from
material science to ecology and epidemiology. Propagation speeds and the novel
state created in the wake of the invasion process can often be well predicted
from linear analysis at the unstable state, through a marginal pointwise
stability analysis. The PI will first develop novel computational tools for the
associated linear questions, complemented by a rigorous convergence analysis. In
a second step, the PI will addresse the validity of these linear predictions in
nonlinear systems, in particular questions associated with the marginal
stability conjecture that postulates that critical, only marginally stable
fronts are selected in the invasion process. A second part of the proposal
studies dislocations in striped phases and creases in elastic media. In both
situations, analysis of the existence of these point defects will yield a deeper
understanding of the role of the core of the defect in the large-scale
deformation of the medium. The interaction between core and farfield is analyzed
using analytical, perturbative tools and computational methods that rely on
rigorous approximations of unbounded by finite-size domains.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
