
* 2205508
* Control of Fluid-Structure Interactions: Finite Dimensional Strategies for Flutter/Turbulence Suppression
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,07/18/2022
* Irena Lasiecka,TN,University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 340,000.00

The goal of this mathematical research project is to identify and construct
physically implementable control strategies for suppression of turbulence, which
is fluid motion characterized by chaotic changes in pressure and flow velocity,
and control of flutter, which is sustained oscillation that may occur when a
nonlinear body is subject to surrounding inviscid flow. The results are
anticipated to inform several important application areas, including aerodynamic
design and renewable energy systems in which harvesting flutter is a goal. The
project involves collaboration with engineers and will train graduate students
through research involvement in modeling, data assimilation, and scientific
computing.

The project studies questions in control theory and corresponding control
strategies with focus on physical phenomena governed by three-dimensional (3D)
fluids, flow/fluid-structure interactions which induce strong instabilities in
their dynamics. The main goal is to establish flutter-suppression and
turbulence-suppression by means of finite dimensional control strategies. The
objectives of the project are: (i) finite dimensional attracting sets to capture
flutter of the oscillating structure, (ii) finite dimensional boundary feedback
stabilization of 3D fluids, and (iii) control theory for 3D fluid-structures
with moving interface. The investigation of flutter will require the theory of
non-dissipative dynamical systems and their attractors, along with microlocal
analysis. In this project, investigation of turbulence in 3D will require Besov
spaces of tight indices and maximal regularity (R-boundedness theory) of
boundary-feedback partial differential equations. Quasilinear theory and sharp
estimates for the hyperbolic Dirichlet-Neumann map will be essential tools in
controlling bodies moving in a fluid, where global existence is still an open
problem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
