
* 2205694
* Charting a New Paradigm for Large Non-Exchangeable Multi-Agent and Many-Particle Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2022,08/02/2022
* Pierre-Emmanuel Jabin,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The project will develop a new framework for the study of large systems of
interacting "agents" or "particles". The main goal is to obtain a reduction in
complexity for systems with a very large number of agents, by replacing exact
interactions with a notion of mean field. Existing theories, to justify this
approximation, typically assume that the agents are identical or at least
indistinguishable. This assumption can be valid when considering classical
applications in Physics, such as the dynamics of electrons under an
electrostatic potential. The investigator will introduce new approaches to
remove the assumption of indistinguishable particles or agents while still
involving realistic singular interactions: This will allow to consider more
complex applications such as multi-species models in Physics and models for the
dynamics of networks of biological neurons. The project provides training
research opportunities for graduate students. Mathematically speaking having
non-identical particles or agents changes the structure of the systems. First,
it makes them non-symmetric and non-exchangeable, which has deep consequences
when trying to define so-called observables, such as the joint law of a sub-
system. It also breaks some of the cancellation effects, for example the anti-
symmetry of the interaction, that many current methods relied on to handle
singular interactions. The project introduces novel methods to bypass those
issues such as new duality formulations and an extended notion of marginal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
