
* 2205962
* Quantum Symmetries of Topological Phases of Matter
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2022,08/02/2022
* Eric Rowell,TX,Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2025
* USD 194,902.00

Ordinary phases of matter (gas, liquid, solid) are distinguished by their
symmetries: transformations that leave them unchanged--for example a ninety
degree rotation of a cubic solid. Exotic quantum states of matter present under
extreme conditions (low temperatures, strong magnetic fields) exhibit symmetries
that resist a simple geometric description. Rather, their symmetries are
understood through topology: qualitative geometry in which angles and lengths
are ignored. The study of topological states is as important for their
application to quantum technologies as for understanding the physical world. Of
particular interest are the applications in quantum information. The
investigator will study the mathematical symmetries of these topological phases
of matter for the purpose of classifying and distinguishing them, probing their
properties, and understanding how they are related through phase transitions.
Some emphasis will be on how the properties of these phases of matter might find
utility in quantum technologies. The investigator will employ theoretical and
computational methods to study mathematical models for topological phases of
matter. While two-dimensional topological phases of matter have been well-
studied, many important questions remain. Three-dimensional systems with
topological features are playing an increasingly substantial role yet are not as
well-studied from a rigorous mathematical perspective. Two key themes in quantum
symmetries are braided fusion categories and motion group representations: the
first models the topologically invariant features of topological phases of
matter, and the second encodes the topological dynamics of anyons and loop-like
excitations. Understanding how the models are related through symmetries and
phase transitions will provide a clearer picture of the landscape of topological
phases of matter. In a complementary direction, the investigator will develop
methods to understand the physically relevant representations of the braid group
and higher dimensional generalizations. In three dimensions there is tension
between the sensitivity of the topological invariants and the physically
motivated assumption of unitarity. This challenge will be met through the study
of non-semisimple categories and representations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
