
* 2206127
* GOALI: Network Models for Membrane Filtration
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/2022,08/09/2022
* Linda Cummings,NJ,New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 477,562.00

Membrane filters are used in in an extraordinarily wide range of everyday
applications ranging from industrial waste treatment to water purification to
air conditioning to food production and, of particular relevance today, medical
masks and vaccine manufacture. Since the goal of effective filtration is the
removal by the filter of particles or impurities carried by the feed solution,
fouling of the membrane is unavoidable, leading ultimately to filter failure.
Improved understanding of the fouling mechanisms, critical in improving filter
designs, is therefore the target of significant research efforts. In addition to
considerations of how particles interact with and adhere to the membrane
material, pore structure, size and shape are critical factors in determining
filter functionality and efficiency. There is considerable industrial interest
in designing and manufacturing efficient filters that allow for fine control of
particle removal while maintaining a reasonable lifetime. Such filters typically
have pore size that decreases in the membrane depth; and may incorporate varying
degrees of connectivity between pores. Our work will use theoretical approaches
(combined with experimental calibration) to study general networks of pores
within filters and identify optimal pore network structures that maximize filter
lifetime while meeting a prescribed impurity removal threshold. This project
will also provide training and research and industrial experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students.

This project addresses issues of flow and fouling in porous membrane filters,
where the pore structure may be modeled as a network of connected (sufficiently
slender) tubes. Working with industrial collaborators at W.L. Gore & Associates
and with a team of students, the PIs will derive new predictive mathematical
models to describe situations of practical importance. Our models will be
formulated on arbitrary pore networks (where both the length and radius of pores
can vary) and will describe fouling both by adsorption of small particulate
contaminants at the pore walls, and by sieving of larger particles (with an
arbitrary size distribution). We will study networks generated computationally
(using a variant of the Random Geometric Graph construction) as well as real
pore networks in non-proprietary manufactured membranes. We will also use
methods from persistent homology (PH) to study connectivity features of such
pore networks and how these evolve in time, to elucidate scaling relationships
between geometric/topological features and filtration performance metrics. The
work is of significant interest to our industrial collaborators, who will
provide us with data and advise on industrial relevance via regular team
meetings. This interaction will ensure that the project remains focused and will
guarantee that we identify and address questions of real importance to
applications. The experimental data provided will also allow us to identify
appropriate ranges for unknown parameters in our models, and to test uncertain
modeling assumptions. Additionally, we will formulate new modules for our
Capstone Course in Applied Mathematics that will involve undergraduate students
in the research by means of Monte-Carlo type simulations and persistent homology
methods using available software libraries. The research will combine novel
mathematical modeling with analytical approaches including graph theory,
optimization, homogenization techniques, multiple scales analysis, asymptotic
methods, stochastic analysis and probability theory, and efficient numerical
techniques.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
