
* 2206239
* Analysis of Deformation, Buckling, and Fracture of Materials: From Composite Materials to Thin Domains
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,07/25/2022
* Davit Harutyunyan,CA,University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 210,000.00

Manufactured devices and structures are often composites containing slender
parts. To avoid structural failures and predict their mechanical behavior, one
needs to understand material mechanical behavior under loading, namely the
rigidity, flexibility, buckling, and fracture of structures, and to derive the
effective behavior of composites, which broadly speaking amounts to establishing
tight bounds on a composite's effective properties. Existing engineering thin
structure theories mostly rely on formal asymptotic expansions and
approximations, and while generally they predict the deformation and fracture of
thin materials quite accurately, they fail to do so in some cases for reasons
not well understood, since often there is not a mathematically rigorous and
comprehensive mechanism for verification of the regime of validity, even when
the structural geometry is simple. On the other hand, existing mathematical thin
structure theories still contain several unsolved or unverified regimes
concerning the geometry of the structure and the energy and loading magnitudes.
This project aims to tackle these shortcomings in the modeling of deformation,
buckling, and fracture of thin structures, by building new tools to obtain
mathematically rigorous thin structure theories depending on geometric
parameters of the structure, and to study composites and printed materials to
derive new bounds on their effective properties. The project will provide
research training opportunities for graduate students.

The first part of the project deals with continuum and fracture mechanics. While
the mathematical theory of deformation and rigidity for developable shells is
well understood, it is less so for constant-sign Gaussian curvature shells and
thin domains. At the same time the study of buckling of thin structures is known
to be complex and underdeveloped. It is known that the linear geometric rigidity
of shells with pinned thin faces depends on the Gaussian curvature of the shell,
and this project aims at showing that this is indeed the case in the nonlinear
setting too and at improving the theories for constant-sign Gauss curvature thin
domains. The project plans also to tackle the modeling of buckling of thin
structures by means of a new slender structure buckling theory, and, on the side
of fracture mechanics, to derive a mathematically rigorous shell fracture
Griffith theory for shells with vanishing or constant-sign Gaussian curvature.
The second part of the project intends to derive new bounds on the effective
properties of composites and printed materials, known as metamaterials, by means
of the so-called extremal quasiconvex quadratic forms. The project will use
techniques and tools from applied analysis and real algebraic and convex
geometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
