
* 2206037
* Phenomena of Periodic Layered Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2022,05/10/2022
* Stephen Shipman,LA,Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 264,000.00

This project investigates the physical properties of multi-layered materials for
the purpose of guiding the efficient and novel design of opto-electronic
devices, such as lasers, antennas, and filters. A popular example of such a
material is stacked sheets of hexagonal carbon graphene. The aim is to develop
flexibility in design from the multitude of ways in which the layers can be
placed relative to each other to achieve a desired interaction of optical and
electromagnetic waves, ultimately delivering practical options for harnessing
light. The layering process naturally intertwines the geometrical structure of
the layers with the mathematical equations for the underlying physics. This
project focuses on the interaction of these mathematical objects with the intent
of building a foundational theory of layered media. Because the investigation
targets the underlying physical phenomena, its results will be applicable across
the diverse aspects of society that rely on electromagnetic devices. Students at
the graduate and undergraduate levels will be integrated into a dedicated group
of researchers from diverse backgrounds and will be given the opportunity to
present their work at scientific conferences to help them broaden their
scientific horizons and forge professional connections.

There is a physical and mathematical object that lies at the center of the
investigations in this project, called the Fermi surface, which together with
the associated Bloch surface contains core information about electromagnetic
waves in crystalline or periodic materials, by encoding a relation between two
fundamental physical quantities, energy (or frequency) and momentum (or
wavenumber). These objects are analytic or algebraic varieties, depending on the
details of the periodic medium, and their structure encodes information about
the layering method. The layered materials can be either two-dimensional, such
as multi-layer graphene sheets, or three-dimensional, where the layers are
internal to the bulk and provide a sort of hidden degree of freedom. Specific
objectives are to establish connections between the layering method and the
Fermi and Bloch varieties, particularly their reducibility and singularities; to
analyze the resonant consequences of reducibility of these varieties; to
classify internal symmetries that result in reducibility and the persistence of
reducibility under symmetry breaking; to create novel bulk media by
homogenization of layered graph models; and to apply these investigations to
multi-layer graphene and other physically viable layered materials. The study
will invoke the mathematical areas of complex analysis, partial differential
equations, algebraic geometry, and spectral theory of differential operators.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
