
* 2206291
* From Differential Inclusions to Variational Problems: Theory and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/2022,04/21/2022
* Guanying Peng,MA,Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2025
* USD 197,999.00

Singularities are ubiquitous in nature. Examples include turbulence in fluid
dynamics, folds in thin films, and defects in liquid crystals. The physical
behavior around singularities is generally highly complex, posing great
challenges to the efforts of understanding their formation, structure, and
influence on neighboring regions. The knowledge of the nature of singularities
is fundamental to predict a system?s behavior or to develop effective
applications for a material. This project considers systems in continuum
mechanics and materials science that can be described directly or indirectly by
a class of partial differential equations (PDE). The main goals include
developing novel mathematical methods for analyzing this class of PDE and
applying such new methods to better understand the nature of their
singularities. This project will offer research and training opportunities to
graduate and undergraduate students. Many nonlinear PDE modeling physical
systems and materials can be formulated as differential inclusions. The nature
of singularities in these problems is closely related to the rigidity and
flexibility properties of the relevant differential inclusions. This project
contains two main themes. The first theme aims to extend the general theory for
rigidity and flexibility of differential inclusions, and to develop new
analytical tools to study the rigidity and flexibility of scalar and systems of
conservation laws viewed as differential inclusions. Specifically, the Eikonal
equation and a two-by-two system of conservation laws for isentropic elasticity
will be investigated as model problems. The investigator will combine methods
from differential inclusions and hyperbolic conservation laws to advance the
understanding of the structure of entropy solutions for systems and generalized
entropy solutions for scalar equations. The second theme seeks to develop novel
perspectives and analytical methods incorporating entropies, to study second
order scalar and multi-valued problems in the calculus of variations, which are
closely related to the Eikonal equation. Such problems arise in various physical
settings, including thin films and layered elastic materials, liquid crystals,
and self-organized convection patterns. The investigator plans to meld tools
from variational analysis and those developed in the first part of this project
to characterize the low-energy states. This analysis will inform the complex
singularity structures in different physical settings of broad practical
interest.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
