
* 2206171
* Stieltjes Functions and Spectral Analysis in Sea Ice Physics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MSPA-INTERDISCIPLINARY
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2022
* Kenneth Golden,UT,University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2025
* USD 538,098.00

Polar sea ice is a critical component of Earth's climate system. Precipitous
losses of Arctic sea ice affect not only the polar marine environment, but can
impact, for example, weather patterns, ocean currents, storm tracks, and
precipitation amounts in the Northern Hemisphere. As a material, sea ice is a
multiscale composite of pure ice with millimeter-scale brine inclusions and
centimeter-scale polycrystalline microstructure. Even the ice pack itself is a
granular composite of ice floes in a sea water host. A principal challenge in
modeling sea ice and its role in climate is how to use information on small
scale structure to find the effective or homogenized properties on larger scales
relevant to process studies and coarse-grained climate models. Also of interest
is the inverse problem of recovering parameters controlling small scale
processes from large scale observations, such as in remote sensing. These
central issues are addressed in this project by exploiting special mathematical
properties of effective parameters that are common to several important problem
areas in sea ice modeling. They include fluid and electromagnetic transport
through sea ice, diffusion processes like heat flux enhanced by brine
convection, and ocean surface waves in the ice pack. Sea ice shares close
similarities with other naturally occurring and engineered composites. Our
mathematical results on sea ice will give new insights and findings about other
composite materials, and vice versa. This research will help to advance how sea
ice is represented in climate models and improve projections of the fate of
Earth's sea ice packs and the ecosystems they support. This project will also
provide support, training, and research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students. A powerful approach in the mathematical theory of
homogenization is the analytic continuation method, which provides integral
representations for the effective parameters of composite materials, treated as
Stieltjes functions of their parameters. The complexities of composite
microgeometries are distilled into the spectral properties of self-adjoint
operators, like the Hamiltonian in quantum physics, which become random matrices
when the system is discretized. Early applications of the method to sea ice
focused on remote sensing and electromagnetic properties, with sea ice treated
as a two-phase composite. Extensions of the method to polycrystalline media,
advection diffusion processes, and surface waves through the ice pack have
yielded only elementary bounds on the effective parameters, based on the
coarsest information like the mass of a spectral measure in the integral, which
is the brine volume fraction for sea ice as a two-phase composite, or the area
fraction of ocean covered by ice floes for surface waves. However, exploiting
deep parallels with random matrix theory descriptions of quantum physics brings
Anderson transition concepts like field localization, mobility edges, eigenvalue
repulsion, and band gaps into homogenization for classical transport in two-
phase composites. In the funded work we will explore new insights that this
approach can give us in the above problem areas, where the effective parameters
are Stieltjes functions. For example, how do sea ice effective properties depend
on crystal size and structure, can some ocean waves be localized by the ice pack
geometry, and how does the fractal nature of composite geometry influence
effective transport and spectral properties. This approach opens many questions
of mathematical interest, while at the same time provides novel tools to address
questions of critical importance in understanding sea ice processes in the
rapidly changing polar marine environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
