
* 2219434
* DMS-EPSRC Collaborative Research: Stability Analysis for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations across Multiscale Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/2022,07/26/2022
* Alexis Vasseur,TX,University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2025
* USD 124,914.00

This award partners a team of US and UK mathematicians to use their combined
expertise for the purpose of studying several challenging and longstanding
mathematical phenomena in fluid dynamics, for example, the interaction of shock
waves, the stability of vortex sheets, and the behavior of boundary layers as
the viscosity vanishes. The project will also investigate questions involving
the behavior of particle systems as the number of particles becomes infinite;
the understanding of the collective behavior of these systems has applications
to a variety of physical, biological, financial, and social systems involving
many interacting agents. The award will provide opportunities for students to be
involved in collaborative research and workshops to take place at various
institutions in the US and the UK.

This collaborative research project will develop innovative mathematical methods
and techniques to study outstanding stability questions for nonlinear partial
differential equations across the scales, including asymptotic, quantifying, and
structural stability problems in hyperbolic conservation laws, kinetic
equations, and related multiscale applications in fluid-particle (agent based)
models. The research is focused mainly on the following four interrelated
objectives: (1) Stability analysis of shock wave patterns of
reflections/diffraction with focus on the shock reflection-diffraction problem
in gas dynamics; (2) Stability analysis of vortex sheets, contact
discontinuities, and other characteristic discontinuities; (3) Stability
analysis of particle to continuum limits including the quantifying
asymptotic/mean-field/large-time limits for pairwise interactions and particle
limits for general interactions among multi-agent or many-particle systems; (4)
Stability analysis of asymptotic limits with emphasis on the vanishing viscosity
limit of solutions from multi-dimensional compressible viscous to inviscid flows
with large initial data. The project will lead to both new understanding of
these fundamental scientific issues and beneficial cross-fertilization with
significant progress towards a nonlinear stability theory of nonlinear partial
differential equations across multiscale applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
