
* 2232241
* Combinatorial and Probabilistic Approaches to Oscillator and Clock Synchronization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 11/01/2021,06/27/2022
* Hanbaek Lyu,WI,University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 82,961.00

If a group of people is given local clocks with arbitrarily set times, and there
is no global reference (for example GPS), is it possible for the group to
synchronize all clocks by only communicating with nearby members? In order for a
distributed system to be able to perform high-level tasks that may go beyond the
capability of an individual agent, the system must first solve a "clock
synchronization" problem to establish a shared notion of time. The study of
clock synchronization (or coupled oscillators) has been an important subject of
research in mathematics and various areas of science for decades, with fruitful
applications in many areas including wildfire monitoring, electric power
networks, robotic vehicle networks, large-scale information fusion, and wireless
sensor networks. However, there has been a gap between our theoretical
understanding of systems of coupled oscillators and practical requirements for
clock synchronization algorithms in modern application contexts. This project
will develop systematic approaches for bridging this gap based on combinatorial
and probabilistic methods. The use of discrete oscillators will be a key thread
in developing more robust and efficient clock synchronization algorithms,
extending the current proof techniques for convergence guarantee, and providing
a foundation for a data-driven approach to the clock synchronization problems.
This project will also include interdisciplinary collaboration and research
opportunities for students at all levels

One of the key difficulties in analyzing the behavior of coupled oscillators
lies in the cyclic hierarchy in the phase space. A widely used observation in
the literature is that, if all initial phases are concentrated in an open half-
circle, such a cyclic hierarchy disappears and we have robust synchronization
results in various settings. Hence deriving global synchronization from
arbitrary initial configurations not only warrants self-stabilization of the
clock synchronization algorithm under arbitrary perturbation, but also addresses
the theoretical limitation of such a half-circle condition. By extending
techniques such as local concentration and adaptive pulse-coupling scheme due to
the PI, the project aims at deriving global synchronization from an arbitrary
initial configuration on undirected finite trees, for non-identical natural
frequencies and non-zero propagation delay of signals with optimal bounds on
convergence time. The convergence result will be extended to arbitrary graphs by
combining with a spanning tree algorithm, and the composite algorithm will be
implemented as a fast and resource-minimal clock synchronization algorithm for
modern wireless sensor networks. This project will also include
interdisciplinary collaboration and research opportunities for students at all
levels. In particular, some of the projects involve generating a large database
for the collective behavior of some models of discrete coupled oscillators on
finite graphs, and applying machine learning techniques to extract key features
of the pair of network topology and initial configuration that guarantee
synchronization. The project will provide students with research experiences
ranging from dynamical systems to computer science and machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
