
* 2237842
* CAREER: Learning of graph diffusion and transport from high dimensional data with low-dimensional structures
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/2023,01/20/2023
* Xiuyuan Cheng,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2028
* USD 147,447.00

Graph-based methods are pivotal tools in big data analysis due to their powerful
ability to model data in various fields of science and industry. For high-
dimensional data, an affinity graph can be constructed from the data cloud and
the graph geometry will recover the implicit low-dimensional structure of the
data. Therefore, a graph-based approach has the potential to overcome the curse
of dimensionality and provide distribution-free methods for predictive and
generative learning tasks. The overarching goal of this project is to develop a
theoretical and computational framework for graph-based data analysis that
overcomes the curse of dimensionality of high dimensional data by leveraging the
underlying low-dimensional geometric structure in the data. The mathematical
results can be applied to data visualization and dimension reduction, generative
models, general unsupervised learning, and a wide range of real applications,
ranging from single-cell sequencing to sensor networks. The project will provide
research opportunities and projects that are suitable for graduate and
undergraduate students, and results of the project will produce pedagogical
materials to be incorporated into data science courses at the undergraduate and
graduate levels.

The project aims to develop theoretical and computational tools for efficient
and accurate graph-based analysis of high-dimensional data that captures the
intrinsically low-dimensional, non-linear structures in the data. The research
work consists of four integrated topics: (1) learning of graph diffusion with a
theoretical guarantee, (2) robust graph affinity for graph-based data analysis,
(3) graph-based learning of intrinsic optimal transport in high dimension, and
(4) generative model of graph data by gradient flow. Using tools from applied
harmonic analysis and high dimensional probability, the project will address
several open questions in the field. On the theoretical side, the project will
model the implicit low-dimensional structure as data lying on or near hidden
manifolds embedded in the high-dimensional space and analyze the convergence of
the graph operators in the limit of large samples. On the practical side, the
project will develop algorithms with sampling and computational complexities
only depending on the intrinsic data dimensionality. The mathematical findings
will provide computational tools to analyze data in real world applications,
including biomedical and network data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.
