
* 8602419
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Optimization: Algorithms and Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, SYSTEMS THEORY, SOFTWARE ENGINEERING, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT
* 07/15/1986,07/14/1987
* Shih-Ping Han,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1988
* USD 54,000.00

Professor Han proposes to study new theoretical and computational aspects of
certain optimization problems. His main interests lie in designing a conceptual
framework for computer oriented procedures that seek a minimum of a function of
many variables subject to constraints. The class of problems that Han is
studying involves smooth, i.e. differentiable functions of n variables which may
be approximated by quadratic functions. The variables are not restricted to
integer values. This class of problems is often solved by iterative methods in
which the minimization is done sequentially by searching for minimum of the
function along certain special directions. With the development of new computer
architectures it became more and more important to adapt the existing procedures
to new possibilities. In parallel processing, arithmetic and logical operations
can be done by many processors at the same time. Han proposes to investigate
minimization methods that are based on a decompositon of the problem into
several search problems with directions that are independent in a certain sense.
Such techniques could become useful in parallel processing and could yield a
important speed-up of practical computing.
