
* 8619856
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Waves: Theory and Computation
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, NUMERIC, SYMBOLIC & GEO COMPUT, EXPERI ADVANC SCIEN COMP SYSTS
* 07/01/1987,06/10/1988
* James Glimm,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 12/31/1989
* USD 309,643.00

Nonlinear phenomena are important across all of science. They constitute a
broad and poorly understood area which draws on a diverse range of mathematical
disciplines. This research program addresses to an area of nonlinear analysis
which has recently shown considerable progress: nonlinear waves in hyperbolic
systems and in coupled hyperbolic-elliptic systems. The investigators intend to
develop computational methods which are based on this mathematical theory and to
participate in the development of the mathematical theory of these waves. The
goal of this work is to develop the mathematical theory and to utilize it to the
maximum extent possible within the computational process. The success of front
tracking shows that this goal is attainable. One of the investigator's major
accomplishments has been the proof of scientific principle for the front
tracking method. This method is now accepted, on the basis of evidence developed
within the research program. The success of front tracking has been confirmed by
independent work of others. It parallels in two dimensions the previous success
which has been achieved by the Random Choice Method in one dimension. The
development and use of mathematical theory in the computational process was
likewise a characteristic feature of the Random Choice Method.
