
* 8701195
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric and Computational Foundations of Nonlinear Feedback Control
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, SYSTEMS THEORY
* 02/01/1988,01/15/1988
* Robert Hermann,MA,Association For Physical & Systems Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1990
* USD 52,176.00

Work underway on Control of air and spacecraft that have nonlinear dynamics
suggests many new problems of geometric control theory. In previous work, the PI
has introduced the cauchy characteristic multifoliate structure associated with
a control system. It is a basic geometric invariant of the feedback structure,
ultimately determining (both locally and globally) what can be accomplished by
applying state-feedback control to the apparatus. This proposed work will carry
on the study of the cauchy characteristic structure both from the point of view
of traditional mathematics (e.g. to what extent does the cauchy characteristic
structure determine the control system up to feedback equivalent?) and from the
LISP/Symbolic computation point of view. In parallel, work will also continue on
the Lie- theoretic foundation of various numerical algorithms for dealing with
nonlinear differential equations. For example, how can the idea of the classical
Runge-Kutta algorithm be implemented for differential equations which live on a
differentiable manifold that carries a Lie group structure? Many potential
applications are possible e.g. to the control of rotating and nonlinear
mechanical systems, as encountered in the study of aircraft and Robotics. This
project falls into the broad area of control science, which is an
interdisciplinary research activity involving both mathematics and engineering.
