
* 8702537
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Stochastic Control toConsumption/Investment Decisions, Equilibrium Analysis and Production
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, SYSTEMS THEORY
* 07/15/1987,01/27/1989
* Steven Shreve,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1990
* USD 269,421.00

This project consists of research suggested in three sub-areas, of which the
first two are closely linked, while the last is slightly disjoint. In the first
area, the general problem is one where money has to be continuously invested or
consumed so that the net benefit of the total consumption is a maximum. The
investments can be divided between a bond, with a fixed rate of return, and
several risky stocks. Variations such as borrowing and short selling (investing
negative amounts) are possible. In some previous work the authors have made some
progress on the case where the various rates of return are random rather than
fixed. Also in a recent work, by means of measure change argument, they have
linked the optimal consumption rate in feedback form to the functional inverse
of the derivative of the consumption function. The authors propose extensions in
infinite versions of the problem, situations where borrowing and short selling
are restricted, and cases where a bankruptcy payment is involved. The second
area, which is closely related to the first, deals with a multiplicity of agents
all pursuing their individually optimal consumption and investment policies. The
goal is to investigate the equilibrium situation where net investment, and
creation of wealth are all zero etc. and show the existence of spot prices. The
last area, which is slightly disjoint from the above deals with the control of
production in a manufacturing system producing n commodities on m machines. The
goal is to minimize holding inventory costs and production systems so as to meet
specified demands, even when machines are liable to failure. The authors propose
to investigate the case where the failure rate is proportional to machine
utilization. They also suggest an extension where there is a continuum of
machines, but this appears less convincing. The research of this type is of
interest to economic theory and stock management, while at the same time being
in the mainstream of current research efforts in control seen as part of
mathematics.
