
* 8801857
* Mathematical Sciences: Stability,Instability and SingularityFormation in Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1988,03/17/1989
* Michael Weinstein,MI,Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1990
* USD 40,434.00

Nonlinear partial differential equations arising in models of physical
phenomena and in geometry will be the focus of this research. Studies on the
stability and instability of solitary traveling waves arising in laser
propagation, plasma waves and water waves will be carried out. Solitary waves
are localized finite energy solutions of nonlinear equations that result from a
balance of dispertion and a focusing nonlinearity. Important questions to be
addressed in this work are concerned with the stability of solitary waves and
their role in the general structure of solutions. The model equation to be
analyzed is the nonlinear Schroedinger equation. Many of the phenomena which
hold for this equation also hold for other nonlinear dispersive systems which
arise as envelope equations. These include the generalized Korteweg-de Vries,
Benjamin-Ono, Intermediate Long Wave and Benjamin-Bona-Mahoney equations. The
ground state solitary wave solution plays a critical role in that it is an
interface between stable and unstable solutions. Two goals of this work are to
determine the sense in which blowing up solutions are attracted to the ground
state and to quantify the loss of compactness in these functions. Work related
to differential geometry concerns the motion of curves governed by their
curvature. Flows of this type arise in the mathematical description of
propagating fronts. The initial expectation was that one could obtain geodesics
as the asymptotic limit of some gradient flow on the space of curves. This has
turned out to be impossible in general. Efforts will be made to understand the
global behavior of these flows and to determine the final form of flows on
spaces of curves lying in unstable manifolds.
