
* 8903018
* Mathematical Sciences: Boundary Layer Phenomena for Functional Differential Equations and Means and Their Iterations
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1989,06/13/1990
* Roger Nussbaum,NJ,Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 12/31/1991
* USD 55,604.00

This project continues work on the mathematical theory of functional
differential equations. Of particular interest are those equations involving
time delay and the presence of a negative feed-back condition. Singular
perturbation methods will be employed. Equations of this type arise in a number
of applications such as optics, physiology and mathematical biology.
Considerable progress has been made on these equations. Emphasis will be placed
on understanding the dynamics of solutions having prescribed values given over
an interval. A particular instance would be to give conditions for the existence
of slowly varying solutions. Other work will focus on equations where one has
state dependent time lags which model blood cell production and agricultural
commodity cycles. Here again, one looks for periodicity properties of solutions
as well as insight into the asymptotic properties of solutions as the
perturbation parameter tends to zero. Another class of problems to be considered
involves functional differential equations where the forcing functional depends
on the delayed values of the solution as well as the current values. Here the
primary object is to determine if there are no nonconstant solutions of period
equal to four. Examples indicate that this conjecture is true, although its
validity is by no means assured.
