
* 8905334
* Mathematical Sciences: Inversion and Observability of Parabolic Initial Boundary Value Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1989,08/14/1989
* Clyde Martin,TX,Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1991
* USD 30,460.00

The inverse problem of determining the initial boundary conditions of a system
evolving in space and time from incomplete observations of the system at various
points interior to the spatial domain, is of considerable importance in many
engineering and scientific applications. This project deals with a selection of
theoretical and numerical aspects of these problems for certain classes of
parabolic partial differential equations. The minimum information needed to
guarantee unique solutions and exact (or, analytic) forms of these solutions is
investigated. Their stability under small errors in numerically determined
system parameters and measured data are investigated using a variety of
topological, functional analytic, and regularization techniques. Numerical
procedures with corresponding error bounds, based on the exact solutions will
also be developed. Another aspect of this work concerns the theoretical and
numerical analysis of methods involving eigenfunction expansions of initial data
and Whittaker Cardinal expansions of initial and boundary data. Various
regularization techniques and their corresponding error bounds will be
investigated for the eigenfunction method. The Whittaker Cardinal technique is
inherently stable, so the main aim there is to extend the recent work of the
investigators to more general equations, domains, and to the recovery of
boundary data.
