
* 9001096
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Set Convergence, Convex Analysis, and Optimization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, TOPOLOGY
* 07/01/1990,05/09/1990
* Gerald Beer,CA,California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1992
* USD 5,000.00

Professor Beer has been involved in the study of topologies on the closed
convex subsets of a normed linear space. Such topologies give rise to topologies
on convex functions, with a function identified with its epigraph, the set of
points on or above its graph. In the last two years, Professor Beer introduced a
topology compatible with Mosco convergence of sequences of convex sets, showing
that it is stable with respect to duality if and only if the underlying space is
reflexive. Several characterizations of the topology were obtained, and
continuity properties of a variety of operators and functionals on convex sets
were studied. In response to the unsuitability of this Mosco topology in the
nonreflexive case, and in view of some prior promising results regarding the
norm convergence of linear functionals and their level sets, Professor Beer
studied the topology of uniform convergence of distance functionals on bounded
sets. Not only is this topology stable with respect to duality without
restriction, but it is also the right convergence notion in terms of the
stability of solutions of convex optimization problems. Professor Beer will
continue his studies on convergence of convex sets, with particular attention to
connections with Banach space geometry, approximation of multifunctions, and
specific operations and functionals. He also hopes to become involved in
applications of set convergence in evolving research in the foundations of
nonsmooth analysis, e.g., to certain optimization problems.
