
* 9103199
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlocal Models in Continuum Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1991,08/02/1991
* Deborah Brandon,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/16/1991
* USD 6,200.00

In this project the principal investigator will analyze rigorously several
mathematical models of nonlocal phenomena in continuum mechanics. In particular,
she will study the question of the existence of solutions of integral models for
heat flow with finite wave speeds and with singular memory functions. This work
is related to parallel work on similar equations arising in viscoelasticity. The
principal investigator will also study nonconvex variational problems with
spatially nonlocal terms of the type that occur in ferromagnetism and
superconductivity, in collaboration with colleagues at her institution. Many
phenomena in the physical world involve what applied mathematicians and
scientists call "nonlocal" processes. An example of a nonlocal process is the
response characteristic of an elastic material that has been subjected to
stretching or some other deformation. The behavior of the material depends on
both the past deformations (a nonlocal effect) and the deformation you are
applying now (a local effect). As an illustration, pick up your telephone. The
cord will deform in some way. All of those twists and turns in the cord are the
result of all the past twisting it has received, along with the twist you are
applying now. In this project the principal investigator will study rigorously
mathematical models of nonlocal processes of the type that occur in heat flow,
ferromagnetism and superconductivity.
