
* 9109324
* Mathematical Sciences: Abnormality in Optimization and Optimal Control Problems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1991,06/10/1991
* Urszula Ledzewicz,IL,Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1993
* USD 17,970.00

In this project the principal investigator will explore the use of new
techniques to study what are called "abnormal" cases in optimization and optimal
control problems that involve nonregular operators. These techniques come from
functional analysis, and they have been applied successfully to treat abnormal
cases involving the Euler-Lagrange equations and the Pontryagin Maximum
Principle. The principal investigator is concerned specifically with determining
the limits of these techniques and with obtaining sharper results than those
obtained previously for the derivation of nontrivial optimality conditions for
general extremal problems. The derivation and exploitation of optimality
conditions for problems in optimization and optimal control have been one of the
major success stories of the decades since World War II. These results have
paved the way for the development of a host of control systems that have
improved the quality of life. More recent advances involving robotic systems can
be traced to this work as well. In this project the principal investigator will
examine optimality conditions in atypical cases where the traditional theory is
inadequate. To do so requires the use of powerful methods of abstract functional
analysis combined with a thorough knowledge of classical control theory.
