
* 9114456
* Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations, Probability and Applications
* DMS,CLASSICAL ANALYSIS, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 01/01/1992,11/23/1993
* Louis Nirenberg,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 06/30/1995
* USD 993,000.00

Work supported by this award will cover broad areas of mathematical analysis
directed at problems arising from mathematical physics, liquid crystals, fluid
dynamics, free boundary problems and differential geometry. The core of the
research is in partial differential equations and systems of ordinary
differential equations. A distinctive feature of this grant is its support of
the ongoing postdoctoral and visitor program at the Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences. The institute provides a unique opportunity for young
mathematical scientists to gain new insights into the applicability of their
researches, a tradition at the institute since its inception. The vast number of
U.S. mathematicians who have been imprinted by the CIMS spirit as students,
postdocs or visitors is unmatched anywhere else. Probably even in the world.
Much of the present work will focus on nonlinear equations. One class of
problems concerns the question of monotonicity of solutions of nonlinear second
order equations in prescribed directions. This type of problem arises in the
analysis of flame propagation in cylinders. In a different direction work will
also be done to determine whether there exist periodic solutions to vector-
valued ordinary differential equations with a time periodic forcing function.
Additionally, the classical sine- Gordon equation has been used by
mathematicians to provide examples of solitary waves as solutions of relatively
simple nonlinear equations. It has been suspected that solutions which decay at
infinity (called breathers) are nonexistent. Techniques necessary for the
resolution of this problem are probably now developed to the point where an
answer can be expected in the short term. Work will be done toward this goal.
