
* 9123674
* Mathematical Sciences: Traveling Waves in Excitable Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
* 09/01/1992,05/25/1994
* John Tyson,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 02/29/1996
* USD 202,125.00

Traveling waves of excitation provide for communication and spatial
organization in a variety of biological systems. The long-term goal of this
project is to study mathematically the origin and properties of traveling waves
of excitation in heart muscle, in fields of aggregating cells, in fields of
dividing cells, and in nonliving chemical mixtures. The investigator emphasizes
those features of wave propagation that are common to all excitable media
because of their similar mathematical description. At the same time, the best
current scientific understanding of specific mechanisms is built into the
models, so that detailed quantitative comparisons between theory and experiment
can be sought. The models are studied by analytical mathematical methods and by
numerical simulations. In modern industrialized nations, the two most common
causes of death are heart disease and cancer. Each is a complicated suite of
diseases with many different causes and treatments. Nonetheless, at a
fundamental level, hearts fail because the electrical stimulation of heart
muscle contraction goes awry, and cancers spread because the normal controls
over cell growth and division are short-circuited. To develop rational
strategies to treat or cure these diseases, one must understand the basic
biological machinery that controls the contraction of heart muscle and the
division of body cells. The investigator and other mathematical biologists are
using powerful mathematical tools to unravel the inner workings of the beating
heart and the dividing cell. Their models have revealed previously hidden
secrets. For instance, the rapid disorganized fluttering of a failing heart is
caused by tiny rotating waves of contraction the spin out of control in the
heart muscle. Mathematical models are used to uncover the laws that govern these
spinning waves, that dictate their onset and demise, and that hold the key to
their treatment. Similarly, the laws that govern cell division, that determine
which cells shall divide and when, are ultimately expressible with mathematical
precision. As these laws become clear, through experimental and theoretical
investigations, it will be possible to use them intelligently to bring renegade
cancer cells back under control.
