
* 9202064
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Coupling of Solitary Internal Waves With Small- Scale Disturbances
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics, PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
* 09/01/1992,04/01/1993
* Triantaphyllos Akylas,MA,Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* nan
* 02/28/1995
* USD 137,600.00

Solitary internal waves are common features in the ocean, due to existing
temperature and salinity variations, and play an important part in the transport
of energy and momentum. Our current theoretical understanding of internal
solitary-wave dynamics is based, to a large extent, on weakly nonlinear long-
wave theories which are derived on the assumption that only long waves are
present. On the other hand, there is evidence from laboratory and field
observations that, in general, large- amplitude solitary internal waves do not
remain locally confined as suggested by these approximate theories, but, rather,
they develop short-wavelength oscillatory tails that cause radiation damping.
This radiation, in turn, provides a nonlinear mechanism for coupling large-
amplitude solitary-wave disturbances with short-scale oscillatory waves of
different modes. For example, it is possible for solitary internal waves to
transfer energy to short-scale surface waves that remain phase-locked with the
internal waves P a situation reminiscent of the surface rips that often
accompany internal waves in the field, and are visible in radar images of the
sea surface. In order to fill the gap currently existing in our theoretical
understanding, this research program investigates the generation of oscillatory
tails and the related radiation- dampling mechanism of solitary internal waves,
using singular- perturbation and numerical methods. Particular emphasis is
placed on calculating the amplitude of short-wave tails under realistic
conditions, including the possibility of deep fluids and the presence of a free
surface. For this purpose, a nonlinear WKB technique will be developed for
weakly nonlinear disturbances, and fully numerical computations will be carried
out for large-amplitude solitary waves. In addition, the transfer of energy from
solitary waves to small-scale disturbances of different modes (short-scale
surface or lower- mode internal waves) will be examined in comparison with other
physical processes, like viscous dissipation, that occur in practice.
