
* 9202550
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Models of Cell Population Dynamics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1992,05/12/1994
* Glenn Webb,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1996
* USD 93,000.00

The investigator will study the linear and nonlinear partial differential
equations of structured models of cell population dynamics. The equations model
growth and treatment of normal and tumor cell populations. The models use age
and size as structure variables to track individual cells through the cell
cycle. The models involve systems of equations to account for interaction
between proliferating and quiescent or drug-resistant cell subpopulations. The
objective of the research is to obtain qualitative information about the
behavior of the solutions of the equations. Such behavior includes asynchronous
exponential growth of early growth stage tumors, quiescence as a mechanism in
Gompertzian type growth in late stage tumors, comparison of continuous and
periodic treatment, and resonances in phase- specific periodic treatment. The
methods of the research use spectral theory of linear operators, semigroup
theory of linear and nonlinear operators in Banach lattices, and nonlinear
perturbation techniques. The project uses mathematical modelling and numerical
simulation to understand essential biological features of cell population
growth. Inherent qualitative features of population growth processes can be
revealed by these mathematical models. The complexity of the population
processes requires sophisticated mathematical models incorporating individual
cell behavior. The significance of this research lies both in the development of
mathematical methods to analyze structured population models and in the
identification of the qualitative features of these models that have potential
biological applicability. Results of the project may shed light on the behavior
of tumors.
