
* 9216614
* Mathematical Sciences: Parallel Algorithms for Ordinary Differential Equations- Applications in Kidney Modeling
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI, ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1993,05/10/1994
* Reginald Tewarson,NY,SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9216614 Tewarson The investigator and his collaborators develop realistic and
comprehensive mathematical models, and the necessary computational algorithms,
to understand the concentrating mechanism of the mammalian kidney. Their
immediate goal is to find out how the inner part of the kidney (inner medulla)
concentrates urine. The role of loops of varying lengths and their parallel
operation are studied. Presently available experimental data, as well as new
data, as it becomes available, are utilized to calibrate and exercise the
models. Current algorithms for solving the stiff multipoint boundary value
differential equations for serial computers are adapted for the parallel
supercomputers. New algorithms based on split system solvers are developed for
parallel computation. Mammals maintain the volume and composition of their body
fluids within very narrow limits. A basic mechanism for this purpose is the
kidney -- which can produce urine that is either more or less concentrated than
plasma or other body fluids. The kidney consists of a large number of distinct
functional units called nephrons, operating in parallel. The human kidney
contains roughly one million nephrons. A lengthwise cross-section of the kidney
reveals two distinct parts: the cortex and the medulla. In view of differing
physiological characteristics of the tubules, the medulla is subdivided into the
outer and the inner parts. Mathematical models have been responsible for many of
the basic ideas leading to our understanding of the urinary concentrating
mechanism. These models --- using experimentally available parameters --- have
established that the outer medulla uses the active mode (metabolic pumps) for
concentration but no model has been able to generate any significant
concentration in the inner medulla. How the inner medulla concentrates urine is
still one of the major unsolved problems in renal physiology. Hypotheses
continue to be proposed to answer this question. Mathematical models are
essential in the testing of such alternate hypotheses. Realistic and
comprehensive models involve the solution of thousands of equations. Therefore,
it is essential that the solution algorithms for the algebraic equations not
only run fast and but also minimize computer storage. Since the nephrons operate
in parallel, algorithms and computers that are able to utilize this
physiological property are eminently suitable for kidney modeling. The goal of
this interdisciplinary project is to develop efficient methods for parallel
computers to understand the concentrating mechanism of the mammalian kidney. The
use of these methods in several other important physiological modeling
applications will also be investigated. The project increases our fundamental
understanding of basic and essential physiological functions, develops software
and algorithms that can be used in other physiological studies, and may have
significant diagnostic implications. ***
