
* 9302988
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dispersive Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1993,08/05/1993
* David McLaughlin,NJ,Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Janice Alexander
* 12/31/1994
* USD 62,000.00

9302988 McLaughlin The investigator continues his research in the theory of
nonlinear waves, using a combination of mathematical theory, formal
approximation methods, and scientific computation. In addition, some of the
projects in nonlinear optics will be done in collaboration with members of the
Department of Physics at Princeton University who will provide a direct
experimental component to the research. McLaughlin will work in three general
areas of nonlinear waves -- (i) temporally chaotic waves, (ii) nonlinear optics,
and (iii) spatially and temporally chaotic waves. In the project on temporally
chaotic nonlinear waves, mathematical methods from dynamical systems theory will
be adapted to the partial differential setting of waves. The project on
spatially and temporally chaotic waves will develop both stochastic and
dynamical mathematical methods for the partial differential equations of waves.
The projects in nonlinear optics will focus upon laser light interacting with
liquid crystals. Because liquid crystal media are extremely nonlinear, they
provide excellent materials in which to study ``light-matter''interactions. All
nonlinear waves in nature, from the light waves of laser physics to water waves
on the surface of the ocean, are modeled mathematically by partial differential
equations known as nonlinear wave equations. While linear wave equations have
been well understood for some time, scientists and mathematicians knew little
about the behavior of solutions of nonlinear wave equations until the recent
explosion in scientific computing power. While scientific computation can
suggest and discover new and unexpected behavior in solutions of nonlinear wave
equations, one can never be certain of the outcome of numerical experiments.
Mathematical studies, often of further idealized models, are required -- not
only to ensure the validity of the numerical experiments, but also to establish
qualitative behavior in the model. With results certain for the model nonlinear
partial differential equations, physical experiments can then be used to
validate the wave equations as a description of real waves in nature. This
project, taken together with the experiments in nonlinear optics on the ``light-
liquid crystal'' interaction, addresses each of these related areas (scientific
computation, mathematical studies, and physical experiments) in the mathematical
studies of nonlinear waves. ***
