
* 9305935
* Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods and Adaptivity for Nonlinear PDEs
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1993,08/11/1993
* Ricardo Nochetto,MD,University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

This project will support research in the design, implementation, and analysis
of adaptive finite element methods for phase transitions and free boundary
problems arising in material sciences. Numerical methods for phase transitions
will be studied; the use of highly graded meshes is extremely important for
phase transitions and free boundary problems which typically exhibit sharp
interfaces as well as very thin transition regions. The solution, or some of its
derivatives, may exhibit discontinuities or just vary very rapidly within such
layers, leading to global numerical difficulties if the singularities are not
properly resolved. Related sharp interface models exhibiting competition between
surface tension and destabilizing mechanisms will also be studied, such as
stress driven instabilities in solid crystals and solidification processes. The
design of linearization techniques for strongly nonlinear partial differential
equations will be studied and combined with mesh refinements. The interaction of
convective fluid with free boundaries, for example that corresponding to solid
coexisting with its melt and interfaces of multiphase fluids, will be analyzed
numerically. Finally, mixed methods for constrained problems will be studied,
with special emphasis on the Stokes flow and related free boundary problems as
well as on free boundary problems for plates over obstacles. This project is
concerned with the design and implementation of adaptive mesh refinements for
nonlinear partial differential equations arising in thermodynamics, fluid
dynamics, and elasticity. The use of highly graded meshes is important for many
of these problems, which typically exhibit sharp interfaces as well as very thin
transition regions. The increasing interest in such problems stems not only from
their mathematical features but also their applications to phase transitions in
material sciences, flame propagation, combustion theory, and crystal growth.
