
* 9401871
* Mathematical Sciences: Modified Lagrangian Methods in Optimization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1994,06/10/1994
* Marc Teboulle,MD,University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 67,000.00

9401871 Teboulle The research program will focus on proximal-like methods and
their applications to nonlinear constrained optimization problems. Central to
this study is a recently proposed new class of proximal-like mappings associated
with closed convex functions, where the usual quadratic term is replaced by a
kind of quasi-distance. When applied to the dual of an optimization problem,
these give rise to wide variety of modified Lagrangians methods which have many
attractive properties not present in the classical quadratic augmented
Lagrangian. The research project will attempt to provide a unifying framework
for the design and analysis of modified multiplier methods for solving nonlinear
programming problems. The program's objective propose to sharpen and extend the
mathematical theory needed to analyze the above algorithms. In particular, the
research will consider new variants of modified Lagrangians for both convex and
nonconvex programs, and will develop a complete convergence theory. Related
decomposition algorithms within the proximal framework will also be
investigated. This project will focus on the study and development of new
methods for solving nonlinear constrained optimization problems. Such problems
consist of minimizing/maximizing an objective subject to some constraints which
are determined by the nature of the particular model/problem. Optimization
techniques play a central role in the solution of fundamental problems arising
in a wide range of applications such as: computerized tomography, finance,
geophysical sciences, production and manufacturing, robotics, to mention just a
few. One area of this research will concentrate on developing the mathematical
theory needed to analyze a new class of methods for solving nonlinear problems.
In particular, the PI will focus on the design and analysis of reliable and fast
algorithms. The second main research area will concentrate on decomposition
methods for large scale problems. Recen t advances in computer technology have
motivated the search for constructing new algorithms for specific classes of
large scale problems, by taking full advantage of the structure of this problem
classes. Such problems arise for example in structural optimization, water
distribution systems, and planning problems under uncertainty. Here, the PI will
study and develop splitting methods, which are leading to highly parallel
algorithms. In both areas, the role of optimization methods is central.
Improvement of methods and their practical applications would thus have a
beneficial impact on contributing to the solution of real life problems.
