
* 9403890
* Mathematical Sciences: Instabilities in Premixed and Diffused Flames
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, CFS-Combustion & Fire Systems
* 07/01/1994,02/26/1996
* Moshe Matalon,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 152,000.00

9403890 Matalon This program is concerned with the dynamic behavior of premixed
and diffusion (non-premixed) flames. It is proposed to derive simplified
mathematical models that permit the description of flames of general shapes in
open and confined environments, and to study dynamical aspects of flame behavior
within this framework by means of asymptotic and perturbation methods
supplemented by numerical computations. Specific problems that will be addressed
include identifying intrinsic instabilities associated with diffusion flames,
exploring the dynamics and stability of premixed flames complicated by non
uniform flow fields and by effects due to confinement, and examining the
dynamics of flame spread over liquid fuels. The significance of the proposed
research is enhancement of the current understanding of the complex phenomena
involved in combustion processes. The proposed work is not only of fundamental
importance to combustion science but has also direct relevance to practical
applications. This proposal consists of a basic research program whose aim is
gaining fundamental understanding on how the complex chemical and physical
processes interact in real combustion systems. The problems under consideration
include the burning of premixed combustible gases in open and confined
environments which is of interest in various engineering systems, flame spread
over flammable liquids which is of great importance in fire hazards with
accidental spillage, and the burning of pure (nonpremixed) fuels which is most
relevant to fire safety and fire prevention. To gain insight into these
problems, and in particular into the mechanisms responsible for the sustenance
of the burning and those responsible for its extinguishement, it is proposed to
develop simplified mathematical models and analyze them in depth. This approach,
which identifies cause and effect, is likely to explain and guide experimental
observations. A deep understanding often lead to suggest ions of new directions
for experiments and design.
