
* 9403915
* Mathematical Sciences: Applied and Computational Mathematics and Experimental Analysis
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS, FD-Fluid Dynamics
* 07/01/1994,05/09/1996
* Jerry Bona,PA,Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 335,000.00

9403915 Bona This project comprises a broadly-based investigation of some
fundamental aspects of mechanics, including the development of some of the
relevant mathematical techniques and tools. Included within its auspices are
theoretical and experimental studies of various fluid flows, studies of water
waves and formation of sand structures in the near- shore zone of large bodies
of water, and theoretical and experimental studies of liquid crystals. One of
the larger investigations will be concerned with the modelling of water waves
with an eye toward a better understanding of the interaction of waves travelling
in opposite directions. Another interesting study is concerned with flows in
which there is a balance between dissipative effects and surface tension. Still
another sub-project will reconsider some classical flows such as flow past a
sphere in a pipe, Taylor-Couette flow and the related issues of stability and
vortex breakdown. The complex mathematical modelling needed to describe exotic
materials like liquid crystals will also be high on the agenda. Allied to all of
these investigations will be the development of specific theoretical results in
partial differential equations and in numerical analysis. Especially important
in the latter area will be work on highly efficient methods for the solution of
large linear systems arising in the algorithms for the solution of complicated
nonlinear differential equations. The resulting computer codes will be used in
conjunction with experimental work on all the forementioned topics and the
outcomes interpreted within the relevant theoretical framework. This work is
exciting for several reasons. First, many of the issues being addressed are not
only of fundamental theoretical importance, but they also have potential to
provide new insights into engineering and technological design and processing.
Secondly, because of the presence of the fluid mechanics laboratory sited within
the mathematics department at Pe nn State, the group has the ability to combine
theoretical, numerical and experimental work in a rarely realized close
collaboration. In addition, some of the work on development of optimal numerical
techniques will have impact in a much broader arena of science and engineering
activity than just the confines of the present study.
