
* 9403844
* Mathematical Sciences: Investigations of Phase Transitions Using Relaxation and Nonlocal Regularization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1994,06/05/1995
* Robert Rogers,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 42,000.00

9403844 Rogers This project will support an ongoing study of a family of
problems in phase transitions. The problems come from three areas of
application: mechanics (liquid-vapor, solid-liquid, and multiphase-solid
transitions), superconductivity, and magnetism (rigid ferromagnets as well as
magnetostrictive materials). The research primarily involves studying static
problems of energy minimization and trying to characterize the set of metastable
states (local minimizers) of the energy. The goal is to describe hysteresis
(which occurs in all of these problems) in terms of these metastable states. The
primary technique is to model the physical problems being studied using relaxed,
nonlocal energy functionals. Stationary points and/or relative minimizers are
found using techniques of integral equations, convex analysis, and methods from
the calculus of variations. Numerical algorithms are developed to approximate
solutions of the Euler-Lagrange equations. The most useful properties of many
high-tech materials (e.g. shape memory alloys, magnetic and magnetostrictive
materials, and superconductors) are caused by the material undergoing a change
of "phase." Often, these phase changes do not occur smoothly, but instead,
exhibit wild oscillations at a microscopic level. In the last century, there has
been a great deal of empirical study of these phenomena by materials scientists.
But it was only in the past decade that mathematicians began to turn these
investigations into a more quantitative science. The current project aims to
make quantitative predictions of the behavior of large-scale material structures
based on fundamental models of the internal energy. The project combines
elements of mathematical modeling, mathematical analysis, and the development
and analysis of new numerical algorithms. The proposed applications are to
liquid-vapor transitions, crystal growth, shape memory alloys, magnetic and
magnetostrictive materials, and superc onductors.
