
* 9403691
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Dynamics and Geometry in High Dimensional Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1994,03/22/1995
* Stephen Wiggins,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9403691 Wiggens This research is concerned with the global, geometric analysis
of high dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems. The physical motivation for
much of the analysis arises from problems in theoretical chemistry. Over the
past five years experimental techniques have been developed in chemistry to the
point where real time dynamical data related to molecular interactions and
dynamics can be obtained, which has resulted in the area of research known as
``femtochemistry''. As a result, we are at a point where dynamical systems
research can play a role in the interpretation of this new experimental data.
Many of the questions of interest are global and geometrical in nature. For
example, answers to questions related to intramolecular and intermolecular
energy transfer depend on the geometry and dynamics associated with surfaces of
various dimensions and shapes in phase space. There is a need for applied
mathematical research in this area since most of the work of theoretical
chemists in this area has been carried out with low dimensional models. Since
most realistic models of molecules are higher dimensional, it is important to
develop mathematical techniques that apply to high dimensional systems as well
as understand higher dimensional dynamical phenomena in general. One result of
this research will be the development of mathematical methods for understanding
intramolecular and intermolecular energy transfer in more realistic molecular
systems. This research is concerned with the global, geometric analysis of high
dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems. The physical motivation for much of the
analysis arises from problems in theoretical chemistry. Over the past 5 years
experimental techniques have been developed in chemistry to the point where real
time dynamical data related to molecular interactions and dynamics can be
obtained, which has resulted in the area of research known as
``femtochemistry''. As a result, we are at a point w here dynamical systems
research can play a role in the interpretation of this new experimental data.
Many of the questions of interest are global and geometrical in nature. For
example, answers to questions related to intramolecular and intermolecular
energy transfer depend on the geometry and dynamics associated with invariant
manifolds that arise near resonances in phase space, and these invariant
manifolds form the ``network'' in phase space which governs energy transfer
issues. Near such regions the invariant manifold geometry is much more
complicated than the standard ``invariant tori'' picture and new methods need to
be developed. Also, one often encounters singular perturbation phenomena near
such resonance regions which forces one to treat ``elliptic'' and ``hyperbolic''
phenomena simultaneously. One promising method for such problems is the so-
called ``energy-phase'' method developed by Haller and Wiggins, largely in the
context of two-degree-of-freedom systems, which enables one to join together the
``elliptic'' and ``hyperbolic'' phenomena that arises near resonances. We will
extend this method to multi-degree-of-freedom systems. At the same time we will
be interested in understanding mechanisms that give rise to complicated
``chaotic'' behavior that are ``intrinsically high dimensional'', i.e. behavior
that is not just a ``scaled up'' version of typical low dimensional behavior.
One result of this research will be the development of mathematical methods for
understanding intramolecular and intermolecular energy transfer in more
realistic molecular systems.
