
* 9407738
* Mathematical Sciences: Symmetry Methods and Nonlinear Analysis in Elastomechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1994,06/29/1994
* Timothy Healey,NY,Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daljit S. Ahluwalia
* 06/30/1996
* USD 40,001.00

9407738 Healey The main focus of the proposed work will be the analysis of
partial differential equations with symmetry in connection with applications to
elastomechanics. The latter will involve geometrically exact formulations of
nonlinearly elastic and visco-elastic solids and structures. The proposed wrk
has three essential goals: (i) to obtain new qualitative results and detect new
phenomena; (ii) to obtain global continuation results for problems of 2 and
3-dimensional elasticity; (iii) to further pursue and exploit the connection
between symmetry and nodal properties in global bifurcation problems for
elliptic equations. This work has several potential applications to "real-world"
engineering problems. First, the occurence of symmetric structures in
engineering practice is ubiquitous - due in part to esthetics, and in part to
optimal load-carrying capacity (typically based upon linear analyses). However,
such structures are also susceptible to symmetry-breaking instabilities. The
fruits of this research will help to provide a systematic approach to the
(necessarily nonlinear) analysis of such instabilities. Second, a qualitative
nonlinear analysis of a concrete class of problems, parameterized by general
constitutive laws, often illuminates the specific roles of material behavior
inattaining thresholds of instability. In this way we are able to classify
material behavior with an eye toward engineering design of structures.
