
* 9500723
* Propagation and Scattering of Coupled Elastic Surface Waves in Curved Structure
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MECHANICS
* 05/01/1995,05/15/1995
* John Harris,IL,University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

DMS-9500723 Harris This work investigates the propagation of surface waves over
the curved elastic surfaces of a shell and studies how these waves couple from
one surface to another. The curved shell is an elastic waveguide whose
properties change slowly with wavelength, these changes being caused by the
varying radii of curvature and thickness, while its two surfaces form weakly
coupled surface-wave waveguides. The propagation is studied by asymptotically
expanding the wavefields in inverse powers of the radii of curvature with each
term subsequently expanded in the Rayleigh-Lamb modes. The beating over the
propagation path of the two lowest Rayleigh-Lamb modes gives rise to a surface
wave that couples back and forth between the two surfaces. The scattering that a
surface wave experiences when it strikes a compact discontinuity near one of the
surfaces or encounters a region of roughness along one of them is also studied.
The compact scatterer is modeled by assigning it reflection and transmission
coefficients determined from a local analysis of the wavefields near the
discontinuity. The roughness is modeled by working out the attenuation to the
surface wave. The results of this work will be compared to existing data at the
Center for Nondestructive Evaluation at Iowa State University. Turbine blades
rotated at high speeds and pipelines used to carry oil or natural gas are among
the common curved structures ultrasonically inspected for damage such as fatigue
cracking or corrosion. Fatigue cracks in a turbine blade often occur at its
root, a location not always visually accessible. Corrosion to a pipeline can
begin at its interior supface where it cannot be detected unless a section of
the line is shut down. This work investigates how these curved, elastic shell
structures can be inspected using surface waves that propagate first over the
exterior surface, then over the interior surface, ultimately returning to the
exterior surface where they are picked up. Th ese waves detect damage to an
interior surface and carry that information to the exterior. Ultrasonic
inspections must also give an estimate of the seriousness of the damage. By
modeling scattering from a small surface crack or attenuation caused by a patch
of corrosion, this work enables the information carried by a surface wave from
one surface to another to be interpreted to give quantitative estimates of the
damage.
