
* 9500912
* Mathematical Sciences:Topis in Interpolation and System Theory
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1995,03/03/1995
* Joseph Ball,VA,Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 47,490.00

This research will explore some basic new directions in systems theory. It has
been known for some time that the standard problem of H-infinity control can be
converted to a Nevanlinna- Pick interpolation problem. Recent work has
illuminated a far-reaching analogue of point evaluation and a whole theory for
associated analogues of Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation for time-varying systems.
This investigation will pursue further elaboration of these ideas, in
particular, the parametrization of a system in terms of zero and pole data for
the time-variant case, and the connections of Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation for
time-variant systems with Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation for time-invariant
systems having infinite -dimensional input-output and state spaces. In addition,
the PI will continue work on nonlinear systems and nonlinear H-infinity control.
In particular, the construction of an inner-outer factorization for a nonlinear
plant is a basic requirement in a number of important applications but is well-
understood only in special situations. Finally, work on various interpolation
problems involving meromorphic matrix functions on closed Riemann surfaces will
be carried out. Zero-pole interpolation problems are closely related to
classical Riemann-Hilbert problems and Wiener-Hopf factorization as well as to
the classification of holomorphic vector bundles over the surface. In addition,
such zero-pole interpolation ideas provide a new tool for completely
understanding of work done in the 1970's on Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation for
functions analytic on a finitely connected planar domain. A basic tool is the
realization theory for meromorphic bundle maps on an algebraic curve with
determinantal representation as the transfer function of a 2-dimensional linear
system. A basic paradigm in control theory is what is now called H-infinity
control. This approach provides a way to formulate control objectives
mathematically in a way which guarantees reliable results when the mathematical
model of the physical system under consideration is not a completely accurate
representation of the true system. The discrepancies may be caused by
uncertainty in certain physical parameters, or the effect of outside
disturbances not taken into account in the mathematical model. One of the
earliest solution procedures for the simplest H- infinity control problems was
through the classical mathematical theory of Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation.
Spurred by the needs of the emerging H-infinity theory, various researchers
improved, extended and made this classical theory computationally practical. The
PI has been instrumental in extending this approach to time-variant systems and
nonlinear systems (where the basic physical law s no longer satisfy a
superposition principle). Although it has now known how to unify time-variant
theory conceptually with the time-invariant case, further work is needed to
obtain a better understanding of decomposability and robust stability properties
for eventually time-invariant linear systems and for nonlinear systems.
Applications to which this research is expected to contribute include airplane
flight control, improvements in automobile suspension systems and compact disk
players, and chemical process control, to mention just a few. Research on
interpolation problems for functions defined on topologically more complicated
surfaces called Riemann surfaces will also be carried out. This work is expected
be useful in applications to control systems involving transfer functions having
algebraic singularities.
