
* 9501404
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Mathematics in Neurobiology
* DMS,COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE, APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1995,07/10/1997
* Michael Reed,NC,Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1998
* USD 177,832.00

Reed The investigator and his colleagues use mathematical and computational
tools to investigate processing of auditory information in the dorsal cochlear
nucleus (DCN) and the lateral superior olive (LSO) of the lower brainstem. The
purpose of the study of the DCN is to understand how the DCN functions to
extract spectral information from complex sounds. The purpose of the study of
the LSO is to understand the mechanisms by which it computes and encodes
azimuthal sound location by using interaural intensity (and time) differences.
The purpose of both projects, which is based on realistic neurophysiology and
neuroanatomy, is to understand how large groups of cells collectively perform
calculations. In addition, a mathematical investigation of the reasons
underlying the apparent stability of trophic developmental schemes as opposed to
the instability of forward stochastic schemes is carried out. The investigators
also investigate the properties of reaction-hyperbolic partial differential
equations. Equations of this type occur in the transport of materials in nerve
axons (and other eukaryotic cells). Previous modelling studies have raised
mathematical questions about the existence and behavior of approximate
travelling waves in reaction-hyperbolic systems of partial differential
equations. Singular perturbation techniques are used to extend to the nonlinear
case previous results on special linear cases where approximate travelling waves
have been shown to exist in the limit where the chemical rate constants get
large. Probabilistic methods are used to derive closed form approximate solution
formulas in this asymptotic limit. Since little is known about how probabilistic
techniques can be used in linear and nonlinear hyperbolic systems (as opposed to
elliptic or parabolic systems), this work may have important applications to
other hyperbolic systems. The investigators use mathematical and computational
tools to investigate the processing of audit ory information by cells in the
brainstem. The purpose of the project is to understand how large groups of nerve
cells work together to perform calculations such as localizing sounds in space
or recognizing the sound source by analyzing the pattern of frequencies
contained in the sound. This not only gives insight into how we hear and how the
brain works, but should also suggest designs for technological devices that
perform similar functions in the control systems of robots. The investigators
also investigate a class of partial differential equations that arise in the
transport of materials in nerve axons. These equations not only allow one to
better understand how materials are transported in normal nerve cells, but also
give insight into the breakdown of transport that occurs in the presence of some
workplace toxins and in certain diseases such as Alzheimer's disease.
