
* 9501148
* Mathematical Sciences: Variational Methods and Applications
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1995,06/26/1995
* Giles Auchmuty,TX,University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 60,000.00

9501148 Auchmuty This project will involve the investigation of a number of
problems in classical field theories, quantum chemistry, and the theory of
rotating self- gravitating fluids. Each of these problems involves non-standard
variational principles and it is intended to develop the requisite variational
analysis and in some cases also look at numerical problems involved in the
simulation of solutions. These problems often are non-convex and special efforts
will be devoted to studying certain duality theories and dual problems for these
principles. Under this project, the investigator plans to develop new methods
for describing fields in various classical continuum theories. This will answer
some foundational questions in fluid mechanics, electromagnetic field theory and
some areas of materials science. It is also planned to investigate the theory of
Hartree-Fock models which are basic models in quantum chemistry and also some
hydrodynamical models of planets and stars. For these problems, the major
interest is in developing good numerical algorithms for simulating solutions.
The proposed algorithms are based on control theoretic ideas and appear to be
both more stable and much more efficient than the methods currently being used
for simulation of these problems.
