
* 9501051
* Mathematical Sciences: Control of Variable Coefficient Partial Differential Equations: Elastic Bodies and Schrodinger Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 09/01/1995,07/10/1995
* Mary Ann Horn,TN,Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 02/28/1998
* USD 32,000.00

9501051 Horn This project focuses on boundary controllability and stabilization
of elastic systems and has the two primary objectives. The first is to address
the question of controllability of a Kirchhoff plate model with nonconstant
coefficients in the principal part of the differential operator and with control
acting as a moment on the boundary. Because of the close relationship between
the Kirchhoff plate and a time-dependent Schroedinger equation with potential,
as a first step, a general technique which relies on local smoothing properties
of the solution is used to establish exact boundary controllability the
Schroedinger equation with continuous coefficients. These results will then be
utilized to establish exact boundary controllability of the Kirchhoff plate
equation. The second major goal is to resolve the issue of controllability for
the equations of three- dimensional linear elasticity, an issue which naturally
arises when moving from two- dimensional plate models to mathematical models of
general three-dimensional elastic bodies. Results currently available assume
very strict geometric conditions on the domain even when the control is acting
on the entire boundary. To examine the boundary controllability problem for the
fully coupled system while eliminating these stringent geometric restrictions,
an approach based on energy estimates and microlocal analysis techniques will be
used. Derivation of trace regularity estimates for the solution of the system of
linear elasticity will be a critical step in the process. Extensions of boundary
controllability results from linear, constant coefficient distributed parameter
systems to systems with nonconstant coefficients are mf great importance both
mathematically and physically. Accurate mathematical modeling of many important
physical systems requires that spatial inhomogeneities be admitted into the
model and that the physical parameters in the model be permitted to vary with
time. For this reason, it is important to develop a control theory based on
these more accurate models of the physical world. In particular, a control
theory for such models based on boundary sensors and actuators is sought, since
one of the most important applications of such a theory is to the problem of
controlling large flexible structures, where the natural locations for both
measurements and controls are the joints and outer edges of the structure.
Because both elastic plate models and equations of linear elasticity may be used
to model components, such as airfoils and solar panels, of many structures,
understanding how such elements can be controlled is a significant step to the
development of a comprehensive control strategy for complex systems. ***
