
* 9505078
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical Sciences; Transitions and Defects in Ordered Materials
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MECHANICS
* 07/01/1995,03/03/1999
* David Kinderlehrer,PA,Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 274,992.00

950578 Kinderlehrer This interdisciplinary group will investigate nonlinear
material behavior and related issues in analysis and computation. Its focus is
materials which undergo martensitic and magnetic phase transitions, with
particular application to shape memory and giant magnetostrictive materials. The
theories and computational methods under development by the authors will be
applied to the design of new actuator materials and composites. The authors
propose to design a composite that exhibits a strong two way shape memory
effect, design small scale, large-force actuators with low hysteresis, and
formulate a strategy for finding a magneto-memory material, a material which
would combine the most useful aspects of a shape memory (large strain) and
magnetostrictive (actuated by a magnetic field) material. The quantitative
description of these phenomena rests in the framework of nonlinear analysis, in
particular within the context of non-convex potentials whose equilibria are
highly oscillatory across widely varying length scales. Innovative numerical
methods and codes will be developed to compute the dynamics of complex
microstructure in response to a variety of environmental changes. Active
materials, that is, materials whose structure transforms dramatically when
subjected to external stimuli like heat or electromagnetic fields, have enormous
potential for use as actuators and sensors across the spectrum of technology,
from aerospace to communications to medicine. This project addresses basic
research directed toward the improvement and optimization of these materials and
the discovery of new ones. The interplay between their microstructure and
macroscopic properties is fundamental to their exploitation and the study of
these properties leads to the frontiers of nonlinear theory, nonlinear analysis,
and scientific computation. The interdisciplinary training of graduate students
and postdoctoral associates is an integral part of this project.
