
* 9510284
* Mathematical Sciences: Archetypal Analysis of Complex Spatio-Temporal Data
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1995,06/22/1995
* Emily Stone,UT,Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1996
* USD 17,748.00

9510284 Stone This work is supported by a Research Planning Grant for Women
Scientists and Engineers Award. A major area of current interest in the field of
dynamiaal systems is the understanding, prediction, and modeling of complex
spatio-temporal dynamics. With the advent of high-speed, large capacity
computers, more complex methods from statistics have become practical in the
analysis of data from dynamical systems. One of the goals of this project is to
compare and contrast two methods, Karhunen-Loeve (KL) decomposition and
Archetypes, in their application to several experimental dynamical systems, both
physical and numerical. Another goal is to propose a method that builds on
Archetypal analysis for data with translating coherent structures, by finding
archetypes that move with the traveling structure, in an objective manner. The
shape of the structure itself is extracted (or possibly shapes, if the structure
itself is varying as well as translating) as well as information on how the
structure is moving across the spatial domain. A third goal is to determine the
feasibility of using archetypes as a basis upon which to perform a Galerkin
projection of the governing equations (when they exist), for modeling purposes.
The National Science Foundation's mandate to ensure the vitality of the Nation's
scientific enterprise includes concern for the quality, composition,
distribution and effectiveness of the human resource base in science and
engineering. Within this context, the Foundation is committed to enhancing the
current rate of participation of women in science and engineering careers, in
general, and as active participants in all of its programs. Research Planning
Grant awards are made: (1) to help increase the number of new women
investigators participating in NSF's research programs; and, (2) to facilitate
preliminary studies and other activities related to the development of
competitive research projects and proposals by women who have not previously had
independent Federal research funding. Research Planning Grants are one-time
awards that may be used for preliminary work to determine the feasibility of a
proposed line of inquiry, and/or for other activities that will facilitate
proposal development.
