
* 9529738
* Mathematical Sciences: Analysis and Numerical Methods in Stochastic Optimization
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1996,04/05/1996
* Gang George Yin,MI,Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1999
* USD 66,330.00

9529738 Yin This project in stochastic optimization consists of four parts: an
examination of the properties of singularly perturbed Markov chains; a
development of global stochastic optimization algorithms; a study of passive
stochastic approximation procedures; and the design of numerical methods for
stochastic optimization in manufacturing systems. The first part is intended to
derive asymptotic properties of singularly perturbed nonstationary Markov chains
and perturbed chains with weak and strong interactions, and to obtain asymptotic
optimality in related control problems. The second part comprises the
development of asymptotic properties of global stochastic optimization
algorithms. By using weak convergence methods, convergence and rates of
convergence are to be established, and the convergence of suitably scaled
sequences to the solutions of appropriate stochastic differential equations is
to be ascertained. In the third part, by combining stochastic approximation
methods with kernel estimators, passive stochastic approximation algorithms are
to be obtained. Here the goal is to establish convergence of the algorithms and
to obtain error estimates. The fourth part encompasses numerical procedures for
solving a class of robust control problems of piecewise deterministic Markov
chains, and the development of stochastic gradient descent algorithms for
approximating the optimal threshold values under the WIP (work in progress)
policies for multi-machine manufacturing systems. Convergence and asymptotic
properties of the algorithms are to be obtained. The entire research project
will include two components: analysis and simulation. The main objectives are to
enhance basic understanding of the asymptotic properties of the underlying
systems and to develop sound and feasible algorithms. This proposal consists of
four closely related topics. It is a bridge-building attempt to link theory and
application in stochastic optimization. Emphasis is on the development of
efficient numerical methods via analysis and numerical experimentation. The
first topic deals with systems that are subject to rapid and random variations.
The results obtained are intended be useful for applications involving
hierarchical decision making, production planning, queuing networks in
communication, and system reliability. To meet the increasing demand for
efficient numerical procedures for global optimization, the second part of the
project focuses on the development of numerical algorithms when random errors in
the data have to be taken into account. The results are applicable to an ever
expanding range of applications in estimation, identification and optimization
problems. The research undertaken in the third part of this program derives from
steady state estimation and detection problems in chemical engineering (for a
continuously stirred tank and for a binary distillation column). The emphasis is
on the design and implementation of numerical algorithms, which are expected to
also have a variety of applications in target recognition, tracking, system
failure detection, signal processing and related fields. The fourth part of the
program is concerned with optimization methods for unreliable manufacturing
systems. By emphasizing system stability rather than optimality alone, numerical
methods for a class of robust control problems of production planning are to be
developed. Under nowadays popular Kanban policies, which were originally
promoted by the Japanese auto industry, a numerical procedure that will provide
a systematic way of finding the optimal number of Kanbans for manufacturing
systems is to be developed.. ***
