
* 9530937
* Mathematical Sciences: Non-Reflecting Boundary Conditions Based on Far Field Expansions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1996,07/17/1996
* Alvin Bayliss,IL,Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9530937 Bayliss The effectiveness of non-reflecting boundary conditions for wave
propagation problems which are based on far field expansions of the solution
will be developed, implemented and assessed. Primarily transient wave
propagation problems will be considered, although many of the techniques will
also be applicable in the frequency domain. The boundary conditions are based on
first deriving convergent or asymptotic expansions of the solution valid in the
far field and then constructing differential operators which annihilate the
leading order terms in the expansions. Generally these operators require
specification of an origin from which outgoing waves are assumed to emanate.
Techniques will be developed in which interior information is used to improve
the performance of the boundary condition. In particular, adaptive boundary
conditions will be developed in which the origin is estimated dynamically and
locally from properties of the solution in the interior. Techniques to increase
the order of the boundary condition without increasing the order of the
differential operator will also be developed. This will be done by incorporating
inhomogeneous terms into the boundary operator, again using properties of the
computed solution in the interior. Finally, far field expansions and associated
boundary conditions suitable for damping layers will be developed, thereby
allowing a reduction in size of the layers. The numerical computation of waves,
for example, acoustic and electromagnetic waves, will be considered. These
problems are typically governed by equations specified in regions which are
unbounded in at least one direction. In order for the problem to be formulated
on a computer it is necessary that the unbounded region be replaced by a bounded
region. Furthermore, it is necessary that some boundary condition be imposed at
the edge (boundary) of the bounded region. This boundary condition should
ideally simulate the ori ginal unbounded problem. However, in general the
boundary treatment will not be a perfect simulation of the unbounded problem and
there will be spurious reflections emanating from the boundary. These
reflections will propagate into the interior region and seriously degrade the
accuracy of the computed solution. Thus, it is essential for accurate
computation that these spurious reflections be minimized. Boundary conditions
will be considered based on properties of the waves in the far field, i.e., far
from the sources where the waves are generated. Currently for any given
computation the boundary conditions are generally determined in advance, i.e.,
at the beginning of the computation, and are not changed as the solution evolves
in time. Thus, the boundary conditions make no use of information about the
waves in the interior. Methodologies will be developed in which interior
information can be used to improve the performance of the boundary conditions.
In this approach, the boundary conditions will change as time evolves, adapting
to the nature of the solution by making use of interior information. It is
anticipated that the resulting boundary treatment will allow a significant
reduction in spurious reflections. Thus, the proposed new boundary conditions
offer the prospect of significant improvement in efficiency and accuracy for the
computation of wave propagation problems. Applications to acoustic,
electromagnetic and elastic wave propagation will be considered.
