
* 9531811
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Nonlinear Dynamics: Graviatational Ionization, Coupled Oscillators, Dielectric Response of Water, Dynamos
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1996,08/06/1996
* Carmen Chicone,MO,University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 40,000.00

9303767 Chicone The principal investigator proposes to continue his recent
research on nonlinear differential equations. The primary theoretical focus of
this work is the analysis of bifurcations to periodic solutions near resonance
for multidimensional multiparameter systems and the description of related
phenomena, especially the phenomenon of passage through resonance. The methods
employed include several aspects of the geometric analysis of nonlinear dynamics
and classical perturbation theory: ``Melnikov'' theory, Lyapunov-Schmidt
reduction, elliptic functions and expansion in a small parameter. There is also
an important computational component; especially, integration of differential
equations, computer graphics and computer algebra. The theory will be applied to
physical systems modeled by systems of coupled nonlinear differential equations.
The primary application proposed for this project is to study the motions of a
DC motor driven mechanical linkage. It is proposed to determine the existence
and stability of periodic motions, the stabilization of periodic motions by
feedback control and the effects of slow variation of control parameters near
resonance. When mechanical or electrical components are linked together (for
example when a motor is connected to a machine) it is important to determine the
subsequent operational capabilities of the coupled system. In the design and
operational control of coupled systems the following phenomenon can occur: a
small effect produced by one of the components can have a large effect on the
operation of the coupled system. This phenomenon can be used to advantage in
electrical devices, for example amplifiers, but often it has dramatic
undesirable consequences when present in machinery. A motor attached to an
elastic support may operate smoothly until a small change in its rotational
speed causes a large vibration and subsequent failure of the motor or its
linkage. This is analogous to the classic example of a n opera singer breaking a
wine glass with her voice. The proposed research seeks to find methods to
determine the effects of couplings among mechanical or electrical components by
developing techniques to analyze mathematical models for the operation of such
coupled systems. These methods will be useful in the design of machinery as well
as the design of auxiliary systems needed to control its operation. ***
