
* 9600103
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Topics in Combustion
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1996,04/01/1998
* Vladimir Volpert,IL,Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1999
* USD 90,000.00

9600103 Volpert Two research topics concerned with mathematical studies of
combustion waves are proposed. The first topic is the determination of the
propagation velocity of combustion waves for a number of combustion problems.
There are a large number of works which use various approaches to this problem,
including the method of matched asymptotic expansions and those based on a
priori physical assumptions concerning the structure of the combustion wave.
These works have led to numerous approximate formulae for the propagation
velocity. However, very few works have been concerned with a careful assessment
of their accuracy or applicability. As a result, different formulae for the
propagation velocity of the same combustion wave derived in different papers do
not necessarily agree with one another. New approaches to the determination of
the combustion velocity, based on minimax principles have been developed in our
previous work. These approaches allow us not only to derive an approximate
formula for the propagation velocity in a number of combustion problems but also
to determine the accuracy of this formula. A number of problems of gaseous
combustion, with both simple and complex chemistry, are proposed to study using
these novel methods. The second topic is a study of combustion synthesis waves
with wide reaction zones, which are often observed in experiments. All previous
theories of the process, which is used in materials production, are based on the
assumption of a narrow reaction zone. This is due to mathematical difficulties
in the study of synthesis waves with wide reaction zones, and the absence of
well developed approaches to the analysis. Development of the theory of wide
reaction zone combustion waves is the primary goal of the proposed project.
Preliminary results show that though waves with wide reaction zones do have very
complex structures, new asymptotic methods allow one to successfully treat the
problem. Specific topic s discussed in the proposal include nonadiabatic
combustion with wide reaction zones, synthesis waves with complex chemistry and
phase transitions as well as stability of the propagating wave. In each of these
problems the structure of the combustion wave, its propagation velocity, burning
temperature, degree of conversion of reactants, etc., will be studied in order
to understand the fundamental mechanisms of the synthesis process with wide
reaction zones. %%% Combustion synthesis of materials is a process that uses
combustion waves for materials production. In the simplest manifestation of this
process, a sample consisting of a powder mixture of reactants is ignited at one
end. A high-temperature thermal wave, having a frontal structure, then
propagates through the sample, converting reactants to desired products. The
process enjoys certain advantages over conventional technology, in which the
mixture is placed in a furnace. These include (i) shorter synthesis times, (ii)
less expense, since the internal chemical energy of the reactants is used rather
than the external energy of the oven, (iii) the use of simpler equipment, and
(iv) purer products, since the high-temperature wave burns off volatile
impurities. A research program designed to further our knowledge of the
mechanisms involved in combustion synthesis is proposed. The main object of the
proposed research is combustion synthesis waves involving wide reaction zones,
which, though they often occur due to the heterogeneous nature of the chemical
conversion, have not been theoretically studied because of the mathematical
complexity of the problem. The goal of this project is to understand the
fundamental mechanisms of the synthesis process with wide reaction zones, and
thus to be able to make recommendations for effective control of the composition
and quality of the products. ***
