
* 9600128
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dispersive Waves
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 06/01/1996,03/13/1998
* David McLaughlin,NY,New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/2000
* USD 201,695.00

DMS-9600128 McLaughlin The proposer continues his research in the theory and
application of nonlinear dispersive waves, in the specific areas of chaotic
nonlinear waves, waves which occur in the interaction of the atmosphere with the
ocean, and topics in liquid crystal nonlinear optics. His work on the
mathematical theory of chaotic nonlinear waves will focus upon the persistence
and consequences of homoclinic orbits for partial differ- ential equations. In
the project he develops geometric singular perturbation methods for partial
differential equations, including including invariant manifold fibrations and
normal forms. He then combines these methods from dynamical systems theory with
Melnikov analysis to prove the persistence of homoclinic orbits. Consequences of
these orbits for nonlinear wave systems are then investigated numerically. Such
modern methods in the mathematical theory of nonlinear dispersive waves are
applied to topics in atmosphere ocean physics and to nonlinear optics. %%%
Atmosphere ocean interactions and laser propagation in nonlinear optics are two
of the most natural areas in science for the occurence of nonlinear dispersive
waves. The proposer will develop modern mathe- matical theory of these waves,
and apply it to these areas of science. Chaotic and irregular behavior, which
occurs in the temporal evolution of these nonlinear wave systems, is just
becoming understood mathematically. The proposer will study the effects of such
nonlinear and irregular behavior on oscillations of the sea surface temperature,
on the prediction and evolution of storm tracks, and on the propagation of laser
light through liquid crystal materials. Methods for this scientific study
include mathematical theory, formal perturbation theory, and scientific
computation. ***
