
* 9600137
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Continuum Mechanics
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1996,04/04/2000
* Zhouping Xin,NY,New York University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2000
* USD 83,790.00

9600137 Xin The PI proposes to study a class of nonlinear partial differential
equations arising from Continuum Mechanics and other branches of natural
sciences, which includes the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations for both
compressible and incompressible, inviscid and viscous fluids, the equations of
electro-magneto field dynamics for electrically conducting compressible viscous
fluids, the equations of elasticity, nonlinear Boltzmann type equations in
kinetic theory, and equations for combustion, multi-phase flows, etc. The main
goal is to gain understanding of the dynamics and interactions of basic
nonlinear waves such as shock waves, expansion waves, solitons, diffusive waves,
vortex sheets, and boundary layers, which play important roles in the study of
the general flows. In particular, it is proposed to analyze the effects of the
small scale dissipation or relaxation processes on large scale physical
quantities and their motions. Other questions such as global existence of both
strong and weak solutions, nonlinear stability of basic wave patterns,
uniqueness of weak entropy solutions, layer behavior of solutions, numerical
methods for the computation of discontinuous flows, and fluid-dynamic limit for
kinetic models are also to be explored. It is planned to continue the current
effort to expand the existing techniques and to develop new tools for studying
some of these problems. One of the main idea is to refine the conventional
methods designed to study smooth flows or unrelaxed systems by taking into
account more internal structures of the underlying discontinuous flows, and
study these problems both theoretically and numerically. %%% Nonlinear evolution
of partial differential equations arising from physical balance laws govern many
of the most widely encountered phenomena in nature. Solutions to these nonlinear
systems remain a central topic in the study of wave propagations and are
fundamental to the understanding of basic physical phenomena ranging from
compressible and incompressible fluids, acoustic waves and electromagnetic
scattering to wave propagations in nonlinear composite materials, in reactive
gas mixtures, in fiber optics, as well as in magnetohydrodynamics and general
relativity. In this project, It is proposed to study some of the basic questions
for these nonlinear systems, which are motivated directly by important
applications to many fields such as image processing, aeronautics, composite
material, sonar, radar, medical imaging, geophysical exploration, weather
prediction, oil reservoir simulations etc.. For example, the proposed study of
design of high resolution multi-dimensional numerical methods for calculating
sharp fronts for mixed type partial differential equations is extremely
important for the oil reservoir simulations, design of composite materials,
imaging processing, and propagation of pollutants such as oil in water and air;
the proposed study of boundary layer theory is one of the key ingredients in the
understanding of turbulence, and the design of supersonic aircrafts, etc.. Thus
the accomplishment of this project should be of considerable importance in the
improvement and new development of technologies in the above mentioned fields.
***
