
* 9615858
* Mathematical Sciences: VIP/ Virtual Integrated Processing ofYBCO Thin Films
* DMS,OFFICE OF MULTIDISCIPLINARY AC, APPLIED MATHEMATICS, MATERIALS PROCESSING AND MANFG, , , , 
* 07/15/1997,06/28/2000
* David Goodwin,CA,California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2001
* USD 2,801,691.00

This is a multidisciplinary project focused on modeling, simulation, and control
of metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) of YBa2Cu3O7-x (YBCO) thin
films. The project team is composed of senior investigators from four
universities (California Institute of Technology, New York University's Courant
Institute, the University of Minnesota, and the Colorado School of Mines),
working together with an industrial partner, Superconductor Technologies, Inc.
(STI). Superconducting thin film devices have enormous economic potential in
several applications, for example as compact, high-performance microwave
filters. However, to make this technology economically viable, a high-
throughput, low-unit-cost superconducting thin film deposition process must be
developed. One promising technique is metalorganic CVD. The goal is to use
mathematical tools and methods to enable virtual prototyping and control of a
robust, high-throughput MOCVD process for manufacturing YBCO thin films suitable
for microwave filter devices. The work will span several fields, and will
include * fundamental investigations of epitaxial YBCO film growth * development
of predictive models for MOCVD of YBCO based on fundamental principles, *
simulation-driven design and construction of an advanced, prototype MOCVD
reactor with integrated sensing and control * and development and experimental
validation of model-based process control strategies. Funding for this activity
will be provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities, the NSF Engineering Directorate, and by DARPA.
