
* 9622642
* Mathematical Sciences: Archetypal Analysis Applied to Dynamical Systems
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS, COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1996,10/23/1997
* Emily Stone,UT,Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1998
* USD 77,734.00

959622642 Stone This project explores the application of Archetypal analysis to
data sets from dynamical systems. Archetypal analysis is a new statistical
method for extracting relevant features from experimental data sets that has
been developed by Cutler and Breiman (Technometrics 1995). Archetypes
characterize extreme data values (those lying on the convex hull of the data
set), and can be thought of as a variation of principal component analysis,
which is also called the proper orthogonal or Karhunen-Loeve (KL) decomposition
by the dynamical systems community. One of the goals of this project is to
compare and contrast the two methods, the KL decomposition and Archetypes, in
their application to several experimental dynamical systems, both physical and
numerical. Data sets possessing traveling structures present a special problem
to those hoping to reduce them using the KL decomposition. If the traveling
structure is sufficiently regular the eigenfunctions will be sines and cosines,
since the decomposition produces a Fourier basis from data that are
translationally invariant. Therefore, in situations where the traveling
structure itself is the feature to be extracted, a straight application the KL
decomposition will not suffice. The proposers are developing a method that
builds on Archetypal analysis to analyze data with translating coherent
structures, by finding, in an objective manner, archetypes that move with the
traveling structure. The shape of the structure itself is extracted (or possibly
shapes, if the structure itself is varying as well as translating) along with
information on how the structure is moving across the spatial domain. Finally,
along with the pattern recognition problems mentioned above, the third goal of
the proposed research is determining the feasibility of using archetypes as a
basis upon which to do a Galerkin projection of the governing equations of the
dynamical system (when they exist), for modeling purposes. %%% Understan ding,
predicting and modeling complex dynamical systems is one of the preoccupations
of the dynamical systems community today. The family of techniques dubbed
"dynamical systems theory" utilized in this effort is expanding rapidly and in
many directions, incorporating ideas from such diverse fields as mathematics,
physics, and engineering. With the advent of high-speed, large capacity
computers, more complex methods from statistics have become practical in the
analysis of data from dynamical systems. One such method is archetypal analysis,
a new statistical technique which models the state of the system at a given time
as a mixture of extreme states. The proposers study the application of
archetypal analysis to dynamical systems. They are comparing archetypal analysis
with other statistical procedures for dynamical systems, and are developing a
new variant of archetypal analysis to handle moving waves. The research is
interdisciplinary in nature, involving ideas from statistics, mathematics, and
physics. ***
