
* 9622307
* Mathematical Sciences: Pattern Formation in Higher Order Differential Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/15/1996,08/07/1996
* William Troy,PA,University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/2000
* USD 60,001.00

DMS9622307 Troy The primary goal of this research is to obtain an understanding
of the mechanisms responsible for pattern formation in bistable systems which
are near a second order phase transition point. An example of such a system is a
magnetic material which undergoes a phase transition from ferromagnetic to
helicoidal as a physically important parameter (e.g. pressure, or the
composition of metal alloys) passes through a critical value. Such phase
transitions also occur in liquid crystals, and in concentrated soap solutions. A
prototype model for these systems consists of a fourth order partial
differential equation derived as a generalization of the classical, second order
Fisher-Kolmogorov equation. A parameter gamma multiplies the fourth order
spatial derivative, and for gamma equal to zero the equation reduces to the
Fisher-Kolmogorov equation. Thus, the model has been named the Extended Fisher
Kolmogorov (EFK) equation in the physics literature. Depending on the choice of
gamma, numerical studies indicate that the set of solutions can become extremely
complicated. Such solutions include monotone transition layers known as
``kinks'', homoclinic orbits, periodic and aperiodic solutions, chaos, and
travelling waves. To prove the existence of these kinds of solutions, the
proposer and L.A. Peletier of the University of Leiden, Holland, are using a new
analytical method which they have recently developed. The method has proved
successful for proving the existence of kinks, periodic solutions and chaos. The
proposer is now apply- ing this new method to study the formation of wave
fronts. In addition to the EFK equation, the proposer is also studying a wider
class of equations. Of particular interest is a model of suspension bridges such
as the Golden Gate bridge. The model is also fourth order, but the nonlinear
terms cause the analysis of the equation to be fundamentally different from that
of the EFK model. As with the EFK equation, the proposer is studying the
suspension bridge model in order to understand the mechanisms responsible for
complicated pattern formation. %%% The primary goal of this research is to
obtain an understanding of the mechanisms responsible for pattern formation in
bistable systems which are near a second order phase transition point. An
example of such a system is a magnetic material which undergoes a phase
transition from ferromagnetic to helicoidal as a physically important parameter
(e.g. pressure, or the composition of metal alloys) passes through a critical
value. Such phase transitions also occur in liquid crystals, and in concentrated
soap solutions. A prototype model for these systems consists of a fourth order
partial differential equation derived as a generalization of the classical,
second order Fisher-Kolmogorov equation. A parameter gamma multiplies the fourth
order spatial derivative, and for gamma equal to zero the equation reduces to
the Fisher-Kolmogorov equation. Thus, the model has been named the Extended
Fisher Kolmogorov (EFK) equation in the physics literature. Depending on the
choice of gamma, numerical studies indicate that the set of solutions can become
extremely complicated. Such solutions include monotone transition layers known
as ``kinks'', homoclinic orbits, periodic and aperiodic solutions, chaos, and
travelling waves. To prove the existence of these kinds of solutions the
proposer and L.A. Peletier of the University of Leiden, Holland, are using a new
analytical method which they have recently developed. The method has proved
successful for proving the existence of kinks, periodic solutions and chaos. The
proposer is now apply- ing this new method to study the formation of wave
fronts. In addition to the EFK equation, the proposer is also studying a wider
class of equations. Of particular interest is a model of suspension bridges such
as the Golden Gate bridge. The model is also fourth order, but the nonlinear
terms cause the analysis of the equation to be fundamentally different from that
of the EFK model. As with the EFK equation, the proposer is studying the
suspension bridge model in order to understand the mechanisms responsible for
complicated pattern formation. *** --=====================_835724635==_--
