
* 9622690
* Mathematical Sciences: The Numerical Analysis of Nonlinear Vlasov Kinetic Equations
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 08/01/1996,06/16/2000
* Harold Victory,TX,Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2001
* USD 107,300.00

9622690 Victory The primary goal of this research is the numerical analysis of
Vlasov kinetic equations which describe collisionless and collisional plasma
models. Research efforts will focus on particle methods used in conjunction with
finite element or finite-difference methods for determining the fields, and with
implicit time-integrating schemes for advancing particles. Because there are
seven independent variables in realistic (three-dimensional) problems, it is not
practical to base numerical simulations on classical finite-differences, finite
elements, or spectral methods. Practical simulations are based on particle
methods, whose implementation requires a solid understanding of the existence,
uniqueness, and regularity properties of Vlasov kinetic models. In particular,
it is proposed to carry out investigations in the following two directions: (A).
Numerical analysis of the Vlasov kinetic equations modeling collisionless
plasmas. In particular, implicit time-integrating methods for advancing
particles are incorporated into the numerical analysis of particle-in-cell
schemes for Vlasov-Poisson systems. Also the convergence theory of particle
approximations for Vlasov-Poisson systems is extended to treat Vlasov-Maxwell
and Vlasov- Einstein problems. (B). Numerical analysis of Vlasov kinetic
equations modeling plasmas with collisions. In particular, nonlinear collision
operators of Landau (Fokker-Planck) type and of Boltzmann type arising in
semiconductor physics are added to the underlying Vlasov-Poisson or Vlasov-
Maxwell system. The analyses involve stochastic and deterministic particle
methods involving operator splitting into nonlinear convective and collisional
portions. Much of the interest in kinetic equations is derived from the
practical and economic benefits that would accrue from applying knowledge of
such equations to problems arising in laser fusion, plasma physics, and
semiconductors. Vlasov kinetic equation s mathematically model such phenomena as
diverse as laser-matter interactions occurring in controlled and laser fusion,
and the transport of electrons in quantum environments present in
semiconductors. The research efforts being supported by the National Science
Foundation have as objective the rigorous investigation of numerical
approximations to Vlasov kinetic models, with the goal of enabling scientists to
perform computations efficiently in determining energies, moments, etc. The work
undertaken here would affect the current base of plasma and semiconductor
technology in providing extended qualitative analysis and robust numerical
procedures for the study of transport of electrons in semiconductors, laser-
matter interactions, and the onset of instabilities in an electron plasma. In
addition, the numerical analysis of nonlinear mathematical models has had a
traditionally wide audience among applied academic and industrial
mathematicians. This fact will have a significant impact on the academic or
industrial career prospects of students who decide to pursue advanced degrees in
the study of nonlinear equations of kinetic type.
