
* 9622854
* Mathematical Sciences: Waves and Diffusion in Random Media
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/01/1996,05/19/1998
* George Papanicolaou,CA,Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 135,000.00

9622854 Papanicolaou The research is in the following areas: Pulse reflection
from Random Media and Radiative Transport, the Focusing Singularity of the
Nonlinear Schrodinger Equation, Convection Enhanced Diffusion, and Direct and
Inverse Problems for High Contrast Media. In Pulse reflection from random media
the goal is to extend the previous work for acoustic waves to elastic waves. It
is proposed to get deeper into the study of transport approximations for waves
and the derivation of effective boundary conditions for the transport
equations.In the Nonlinear Schrodinger Equation the goal is to address the very
hard problem of whether or not time dispersion prevents the formation of finite
time singularities. In convection enhanced diffusion the plans are to continue
the past study convection dominated phenomena by considering time dependent and
nonlinear flows and using the saddle point variational principles that proved so
useful in the previous work by the PI. In the area of High Contrast Media it is
proposed to to focus primarily on inverse problems where linearized inversion
schemes are not suitable when the parameters to be estimated have large
variations over the spatial domain. %%% This research is aimed at understanding
the behavior of complex materials and environments using advanced mathematical
modeling and solution techniques. Applications include seismic imaging in
exploration seismology and in a more global environment, tomographic imaging of
geophysical environments, turbulent dispersion of contaminants and related
problems. This research is closely related to the applications, and addresses
specific issues that arise there, while staying at the cutting edge of what
mathematical analysis can do at present and producing new and interesting
mathematics.
