
* 9622785
* COLLABORATIVE: Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics of Interfaces and Phase Transitions
* DMS,APPLIED MATHEMATICS
* 07/15/1996,07/21/1999
* Peter Bates,UT,Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 44,800.00

9622785 Bates The main goal of our research program is the development and
analysis of mathematical models of continua which admit phase transitions or
structural defects. The mathematical problems address the general questions: How
do nonlinear systems relax to equilibrium? How do interfaces and defects form
and how do they propagate? These questions arise both for diffuse and sharp
interface models. We also encounter interesting questions in phase interface
dynamics which are closely tied to interesting questions in geometry. We intend
to obtain information on the qualitative behavior of phase states predicted by
several new models as well as classical modelsfor phase transition. We will
consider isothermal solid-solid transitions which occur without a change in the
total amount of each species and we will also study liquid-solid transformations
where a heat equation is coupled to that for the order parameter. There are
natural situations where the perimeter or the geometry of the interface, does
not change significantly during the evolution. Then a reduction to a finite
dimensional dynamical system is often possible. A good deal of our effort in
these investigations is spent towards identifying and understanding the
underlying finite dimensional dynamics. %%% We investigate certain physical
phenomena where surface tension plays a role. Surface tension is responsible for
the shape of planets, as well as for the shape of rain drops. It is also the
reason why skating on ice is possible. Generally it is a second order effect.
However when the other forces balance each other, surface tension can become the
determining factor. Here is anexample: In the first stages of the space program
scientists were puzzled by the fact that as soon as the rocket was exiting the
earth's gravitiational attraction the engines would shut off as if they were
running out of fuel. Eventually they realized that in space the fuel in the tank
forms into sphe rical shapes due to surface tension effects with many blobs
staying away from the walls of the container. We are interested in phase change
phenomena , for example those involving ice and water (different phases of the
same substance which can coexist near the critical temperature of 32F).
Understanding the way certain phases mix is important for determinig the
properties of materials. Superconductivity is a good example to which our work
applies. For understanding all this, one, in principle, could start with the
basic equations of physics. The problem with this approach is the enormous
complexity that one encounters and the difficulty in the numerical simulation.
For dealing with this scientists are proposing adhoc, phenomenologically
convincing models, which have the advantage of great simplicity. Our work is of
qualitative nature. It aims to establish that some of these simple mathematical
models exhibit the wealth of behavior making them capable of describing and
predicting the phenomena that are observed . ***
